

CHAPTER XXVI 

JOHN IS DRAINED AND CAST ASIDE

His lordship was busy with some letters, and did not
look up for a minute or two, although he knew that I
was there.  Meanwhile I stood waiting to make my bow;
afraid to begin upon him, and wondering at his great
bull-head.  Then he closed his letters, well-pleased
with their import, and fixed his bold broad stare on
me, as if I were an oyster opened, and he would know
how fresh I was.

'May it please your worship,' I said, 'here I am
according to order, awaiting your good pleasure.'

'Thou art made to weight, John, more than order.  How
much dost thou tip the scales to?'

'Only twelvescore pounds, my lord, when I be in
wrestling trim.  And sure I must have lost weight
here, fretting so long in London.'

'Ha, ha! Much fret is there in thee! Hath His Majesty
seen thee?'

'Yes, my lord, twice or even thrice; and he made some
jest concerning me.'

'A very bad one, I doubt not.  His humour is not so
dainty as mine, but apt to be coarse and unmannerly. 
Now John, or Jack, by the look of thee, thou art more
used to be called.'

'Yes, your worship, when I am with old Molly and Betty
Muxworthy.'

'Peace, thou forward varlet! There is a deal too much
of thee.  We shall have to try short commons with
thee, and thou art a very long common.  Ha, ha! Where
is that rogue Spank?  Spank must hear that by-and-by. 
It is beyond thy great thick head, Jack.'

'Not so, my lord; I have been at school, and had very
bad jokes made upon me.'

'Ha, ha! It hath hit thee hard.  And faith, it would be
hard to miss thee, even with harpoon.  And thou lookest
like to blubber, now.  Capital, in faith! I have thee
on every side, Jack, and thy sides are manifold;
many-folded at any rate.  Thou shalt have double
expenses, Jack, for the wit thou hast provoked in me.'

'Heavy goods lack heavy payment, is a proverb down our
way, my lord.'

'Ah, I hurt thee, I hurt thee, Jack.  The harpoon hath
no tickle for thee.  Now, Jack Whale, having hauled
thee hard, we will proceed to examine thee.' Here all
his manner was changed, and he looked with his heavy
brows bent upon me, as if he had never laughed in his
life, and would allow none else to do so.

'I am ready to answer, my lord,' I replied, 'if he asks
me nought beyond my knowledge, or beyond my honour.'

'Hadst better answer me everything, lump.  What hast
thou to do with honour?  Now is there in thy
neighbourhood a certain nest of robbers, miscreants,
and outlaws, whom all men fear to handle?'

'Yes, my lord.  At least, I believe some of them be
robbers, and all of them are outlaws.'

'And what is your high sheriff about, that he doth not
hang them all?  Or send them up for me to hang, without
more to do about them?'

'I reckon that he is afraid, my lord; it is not safe to
meddle with them.  They are of good birth, and
reckless; and their place is very strong.'

'Good birth! What was Lord Russell of, Lord Essex, and
this Sidney?  'Tis the surest heirship to the block to
be the chip of a good one.  What is the name of this
pestilent race, and how many of them are there?'

'They are the Doones of Bagworthy forest, may it please
your worship.  And we reckon there be about forty of
them, beside the women and children.'

'Forty Doones, all forty thieves! and women and
children!  Thunder of God!  How long have they been there
then?'

'They may have been there thirty years, my lord; and
indeed they may have been forty.  Before the great war
broke out they came, longer back than I can remember.'

'Ay, long before thou wast born, John.  Good, thou
speakest plainly.  Woe betide a liar, whenso I get hold
of him.  Ye want me on the Western Circuit; by God, and
ye shall have me, when London traitors are spun and
swung.  There is a family called De Whichehalse living
very nigh thee, John?'

This he said in a sudden manner, as if to take me off
my guard, and fixed his great thick eyes on me.  And in
truth I was much astonished.

'Yes, my lord, there is.  At least, not so very far
from us.  Baron de Whichehalse, of Ley Manor.'

'Baron, ha! of the Exchequer--eh, lad?  And taketh dues
instead of His Majesty.  Somewhat which halts there
ought to come a little further, I trow.  It shall be
seen to, as well as the witch which makes it so to
halt.  Riotous knaves in West England, drunken outlaws,
you shall dance, if ever I play pipe for you.  John
Ridd, I will come to Oare parish, and rout out the Oare
of Babylon.'

'Although your worship is so learned,' I answered
seeing that now he was beginning to make things uneasy;
'your worship, though being Chief Justice, does little
justice to us.  We are downright good and loyal folk;
and I have not seen, since here I came to this great
town of London, any who may better us, or even come
anigh us, in honesty, and goodness, and duty to our
neighbours.  For we are very quiet folk, not prating
our own virtues--'

'Enough, good John, enough!  Knowest thou not that
modesty is the maidenhood of virtue, lost even by her
own approval?  Now hast thou ever heard or thought that
De Whichehalse is in league with the Doones of
Bagworthy?'

Saying these words rather slowly, he skewered his great
eyes into mine, so that I could not think at all,
neither look at him, nor yet away.  The idea was so new
to me that it set my wits all wandering; and looking
into me, he saw that I was groping for the truth.

'John Ridd, thine eyes are enough for me.  I see thou
hast never dreamed of it.  Now hast thou ever seen a
man whose name is Thomas Faggus?'

'Yes, sir, many and many a time.  He is my own worthy
cousin; and I fear he that hath intentions'--here I
stopped, having no right there to speak about our
Annie.

'Tom Faggus is a good man,' he said; and his great
square face had a smile which showed me he had met my
cousin; 'Master Faggus hath made mistakes as to the
title to property, as lawyers oftentimes may do; but
take him all for all, he is a thoroughly
straightforward man; presents his bill, and has it
paid, and makes no charge for drawing it. 
Nevertheless, we must tax his costs, as of any other
solicitor.'

'To be sure, to be sure, my lord!' was all that I could
say, not understanding what all this meant.

'I fear he will come to the gallows,' said the Lord
Chief Justice, sinking his voice below the echoes;
'tell him this from me, Jack.  He shall never be
condemned before me; but I cannot be everywhere, and
some of our Justices may keep short memory of his
dinners.  Tell him to change his name, turn parson, or
do something else, to make it wrong to hang him. 
Parson is the best thing, he hath such command of
features, and he might take his tithes on horseback.  
Now a few more things, John Ridd; and for the present I
have done with thee.'

All my heart leaped up at this, to get away from London
so: and yet I could hardly trust to it.

'Is there any sound round your way of disaffection to
His Majesty, His most gracious Majesty?'

'No, my lord: no sign whatever.  We pray for him in
church perhaps, and we talk about him afterwards,
hoping it may do him good, as it is intended.  But
after that we have naught to say, not knowing much
about him--at least till I get home again.'

'That is as it should be, John.  And the less you say
the better.  But I have heard of things in Taunton,
and even nearer to you in Dulverton, and even nigher
still upon Exmoor; things which are of the pillory
kind, and even more of the gallows.  I see that you
know naught of them.  Nevertheless, it will not be long
before all England hears of them.  Now, John, I have
taken a liking to thee, for never man told me the
truth, without fear or favour, more thoroughly and
truly than thou hast done.  Keep thou clear of this, my
son.  It will come to nothing; yet many shall swing
high for it.  Even I could not save thee, John Ridd, if
thou wert mixed in this affair.  Keep from the Doones,
keep from De Whichehalse, keep from everything which
leads beyond the sight of thy knowledge.  I meant to
use thee as my tool; but I see thou art too honest and
simple.  I will send a sharper down; but never let me
find thee, John, either a tool for the other side, or a
tube for my words to pass through.'

Here the Lord Justice gave me such a glare that I
wished myself well rid of him, though thankful for his
warnings; and seeing how he had made upon me a long
abiding mark of fear, he smiled again in a jocular
manner, and said,--

'Now, get thee gone, Jack.  I shall remember thee; and
I trow, thou wilt'st not for many a day forget me.'

'My lord, I was never so glad to go; for the hay must
be in, and the ricks unthatched, and none of them can
make spars like me, and two men to twist every
hay-rope, and mother thinking it all right, and
listening right and left to lies, and cheated at every
pig she kills, and even the skins of the sheep to go--'

'John Ridd, I thought none could come nigh your folk in
honesty, and goodness, and duty to their neighbours!'

'Sure enough, my lord; but by our folk, I mean
ourselves, not the men nor women neither--'

'That will do, John.  Go thy way.  Not men, nor women
neither, are better than they need be.'

I wished to set this matter right; but his worship
would not hear me, and only drove me out of court,
saying that men were thieves and liars, no more in one
place than another, but all alike all over the world,
and women not far behind them.  It was not for me to
dispute this point (though I was not yet persuaded of
it), both because my lord was a Judge, and must know
more about it, and also that being a man myself I might
seem to be defending myself in an unbecoming manner. 
Therefore I made a low bow, and went; in doubt as to
which had the right of it.

But though he had so far dismissed me, I was not yet
quite free to go, inasmuch as I had not money enough to
take me all the way to Oare, unless indeed I should go
afoot, and beg my sustenance by the way, which seemed
to be below me.  Therefore I got my few clothes packed,
and my few debts paid, all ready to start in half an
hour, if only they would give me enough to set out upon
the road with.  For I doubted not, being young and
strong, that I could walk from London to Oare in ten
days or in twelve at most, which was not much longer
than horse-work; only I had been a fool, as you will
say when you hear it.  For after receiving from Master
Spank the amount of the bill which I had
delivered--less indeed by fifty shillings than the
money my mother had given me, for I had spent fifty
shillings, and more, in seeing the town and treating
people, which I could not charge to His Majesty--I had
first paid all my debts thereout, which were not very
many, and then supposing myself to be an established
creditor of the Treasury for my coming needs, and
already scenting the country air, and foreseeing the
joy of my mother, what had I done but spent half my
balance, ay and more than three-quarters of it, upon
presents for mother, and Annie, and Lizzie, John Fry,
and his wife, and Betty Muxworthy, Bill Dadds, Jim
Slocombe, and, in a word, half of the rest of the
people at Oare, including all the Snowe family, who
must have things good and handsome?  And if I must
while I am about it, hide nothing from those who read
me, I had actually bought for Lorna a thing the price
of which quite frightened me, till the shopkeeper said
it was nothing at all, and that no young man, with a
lady to love him, could dare to offer her rubbish, such
as the Jew sold across the way.  Now the mere idea of
beautiful Lorna ever loving me, which he talked about
as patly (though of course I never mentioned her) as if
it were a settled thing, and he knew all about it, that
mere idea so drove me abroad, that if he had asked
three times as much, I could never have counted the
money.

Now in all this I was a fool of course--not for
remembering my friends and neighbours, which a man has
a right to do, and indeed is bound to do, when he comes
from London--but for not being certified first what
cash I had to go on with.  And to my great amazement,
when I went with another bill for the victuals of only
three days more, and a week's expense on the homeward
road reckoned very narrowly, Master Spank not only
refused to grant me any interview, but sent me out a
piece of blue paper, looking like a butcher's ticket,
and bearing these words and no more, 'John Ridd, go to
the devil.  He who will not when he may, when he will,
he shall have nay.' From this I concluded that I had
lost favour in the sight of Chief Justice Jeffreys. 
Perhaps because my evidence had not proved of any
value! perhaps because he meant to let the matter lie,
till cast on him.

Anyhow, it was a reason of much grief, and some anger
to me, and very great anxiety, disappointment, and
suspense.  For here was the time of the hay gone past,
and the harvest of small corn coming on, and the trout
now rising at the yellow Sally, and the blackbirds
eating our white-heart cherries (I was sure, though I
could not see them), and who was to do any good for
mother, or stop her from weeping continually?  And more
than this, what was become of Lorna?  Perhaps she had
cast me away altogether, as a flouter and a changeling;
perhaps she had drowned herself in the black well;
perhaps (and that was worst of all) she was even
married, child as she was, to that vile Carver Doone,
if the Doones ever cared about marrying! That last
thought sent me down at once to watch for Mr. Spank
again, resolved that if I could catch him, spank him I
would to a pretty good tune, although sixteen in
family.

However, there was no such thing as to find him; and
the usher vowed (having orders I doubt) that he was
gone to the sea for the good of his health, having
sadly overworked himself; and that none but a poor
devil like himself, who never had handling of money,
would stay in London this foul, hot weather; which was
likely to bring the plague with it.  Here was another
new terror for me, who had heard of the plagues of
London, and the horrible things that happened; and so
going back to my lodgings at once, I opened my clothes
and sought for spots, especially as being so long at a
hairy fellmonger's; but finding none, I fell down and
thanked God for that same, and vowed to start for Oare
to-morrow, with my carbine loaded, come weal come woe,
come sun come shower; though all the parish should
laugh at me, for begging my way home again, after the
brave things said of my going, as if I had been the
King's cousin.

But I was saved in some degree from this lowering of my
pride, and what mattered more, of mother's; for going
to buy with my last crown-piece (after all demands were
paid) a little shot and powder, more needful on the
road almost than even shoes or victuals, at the corner
of the street I met my good friend Jeremy Stickles,
newly come in search of me.  I took him back to my
little room--mine at least till to-morrow morning--and
told him all my story, and how much I felt aggrieved by
it.  But he surprised me very much, by showing no
surprise at all.

'It is the way of the world, Jack.  They have gotten
all they can from thee, and why should they feed thee
further?  We feed not a dead pig, I trow, but baste him
well with brine and rue.  Nay, we do not victual him
upon the day of killing; which they have done to thee. 
Thou art a lucky man, John; thou hast gotten one day's
wages, or at any rate half a day, after thy work was
rendered.  God have mercy on me, John!  The things I
see are manifold; and so is my regard of them.  What
use to insist on this, or make a special point of that,
or hold by something said of old, when a different mood
was on?  I tell thee, Jack, all men are liars; and he
is the least one who presses not too hard on them for
lying.'

This was all quite dark to me, for I never looked at
things like that, and never would own myself a liar,
not at least to other people, nor even to myself,
although I might to God sometimes, when trouble was
upon me.  And if it comes to that, no man has any right
to be called a 'liar' for smoothing over things
unwitting, through duty to his neighbour.

'Five pounds thou shalt have, Jack,' said Jeremy
Stickles suddenly, while I was all abroad with myself
as to being a liar or not; 'five pounds, and I will
take my chance of wringing it from that great rogue
Spank.  Ten I would have made it, John, but for bad
luck lately.  Put back your bits of paper, lad; I will
have no acknowledgment.  John Ridd, no nonsense with
me!'

For I was ready to kiss his hand, to think that any man
in London (the meanest and most suspicious place, upon
all God's earth) should trust me with five pounds,
without even a receipt for it!  It overcame me so that
I sobbed; for, after all, though big in body, I am but
a child at heart.  It was not the five pounds that
moved me, but the way of giving it; and after so much
bitter talk, the great trust in my goodness.



CHAPTER XXVII

HOME AGAIN AT LAST

It was the beginning of wheat-harvest, when I came to
Dunster town, having walked all the way from London,
and being somewhat footsore.  For though five pounds
was enough to keep me in food and lodging upon the
road, and leave me many a shilling to give to far
poorer travellers, it would have been nothing for
horse-hire, as I knew too well by the prices Jeremy
Stickles had paid upon our way to London.  Now I never
saw a prettier town than Dunster looked that evening;
for sooth to say, I had almost lost all hope of
reaching it that night, although the castle was long in
view.  But being once there, my troubles were gone, at
least as regarded wayfaring; for mother's cousin, the
worthy tanner (with whom we had slept on the way to
London), was in such indignation at the plight in which
I came back to him, afoot, and weary, and almost
shoeless--not to speak of upper things--that he swore
then, by the mercy of God, that if the schemes abrewing
round him, against those bloody Papists, should come to
any head or shape, and show good chance of succeeding,
he would risk a thousand pounds, as though it were a
penny.

I told him not to do it, because I had heard otherwise,
but was not at liberty to tell one-tenth of what I
knew, and indeed had seen in London town.  But of this
he took no heed, because I only nodded at him; and he
could not make it out.  For it takes an old man, or at
least a middle-aged one, to nod and wink, with any
power on the brains of other men.  However, I think I
made him know that the bad state in which I came to his
town, and the great shame I had wrought for him among
the folk round the card-table at the Luttrell Arms, was
not to be, even there, attributed to King Charles the
Second, nor even to his counsellors, but to my own
speed of travelling, which had beat post-horses.  For
being much distraught in mind, and desperate in body, I
had made all the way from London to Dunster in six
days, and no more.  It may be one hundred and seventy
miles, I cannot tell to a furlong or two, especially as
I lost my way more than a dozen times; but at any rate
there in six days I was, and most kindly they received
me.  The tanner had some excellent daughters, I forget
how many; very pretty damsels, and well set up, and
able to make good pastry.  But though they asked me
many questions, and made a sort of lord of me, and
offered to darn my stockings (which in truth required
it), I fell asleep in the midst of them, although I
would not acknowledge it; and they said, 'Poor cousin!
he is weary', and led me to a blessed bed, and kissed
me all round like swan's down.

In the morning all the Exmoor hills, the thought of
which had frightened me at the end of each day's
travel, seemed no more than bushels to me, as I looked
forth the bedroom window, and thanked God for the sight
of them.  And even so, I had not to climb them, at
least by my own labour.  For my most worthy uncle (as
we oft call a parent's cousin), finding it impossible
to keep me for the day, and owning indeed that I was
right in hastening to my mother, vowed that walk I
should not, even though he lost his Saturday hides from
Minehead and from Watchett.  Accordingly he sent me
forth on the very strongest nag he had, and the maidens
came to wish me God-speed, and kissed their hands at
the doorway.  It made me proud and glad to think that
after seeing so much of the world, and having held my
own with it, I was come once more among my own people,
and found them kinder, and more warm-hearted, ay and
better looking too, than almost any I had happened upon
in the mighty city of London.

But how shall I tell you the things I felt, and the
swelling of my heart within me, as I drew nearer, and
more near, to the place of all I loved and owned, to
the haunt of every warm remembrance, the nest of all
the fledgling hopes--in a word, to home?  The first
sheep I beheld on the moor with a great red J.R. on
his side (for mother would have them marked with my
name, instead of her own as they should have been), I
do assure you my spirit leaped, and all my sight came
to my eyes.  I shouted out, 'Jem, boy!'--for that was
his name, and a rare hand he was at fighting--and he
knew me in spite of the stranger horse; and I leaned
over and stroked his head, and swore he should never be
mutton.  And when I was passed he set off at full
gallop, to call the rest of the J.R.'s together, and
tell them young master was come home at last.

But bless your heart, and my own as well, it would take
me all the afternoon to lay before you one-tenth of the
things which came home to me in that one half-hour, as
the sun was sinking, in the real way he ought to sink. 
I touched my horse with no spur nor whip, feeling that
my slow wits would go, if the sights came too fast over
them.  Here was the pool where we washed the sheep, and
there was the hollow that oozed away, where I had shot
three wild ducks.  Here was the peat-rick that hid my
dinner, when I could not go home for it, and there was
the bush with the thyme growing round it, where Annie
had found a great swarm of our bees.  And now was the
corner of the dry stone wall, where the moor gave over
in earnest, and the partridges whisked from it into the
corn lands, and called that their supper was ready, and
looked at our house and the ricks as they ran, and
would wait for that comfort till winter.

And there I saw--but let me go--Annie was too much for
me.  She nearly pulled me off my horse, and kissed the
very mouth of the carbine.

"I knew you would come.  Oh John! Oh John! I have
waited here every Saturday night; and I saw you for the
last mile or more, but I would not come round the
corner, for fear that I should cry, John, and then not
cry when I got you.  Now I may cry as much as I like,
and you need not try to stop me, John, because I am so
happy.  But you mustn't cry yourself, John; what will
mother think of you?  She will be so jealous of me.'

What mother thought I cannot tell; and indeed I doubt
if she thought at all for more than half an hour, but
only managed to hold me tight, and cry, and thank God
now and then, but with some fear of His taking me, if
she should be too grateful.  Moreover she thought it
was my own doing, and I ought to have the credit of it,
and she even came down very sharply upon John's wife,
Mrs. Fry, for saying that we must not be too proud, for
all of it was the Lord's doing.  However, dear mother
was ashamed of that afterwards, and asked Mrs. Fry's
humble pardon; and perhaps I ought not to have
mentioned it.

Old Smiler had told them that I was coming--all the
rest, I mean, except Annie--for having escaped from his
halter-ring, he was come out to graze in the lane a
bit; when what should he see but a strange horse coming
with young master and mistress upon him, for Annie must
needs get up behind me, there being only sheep to look
at her.  Then Smiler gave us a stare and a neigh, with
his tail quite stiff with amazement, and then (whether
in joy or through indignation) he flung up his hind
feet and galloped straight home, and set every dog wild
with barking.

Now, methinks, quite enough has been said concerning
this mighty return of the young John Ridd (which was
known up at Cosgate that evening), and feeling that I
cannot describe it, how can I hope that any one else
will labour to imagine it, even of the few who are
able?  For very few can have travelled so far, unless
indeed they whose trade it is, or very unsettled
people.  And even of those who have done so, not one in
a hundred can have such a home as I had to come home
to.

Mother wept again, with grief and some wrath, and so
did Annie also, and even little Eliza, and all were
unsettled in loyalty, and talked about a republic, when
I told them how I had been left without money for
travelling homeward, and expected to have to beg my
way, which Farmer Snowe would have heard of.  And
though I could see they were disappointed at my failure
of any promotion, they all declared how glad they were,
and how much better they liked me to be no more than
what they were accustomed to.  At least, my mother and
Annie said so, without waiting to hear any more; but
Lizzie did not answer to it, until I had opened my bag
and shown the beautiful present I had for her.  And
then she kissed me, almost like Annie, and vowed that
she thought very little of captains.

For Lizzie's present was the best of all, I mean, of
course, except Lorna's (which I carried in my breast
all the way, hoping that it might make her love me,
from having lain so long, close to my heart).  For I
had brought Lizzie something dear, and a precious heavy
book it was, and much beyond my understanding; whereas
I knew well that to both the others my gifts would be
dear, for mine own sake.  And happier people could not
be found than the whole of us were that evening.



CHAPTER XXVIII

JOHN HAS HOPE OF LORNA

Much as I longed to know more about Lorna, and though
all my heart was yearning, I could not reconcile it yet
with my duty to mother and Annie, to leave them on the
following day, which happened to be a Sunday.  For lo,
before breakfast was out of our mouths, there came all
the men of the farm, and their wives, and even the two
crow-boys, dressed as if going to Barnstaple fair, to
inquire how Master John was, and whether it was true
that the King had made him one of his body-guard; and
if so, what was to be done with the belt for the
championship of the West-Counties wrestling, which I
had held now for a year or more, and none were ready to
challenge it.  Strange to say, this last point seemed
the most important of all to them; and none asked who
was to manage the farm, or answer for their wages; but
all asked who was to wear the belt.  

To this I replied, after shaking hands twice over all
round with all of them, that I meant to wear the belt
myself, for the honour of Oare parish, so long as ever
God gave me strength and health to meet all-comers; for
I had never been asked to be body-guard, and if asked I
would never have done it.  Some of them cried that the
King must be mazed, not to keep me for his protection,
in these violent times of Popery.  I could have told
them that the King was not in the least afraid of
Papists, but on the contrary, very fond of them;
however, I held my tongue, remembering what Judge
Jeffreys bade me.

In church, the whole congregation, man, woman, and
child (except, indeed, the Snowe girls, who only looked
when I was not watching), turned on me with one accord,
and stared so steadfastly, to get some reflection of
the King from me, that they forgot the time to kneel
down and the parson was forced to speak to them.  If I
coughed, or moved my book, or bowed, or even said
'Amen,' glances were exchanged which meant--'That he
hath learned in London town, and most likely from His
Majesty.'

However, all this went off in time, and people became
even angry with me for not being sharper (as they
said), or smarter, or a whit more fashionable, for all
the great company I had seen, and all the wondrous
things wasted upon me.

But though I may have been none the wiser by reason of
my stay in London, at any rate I was much the better in
virtue of coming home again.  For now I had learned the
joy of quiet, and the gratitude for good things round
us, and the love we owe to others (even those who must
be kind), for their indulgence to us.  All this, before
my journey, had been too much as a matter of course to
me; but having missed it now I knew that it was a gift,
and might be lost.  Moreover, I had pined so much, in
the dust and heat of that great town, for trees, and
fields, and running waters, and the sounds of country
life, and the air of country winds, that never more
could I grow weary of those soft enjoyments; or at
least I thought so then.

To awake as the summer sun came slanting over the
hill-tops, with hope on every beam adance to the
laughter of the morning; to see the leaves across the
window ruffling on the fresh new air, and the tendrils
of the powdery vine turning from their beaded sleep.  
Then the lustrous meadows far beyond the thatch of the
garden-wall, yet seen beneath the hanging scollops of
the walnut-tree, all awaking, dressed in pearl, all
amazed at their own glistening, like a maid at her own
ideas.  Down them troop the lowing kine, walking each
with a step of character (even as men and women do),
yet all alike with toss of horns, and spread of udders
ready.  From them without a word, we turn to the
farm-yard proper, seen on the right, and dryly strawed
from the petty rush of the pitch-paved runnel.  Round
it stand the snug out-buildings, barn, corn-chamber,
cider-press, stables, with a blinker'd horse in every
doorway munching, while his driver tightens buckles,
whistles and looks down the lane, dallying to begin his
labour till the milkmaids be gone by.  Here the cock
comes forth at last;--where has he been
lingering?--eggs may tell to-morrow--he claps his wings
and shouts 'cock-a-doodle'; and no other cock dare look
at him.  Two or three go sidling off, waiting till
their spurs be grown; and then the crowd of partlets
comes, chattering how their lord has dreamed, and
crowed at two in the morning, and praying that the old
brown rat would only dare to face him.  But while the
cock is crowing still, and the pullet world admiring
him, who comes up but the old turkey-cock, with all his
family round him.  Then the geese at the lower end
begin to thrust their breasts out, and mum their
down-bits, and look at the gander and scream shrill joy
for the conflict; while the ducks in pond show nothing
but tail, in proof of their strict neutrality.

While yet we dread for the coming event, and the fight
which would jar on the morning, behold the grandmother
of sows, gruffly grunting right and left with muzzle
which no ring may tame (not being matrimonial), hulks
across between the two, moving all each side at once,
and then all of the other side as if she were chined
down the middle, and afraid of spilling the salt from
her.  As this mighty view of lard hides each combatant
from the other, gladly each retires and boasts how he
would have slain his neighbour, but that old sow drove
the other away, and no wonder he was afraid of her,
after all the chicks she had eaten.

And so it goes on; and so the sun comes, stronger from
his drink of dew; and the cattle in the byres, and the
horses from the stable, and the men from cottage-door,
each has had his rest and food, all smell alike of hay
and straw, and every one must hie to work, be it drag,
or draw, or delve.

So thought I on the Monday morning; while my own work
lay before me, and I was plotting how to quit it, void
of harm to every one, and let my love have work a
little--hardest perhaps of all work, and yet as sure as
sunrise.  I knew that my first day's task on the farm
would be strictly watched by every one, even by my
gentle mother, to see what I had learned in London. 
But could I let still another day pass, for Lorna to
think me faithless?

I felt much inclined to tell dear mother all about
Lorna, and how I loved her, yet had no hope of winning
her.  Often and often, I had longed to do this, and
have done with it.  But the thought of my father's
terrible death, at the hands of the Doones, prevented
me.  And it seemed to me foolish and mean to grieve
mother, without any chance of my suit ever speeding. 
If once Lorna loved me, my mother should know it; and
it would be the greatest happiness to me to have no
concealment from her, though at first she was sure to
grieve terribly.  But I saw no more chance of Lorna
loving me, than of the man in the moon coming down; or
rather of the moon coming down to the man, as related
in old mythology.

Now the merriment of the small birds, and the clear
voice of the waters, and the lowing of cattle in
meadows, and the view of no houses (except just our own
and a neighbour's), and the knowledge of everybody
around, their kindness of heart and simplicity, and
love of their neighbour's doings,--all these could not
help or please me at all, and many of them were much
against me, in my secret depth of longing and dark
tumult of the mind.  Many people may think me foolish,
especially after coming from London, where many nice
maids looked at me (on account of my bulk and stature),
and I might have been fitted up with a sweetheart, in
spite of my west-country twang, and the smallness of my
purse; if only I had said the word.  But nay; I have
contempt for a man whose heart is like a shirt-stud
(such as I saw in London cards), fitted into one
to-day, sitting bravely on the breast; plucked out on
the morrow morn, and the place that knew it, gone.

Now, what did I do but take my chance; reckless whether
any one heeded me or not, only craving Lorna's heed,
and time for ten words to her.  Therefore I left the
men of the farm as far away as might be, after making
them work with me (which no man round our parts could
do, to his own satisfaction), and then knowing them to
be well weary, very unlike to follow me--and still more
unlike to tell of me, for each had his London
present--I strode right away, in good trust of my
speed, without any more misgivings; but resolved to
face the worst of it, and to try to be home for supper.

And first I went, I know not why, to the crest of the
broken highland, whence I had agreed to watch for any
mark or signal.  And sure enough at last I saw (when
it was too late to see) that the white stone had been
covered over with a cloth or mantle,--the sign that
something had arisen to make Lorna want me.  For a
moment I stood amazed at my evil fortune; that I should
be too late, in the very thing of all things on which
my heart was set!  Then after eyeing sorrowfully every
crick and cranny to be sure that not a single flutter
of my love was visible, off I set, with small respect
either for my knees or neck, to make the round of the
outer cliffs, and come up my old access.

Nothing could stop me; it was not long, although to me
it seemed an age, before I stood in the niche of rock
at the head of the slippery watercourse, and gazed into
the quiet glen, where my foolish heart was dwelling. 
Notwithstanding doubts of right, notwithstanding sense
of duty, and despite all manly striving, and the great
love of my home, there my heart was ever dwelling,
knowing what a fool it was, and content to know it.

Many birds came twittering round me in the gold of
August; many trees showed twinkling beauty, as the sun
went lower; and the lines of water fell, from wrinkles
into dimples.  Little heeding, there I crouched; though
with sense of everything that afterwards should move
me, like a picture or a dream; and everything went by
me softly, while my heart was gazing.

At last, a little figure came, not insignificant (I
mean), but looking very light and slender in the moving
shadows, gently here and softly there, as if vague of
purpose, with a gloss of tender movement, in and out
the wealth of trees, and liberty of the meadow.  Who
was I to crouch, or doubt, or look at her from a
distance; what matter if they killed me now, and one
tear came to bury me?  Therefore I rushed out at once,
as if shot-guns were unknown yet; not from any real
courage, but from prisoned love burst forth.

I know not whether my own Lorna was afraid of what I
looked, or what I might say to her, or of her own
thoughts of me; all I know is that she looked
frightened, when I hoped for gladness.  Perhaps the
power of my joy was more than maiden liked to own, or
in any way to answer to; and to tell the truth, it
seemed as if I might now forget myself; while she would
take good care of it.  This makes a man grow
thoughtful; unless, as some low fellows do, he believe
all women hypocrites.

Therefore I went slowly towards her, taken back in my
impulse; and said all I could come to say, with some
distress in doing it.

'Mistress Lorna, I had hope that you were in need of
me.'

'Oh, yes; but that was long ago; two months ago, or
more, sir.'  And saying this she looked away, as if it
all were over.  But I was now so dazed and frightened,
that it took my breath away, and I could not answer,
feeling sure that I was robbed and some one else had
won her.  And I tried to turn away, without another
word, and go.

But I could not help one stupid sob, though mad with
myself for allowing it, but it came too sharp for pride
to stay it, and it told a world of things.  Lorna heard
it, and ran to me, with her bright eyes full of wonder,
pity, and great kindness, as if amazed that I had more
than a simple liking for her.  Then she held out both
hands to me; and I took and looked at them.

'Master Ridd, I did not mean,' she whispered, very
softly, 'I did not mean to vex you.'

'If you would be loath to vex me, none else in this
world can do it,' I answered out of my great love, but
fearing yet to look at her, mine eyes not being strong
enough.

'Come away from this bright place,' she answered,
trembling in her turn; 'I am watched and spied of late. 
Come beneath the shadows, John.'

I would have leaped into the valley of the shadow of
death (as described by the late John Bunyan), only to
hear her call me 'John'; though Apollyon were lurking
there, and Despair should lock me in.

She stole across the silent grass; but I strode hotly
after her; fear was all beyond me now, except the fear
of losing her.  I could not but behold her manner, as
she went before me, all her grace, and lovely
sweetness, and her sense of what she was.

She led me to her own rich bower, which I told of once
before; and if in spring it were a sight, what was it
in summer glory?  But although my mind had notice of
its fairness and its wonder, not a heed my heart took
of it, neither dwelt it in my presence more than
flowing water.  All that in my presence dwelt, all that
in my heart was felt, was the maiden moving gently, and
afraid to look at me.

For now the power of my love was abiding on her, new to
her, unknown to her; not a thing to speak about, nor
even to think clearly; only just to feel and wonder,
with a pain of sweetness.  She could look at me no
more, neither could she look away, with a studied
manner--only to let fall her eyes, and blush, and be
put out with me, and still more with herself.

I left her quite alone; though close, though tingling
to have hold of her.  Even her right hand was dropped
and lay among the mosses.  Neither did I try to steal
one glimpse below her eyelids.  Life and death to me
were hanging on the first glance I should win; yet I
let it be so.

After long or short--I know not, yet ere I was weary,
ere I yet began to think or wish for any answer--Lorna
slowly raised her eyelids, with a gleam of dew below
them, and looked at me doubtfully.  Any look with so
much in it never met my gaze before.

'Darling, do you love me?' was all that I could say to
her.

'Yes, I like you very much,' she answered, with her
eyes gone from me, and her dark hair falling over, so
as not to show me things.

'But do you love me, Lorna, Lorna; do you love me more
than all the world?'

'No, to be sure not.  Now why should I?'

'In truth, I know not why you should.  Only I hoped
that you did, Lorna.  Either love me not at all, or as
I love you for ever.'

'John I love you very much; and I would not grieve you. 
You are the bravest, and the kindest, and the simplest
of all men--I mean of all people--I like you very much,
Master Ridd, and I think of you almost every day.'

'That will not do for me, Lorna.  Not almost every day
I think, but every instant of my life, of you.  For you
I would give up my home, my love of all the world
beside, my duty to my dearest ones, for you I would
give up my life, and hope of life beyond it.  Do you
love me so?'

'Not by any means,' said Lorna; 'no, I like you very
much, when you do not talk so wildly; and I like to see
you come as if you would fill our valley up, and I like
to think that even Carver would be nothing in your
hands--but as to liking you like that, what should make
it likely?  especially when I have made the signal, and
for some two months or more you have never even
answered it!  If you like me so ferociously, why do you
leave me for other people to do just as they like with
me?'

'To do as they liked!  Oh, Lorna, not to make you marry
Carver?'

'No, Master Ridd, be not frightened so; it makes me
fear to look at you.'

'But you have not married Carver yet?  Say quick! Why
keep me waiting so?' 

'Of course I have not, Master Ridd.  Should I be here
if I had, think you, and allowing you to like me so,
and to hold my hand, and make me laugh, as I declare
you almost do sometimes?  And at other times you
frighten me.'

'Did they want you to marry Carver?  Tell me all the
truth of it.'

'Not yet, not yet.  They are not half so impetuous as
you are, John.  I am only just seventeen, you know, and
who is to think of marrying?  But they wanted me to
give my word, and be formally betrothed to him in the
presence of my grandfather.  It seems that something
frightened them.  There is a youth named Charleworth
Doone, every one calls him "Charlie"; a headstrong and
a gay young man, very gallant in his looks and manner;
and my uncle, the Counsellor, chose to fancy that
Charlie looked at me too much, coming by my
grandfather's cottage.'

Here Lorna blushed so that I was frightened, and began
to hate this Charlie more, a great deal more, than even
Carver Doone.

'He had better not,' said I; 'I will fling him over it,
if he dare.  He shall see thee through the roof, Lorna,
if at all he see thee.'

'Master Ridd, you are worse than Carver!  I thought you
were so kind-hearted.  Well, they wanted me to promise,
and even to swear a solemn oath (a thing I have never
done in my life) that I would wed my eldest cousin,
this same Carver Doone, who is twice as old as I am,
being thirty-five and upwards.  That was why I gave the
token that I wished to see you, Master Ridd.  They
pointed out how much it was for the peace of all the
family, and for mine own benefit; but I would not
listen for a moment, though the Counsellor was most
eloquent, and my grandfather begged me to consider, and
Carver smiled his pleasantest, which is a truly
frightful thing.  Then both he and his crafty father
were for using force with me; but Sir Ensor would not
hear of it; and they have put off that extreme until he
shall be past its knowledge, or, at least, beyond
preventing it.  And now I am watched, and spied, and
followed, and half my little liberty seems to be taken
from me.  I could not be here speaking with you, even
in my own nook and refuge, but for the aid, and skill,
and courage of dear little Gwenny Carfax.  She is now
my chief reliance, and through her alone I hope to
baffle all my enemies, since others have forsaken me.'

Tears of sorrow and reproach were lurking in her soft
dark eyes, until in fewest words I told her that my
seeming negligence was nothing but my bitter loss and
wretched absence far away; of which I had so vainly
striven to give any tidings without danger to her.  
When she heard all this, and saw what I had brought
from London (which was nothing less than a ring of
pearls with a sapphire in the midst of them, as pretty
as could well be found), she let the gentle tears flow
fast, and came and sat so close beside me, that I
trembled like a folded sheep at the bleating of her
lamb.  But recovering comfort quickly, without more
ado, I raised her left hand and observed it with a nice
regard, wondering at the small blue veins, and curves,
and tapering whiteness, and the points it finished
with.  My wonder seemed to please her much, herself so
well accustomed to it, and not fond of watching it. 
And then, before she could say a word, or guess what I
was up to, as quick as ever I turned hand in a bout of
wrestling, on her finger was my ring--sapphire for the
veins of blue, and pearls to match white fingers.

'Oh, you crafty Master Ridd!' said Lorna, looking up at
me, and blushing now a far brighter blush than when she
spoke of Charlie; 'I thought that you were much too
simple ever to do this sort of thing.  No wonder you
can catch the fish, as when first I saw you.' 

'Have I caught you, little fish?  Or must all my life
be spent in hopeless angling for you?'

'Neither one nor the other, John!  You have not caught
me yet altogether, though I like you dearly John; and
if you will only keep away, I shall like you more and
more.  As for hopeless angling, John--that all others
shall have until I tell you otherwise.'

With the large tears in her eyes--tears which seemed to
me to rise partly from her want to love me with the
power of my love--she put her pure bright lips, half
smiling, half prone to reply to tears, against my
forehead lined with trouble, doubt, and eager longing.  
And then she drew my ring from off that snowy twig her
finger, and held it out to me; and then, seeing how my
face was falling, thrice she touched it with her lips,
and sweetly gave it back to me.  'John, I dare not take
it now; else I should be cheating you.  I will try to
love you dearly, even as you deserve and wish.  Keep it
for me just till then.  Something tells me I shall earn
it in a very little time.  Perhaps you will be sorry
then, sorry when it is all too late, to be loved by
such as I am.'

What could I do at her mournful tone, but kiss a
thousand times the hand which she put up to warn me,
and vow that I would rather die with one assurance of
her love, than without it live for ever with all beside
that the world could give?  Upon this she looked so
lovely, with her dark eyelashes trembling, and her soft
eyes full of light, and the colour of clear sunrise
mounting on her cheeks and brow, that I was forced to
turn away, being overcome with beauty.

'Dearest darling, love of my life,' I whispered through
her clouds of hair; 'how long must I wait to know, how
long must I linger doubting whether you can ever stoop
from your birth and wondrous beauty to a poor, coarse
hind like me, an ignorant unlettered yeoman--'

'I will not have you revile yourself,' said Lorna, very
tenderly--just as I had meant to make her.  'You are
not rude and unlettered, John.  You know a great deal
more than I do; you have learned both Greek and Latin,
as you told me long ago, and you have been at the very
best school in the West of England.  None of us but my
grandfather, and the Counsellor (who is a great
scholar), can compare with you in this.  And though I
have laughed at your manner of speech, I only laughed
in fun, John; I never meant to vex you by it, nor knew
that it had done so.'

'Naught you say can vex me, dear,' I answered, as she
leaned towards me in her generous sorrow; 'unless you
say "Begone, John Ridd; I love another more than you."'

'Then I shall never vex you, John.  Never, I mean, by
saying that.  Now, John, if you please, be quiet--'

For I was carried away so much by hearing her calling
me 'John' so often, and the music of her voice, and the
way she bent toward me, and the shadow of soft weeping
in the sunlight of her eyes, that some of my great hand
was creeping in a manner not to be imagined, and far
less explained, toward the lithesome, wholesome curving
underneath her mantle-fold, and out of sight and harm,
as I thought; not being her front waist.  However, I
was dashed with that, and pretended not to mean it;
only to pluck some lady-fern, whose elegance did me no
good.

'Now, John,' said Lorna, being so quick that not even a
lover could cheat her, and observing my confusion more
intently than she need have done.  'Master John Ridd,
it is high time for you to go home to your mother.  I
love your mother very much from what you have told me
about her, and I will not have her cheated.'

'If you truly love my mother,' said I, very craftily
'the only way to show it is by truly loving me.'

Upon that she laughed at me in the sweetest manner, and
with such provoking ways, and such come-and-go of
glances, and beginning of quick blushes, which she
tried to laugh away, that I knew, as well as if she
herself had told me, by some knowledge (void of
reasoning, and the surer for it), I knew quite well,
while all my heart was burning hot within me, and mine
eyes were shy of hers, and her eyes were shy of mine;
for certain and for ever this I knew--as in a
glory--that Lorna Doone had now begun and would go on
to love me.



CHAPTER XXIX

REAPING LEADS TO REVELLING

Although I was under interdict for two months from my
darling--'one for your sake, one for mine,' she had
whispered, with her head withdrawn, yet not so very far
from me--lighter heart was not on Exmoor than I bore
for half the time, and even for three quarters.  For
she was safe; I knew that daily by a mode of signals
well-contrived between us now, on the strength of our
experience.  'I have nothing now to fear, John,' she
had said to me, as we parted; 'it is true that I am
spied and watched, but Gwenny is too keen for them. 
While I have my grandfather to prevent all violence;
and little Gwenny to keep watch on those who try to
watch me; and you, above all others, John, ready at a
moment, if the worst comes to the worst--this neglected
Lorna Doone was never in such case before.  Therefore
do not squeeze my hand, John; I am safe without it, and
you do not know your strength.'

Ah, I knew my strength right well.  Hill and valley
scarcely seemed to be step and landing for me; fiercest
cattle I would play with, making them go backward, and
afraid of hurting them, like John Fry with his terrier;
even rooted trees seemed to me but as sticks I could
smite down, except for my love of everything.  The love
of all things was upon me, and a softness to them all,
and a sense of having something even such as they had.

Then the golden harvest came, waving on the broad
hill-side, and nestling in the quiet nooks scooped from
out the fringe of wood.  A wealth of harvest such as
never gladdened all our country-side since my father
ceased to reap, and his sickle hung to rust.  There
had not been a man on Exmoor fit to work that
reaping-hook since the time its owner fell, in the
prime of life and strength, before a sterner reaper. 
But now I took it from the wall, where mother proudly
stored it, while she watched me, hardly knowing whether
she should smile or cry.

All the parish was assembled in our upper courtyard;
for we were to open the harvest that year, as had been
settled with Farmer Nicholas, and with Jasper Kebby,
who held the third or little farm.  We started in
proper order, therefore, as our practice is: first, the
parson Josiah Bowden, wearing his gown and cassock,
with the parish Bible in his hand, and a sickle
strapped behind him.  As he strode along well and
stoutly, being a man of substance, all our family came
next, I leading mother with one hand, in the other
bearing my father's hook, and with a loaf of our own
bread and a keg of cider upon my back.  Behind us Annie
and Lizzie walked, wearing wreaths of corn-flowers, set
out very prettily, such as mother would have worn if
she had been a farmer's wife, instead of a farmer's
widow.  Being as she was, she had no adornment, except
that her widow's hood was off, and her hair allowed to
flow, as if she had been a maiden; and very rich bright
hair it was, in spite of all her troubles.

After us, the maidens came, milkmaids and the rest of
them, with Betty Muxworthy at their head, scolding even
now, because they would not walk fitly.  But they only
laughed at her; and she knew it was no good to scold,
with all the men behind them.

Then the Snowes came trooping forward; Farmer Nicholas
in the middle, walking as if he would rather walk to a
wheatfield of his own, yet content to follow lead,
because he knew himself the leader; and signing every
now and then to the people here and there, as if I were
nobody.  But to see his three great daughters, strong
and handsome wenches, making upon either side, as if
somebody would run off with them--this was the very
thing that taught me how to value Lorna, and her pure
simplicity.

After the Snowes came Jasper Kebby, with his wife,
new-married; and a very honest pair they were, upon
only a hundred acres, and a right of common.  After
these the men came hotly, without decent order, trying
to spy the girls in front, and make good jokes about
them, at which their wives laughed heartily, being
jealous when alone perhaps.  And after these men and
their wives came all the children toddling, picking
flowers by the way, and chattering and asking
questions, as the children will.  There must have been
threescore of us, take one with another, and the lane
was full of people.  When we were come to the big
field-gate, where the first sickle was to be, Parson
Bowden heaved up the rail with the sleeves of his gown
done green with it; and he said that everybody might
hear him, though his breath was short, 'In the name of
the Lord, Amen!'

'Amen!  So be it!' cried the clerk, who was far behind,
being only a shoemaker.

Then Parson Bowden read some verses from the parish
Bible, telling us to lift up our eyes, and look upon
the fields already white to harvest; and then he laid
the Bible down on the square head of the gate-post, and
despite his gown and cassock, three good swipes he cut
off corn, and laid them right end onwards.  All this
time the rest were huddling outside the gate, and along
the lane, not daring to interfere with parson, but
whispering how well he did it.

When he had stowed the corn like that, mother entered,
leaning on me, and we both said, 'Thank the Lord for
all His mercies, and these the first-fruits of His
hand!'  And then the clerk gave out a psalm verse by
verse, done very well; although he sneezed in the midst
of it, from a beard of wheat thrust up his nose by the
rival cobbler at Brendon.  And when the psalm was sung,
so strongly that the foxgloves on the bank were
shaking, like a chime of bells, at it, Parson took a
stoop of cider, and we all fell to at reaping.

Of course I mean the men, not women; although I know
that up the country, women are allowed to reap; and
right well they reap it, keeping row for row with men,
comely, and in due order, yet, meseems, the men must
ill attend to their own reaping-hooks, in fear lest the
other cut themselves, being the weaker vessel.  But in
our part, women do what seems their proper business,
following well behind the men, out of harm of the
swinging hook, and stooping with their breasts and arms
up they catch the swathes of corn, where the reapers
cast them, and tucking them together tightly with a
wisp laid under them, this they fetch around and twist,
with a knee to keep it close; and lo, there is a goodly
sheaf, ready to set up in stooks!  After these the
children come, gathering each for his little self, if
the farmer be right-minded; until each hath a bundle
made as big as himself and longer, and tumbles now and
again with it, in the deeper part of the stubble.

We, the men, kept marching onwards down the flank of
the yellow wall, with knees bent wide, and left arm
bowed and right arm flashing steel.  Each man in his
several place, keeping down the rig or chine, on the
right side of the reaper in front, and the left of the
man that followed him, each making farther sweep and
inroad into the golden breadth and depth, each casting
leftwards his rich clearance on his foregoer's double
track.

So like half a wedge of wildfowl, to and fro we swept
the field; and when to either hedge we came, sickles
wanted whetting, and throats required moistening, and
backs were in need of easing, and every man had much to
say, and women wanted praising.  Then all returned to
the other end, with reaping-hooks beneath our arms, and
dogs left to mind jackets.

But now, will you believe me well, or will you only
laugh at me?  For even in the world of wheat, when deep
among the varnished crispness of the jointed stalks,
and below the feathered yielding of the graceful heads,
even as I gripped the swathes and swept the sickle
round them, even as I flung them by to rest on brother
stubble, through the whirling yellow world, and
eagerness of reaping, came the vision of my love, as
with downcast eyes she wondered at my power of passion. 
And then the sweet remembrance glowed brighter than the
sun through wheat, through my very depth of heart, of
how she raised those beaming eyes, and ripened in my
breast rich hope.  Even now I could descry, like high
waves in the distance, the rounded heads and folded
shadows of the wood of Bagworthy.  Perhaps she was
walking in the valley, and softly gazing up at them. 
Oh, to be a bird just there! I could see a bright mist
hanging just above the Doone Glen.  Perhaps it was
shedding its drizzle upon her.  Oh, to be a drop of
rain! The very breeze which bowed the harvest to my
bosom gently, might have come direct from Lorna, with
her sweet voice laden.  Ah, the flaws of air that
wander where they will around her, fan her bright
cheek, play with lashes, even revel in her hair and
reveal her beauties--man is but a breath, we know,
would I were such breath as that!

But confound it, while I ponder, with delicious dreams
suspended, with my right arm hanging frustrate and the
giant sickle drooped, with my left arm bowed for
clasping something more germane than wheat, and my eyes
not minding business, but intent on distant
woods--confound it, what are the men about, and why am
I left vapouring?  They have taken advantage of me, the
rogues! They are gone to the hedge for the cider-jars;
they have had up the sledd of bread and meat, quite
softly over the stubble, and if I can believe my eyes
(so dazed with Lorna's image), they are sitting down to
an excellent dinner, before the church clock has gone
eleven!

'John Fry, you big villain!' I cried, with John hanging
up in the air by the scruff of his neck-cloth, but
holding still by his knife and fork, and a goose-leg in
between his lips, 'John Fry, what mean you by this,
sir?'

'Latt me dowun, or I can't tell 'e,' John answered with
some difficulty.  So I let him come down, and I must
confess that he had reason on his side.  'Plaise your
worship'--John called me so, ever since I returned from
London, firmly believing that the King had made me a
magistrate at least; though I was to keep it secret--
'us zeed as how your worship were took with thinkin' of
King's business, in the middle of the whate-rigg: and
so uz zed, "Latt un coom to his zell, us had better
zave taime, by takking our dinner"; and here us be,
praise your worship, and hopps no offence with thick
iron spoon full of vried taties.'

I was glad enough to accept the ladle full of fried
batatas, and to make the best of things, which is
generally done by letting men have their own way. 
Therefore I managed to dine with them, although it was
so early.  

For according to all that I can find, in a long life
and a varied one, twelve o'clock is the real time for a
man to have his dinner.  Then the sun is at his noon,
calling halt to look around, and then the plants and
leaves are turning, each with a little leisure time,
before the work of the afternoon.  Then is the balance
of east and west, and then the right and left side of a
man are in due proportion, and contribute fairly with
harmonious fluids.  And the health of this mode of
life, and its reclaiming virtue are well set forth in
our ancient rhyme,--

  Sunrise, breakfast; sun high, dinner;
  Sundown, sup; makes a saint of a sinner.

Whish, the wheat falls! Whirl again; ye have had good
dinners; give your master and mistress plenty to supply
another year.  And in truth we did reap well and
fairly, through the whole of that afternoon, I not only
keeping lead, but keeping the men up to it.  We got
through a matter of ten acres, ere the sun between the
shocks broke his light on wheaten plumes, then hung his
red cloak on the clouds, and fell into grey slumber.

Seeing this we wiped our sickles, and our breasts and
foreheads, and soon were on the homeward road, looking
forward to good supper.

Of course all the reapers came at night to the
harvest-supper, and Parson Bowden to say the grace as
well as to help to carve for us.  And some help was
needed there, I can well assure you; for the reapers
had brave appetites, and most of their wives having
babies were forced to eat as a duty.  Neither failed
they of this duty; cut and come again was the order of
the evening, as it had been of the day; and I had no
time to ask questions, but help meat and ladle gravy. 
All the while our darling Annie, with her sleeves
tucked up, and her comely figure panting, was running
about with a bucket of taties mashed with lard and
cabbage.  Even Lizzie had left her books, and was
serving out beer and cider; while mother helped
plum-pudding largely on pewter-plates with the mutton. 
And all the time, Betty Muxworthy was grunting in and
out everywhere, not having space to scold even, but
changing the dishes, serving the meat, poking the fire,
and cooking more.  But John Fry would not stir a peg,
except with his knife and fork, having all the airs of
a visitor, and his wife to keep him eating, till I
thought there would be no end of it.

Then having eaten all they could, they prepared
themselves, with one accord, for the business now of
drinking.  But first they lifted the neck of corn,
dressed with ribbons gaily, and set it upon the
mantelpiece, each man with his horn a-froth; and then
they sang a song about it, every one shouting in the
chorus louder than harvest thunderstorm.  Some were in
the middle of one verse, and some at the end of the
next one; yet somehow all managed to get together in
the mighty roar of the burden.  And if any farmer up
the country would like to know Exmoor harvest-song as
sung in my time and will be sung long after I am
garnered home, lo, here I set it down for him, omitting
only the dialect, which perchance might puzzle him.

  EXMOOR HARVEST-SONG

  1

The corn, oh the corn, 'tis the ripening of the corn!
Go unto the door, my lad, and look beneath the moon,
Thou canst see, beyond the woodrick, how it is yelloon:
'Tis the harvesting of wheat, and the barley must be shorn.

  (Chorus)

The corn, oh the corn, and the yellow, mellow corn!
Here's to the corn, with the cups upon the board!
We've been reaping all the day, and we'll reap again the morn
And fetch it home to mow-yard, and then we'll thank the Lord.

  2

The wheat, oh the wheat, 'tis the ripening of the wheat!
All the day it has been hanging down its heavy head,
Bowing over on our bosoms with a beard of red:
'Tis the harvest, and the value makes the labour sweet.

  (Chorus)

The wheat, oh the wheat, and the golden, golden wheat!
Here's to the wheat, with the loaves upon the board!
We've been reaping all the day, and we never will be beat,
But fetch it all to mow-yard, and then we'll thank the Lord.

  3

The barley, oh the barley, and the barley is in prime!
All the day it has been rustling, with its bristles brown,
Waiting with its beard abowing, till it can be mown!
'Tis the harvest and the barley must abide its time.

  (Chorus)

The barley, oh the barley, and the barley ruddy brown!
Here's to the barley, with the beer upon the board!
We'll go amowing, soon as ever all the wheat is down;
When all is in the mow-yard, we'll stop, and thank the Lord.

  4

The oats, oh the oats, 'tis the ripening of the oats!
All the day they have been dancing with their flakes of white,
Waiting for the girding-hook, to be the nags' delight:
'Tis the harvest, let them dangle in their skirted coats.

  (Chorus)

The oats, oh the oats, and the silver, silver oats!
Here's to the oats with the blackstone on the board!
We'll go among them, when the barley has been laid in rotes:
When all is home to mow-yard, we'll kneel and thank the Lord.

  5

The corn, oh the corn, and the blessing of the corn!
Come unto the door, my lads, and look beneath the moon,
We can see, on hill and valley, how it is yelloon,
With a breadth of glory, as when our Lord was born.

  (Chorus)

The corn, oh the corn, and the yellow, mellow corn!
Thanks for the corn, with our bread upon the board!
So shall we acknowledge it, before we reap the morn,
With our hands to heaven, and our knees unto the Lord.


Now we sang this song very well the first time, having
the parish choir to lead us, and the clarionet, and the
parson to give us the time with his cup; and we sang it
again the second time, not so but what you might praise
it (if you had been with us all the evening), although
the parson was gone then, and the clerk not fit to
compare with him in the matter of keeping time.  But
when that song was in its third singing, I defy any man
(however sober) to have made out one verse from the
other, or even the burden from the verses, inasmuch as
every man present, ay, and woman too, sang as became
convenient to them, in utterance both of words and
tune.

And in truth, there was much excuse for them; because
it was a noble harvest, fit to thank the Lord for,
without His thinking us hypocrites.  For we had more
land in wheat, that year, than ever we had before, and
twice the crop to the acre; and I could not help now
and then remembering, in the midst of the merriment,
how my father in the churchyard yonder would have
gloried to behold it.  And my mother, who had left us
now, happening to return just then, being called to
have her health drunk (for the twentieth time at
least), I knew by the sadness in her eyes that she was
thinking just as I was.  Presently, therefore, I
slipped away from the noise, and mirth, and smoking
(although of that last there was not much, except from
Farmer Nicholas), and crossing the courtyard in the
moonlight, I went, just to cool myself, as far as my
father's tombstone.



CHAPTER XXX

ANNIE GETS THE BEST OF IT

I had long outgrown unwholesome feeling as to my
father's death, and so had Annie; though Lizzie (who
must have loved him least) still entertained some evil
will, and longing for a punishment.  Therefore I was
surprised (and indeed, startled would not be too much
to say, the moon being somewhat fleecy), to see our
Annie sitting there as motionless as the tombstone, and
with all her best fallals upon her, after stowing away
the dishes.

My nerves, however, are good and strong, except at
least in love matters, wherein they always fail me, and
when I meet with witches; and therefore I went up to
Annie, although she looked so white and pure; for I had
seen her before with those things on, and it struck me
who she was.

"What are you doing here, Annie?" I inquired rather
sternly, being vexed with her for having gone so very
near to frighten me.

"Nothing at all," said our Annie shortly.  And indeed
it was truth enough for a woman.  Not that I dare to
believe that women are such liars as men say; only that
I mean they often see things round the corner, and know
not which is which of it.  And indeed I never have
known a woman (though right enough in their meaning)
purely and perfectly true and transparent, except only
my Lorna; and even so, I might not have loved her, if
she had been ugly.

'Why, how so?' said I; 'Miss Annie, what business have
you here, doing nothing at this time of night?  And
leaving me with all the trouble to entertain our
guests!'

'You seem not to me to be doing it, John,' Annie
answered softly; 'what business have you here doing
nothing, at this time of night?'

I was taken so aback with this, and the extreme
impertinence of it, from a mere young girl like Annie,
that I turned round to march away and have nothing more
to say to her.  But she jumped up, and caught me by the
hand, and threw herself upon my bosom, with her face
all wet with tears.

'Oh, John, I will tell you.  I will tell you.  Only
don't be angry, John.'

'Angry! no indeed,' said I; 'what right have I to be
angry with you, because you have your secrets?  Every
chit of a girl thinks now that she has a right to her
secrets.'

'And you have none of your own, John; of course you
have none of your own?  All your going out at night--'

'We will not quarrel here, poor Annie,' I answered,
with some loftiness; 'there are many things upon my
mind, which girls can have no notion of.'

'And so there are upon mine, John.  Oh, John, I will
tell you everything, if you will look at me kindly, and
promise to forgive me.  Oh, I am so miserable!'

Now this, though she was behaving so badly, moved me
much towards her; especially as I longed to know what
she had to tell me.  Therefore I allowed her to coax
me, and to kiss me, and to lead me away a little, as
far as the old yew-tree; for she would not tell me
where she was.

But even in the shadow there, she was very long before
beginning, and seemed to have two minds about it, or
rather perhaps a dozen; and she laid her cheek against
the tree, and sobbed till it was pitiful; and I knew
what mother would say to her for spoiling her best
frock so.

'Now will you stop?' I said at last, harder than I
meant it, for I knew that she would go on all night, if
any one encouraged her: and though not well acquainted
with women, I understood my sisters; or else I must be
a born fool--except, of course, that I never professed
to understand Eliza.

'Yes, I will stop,' said Annie, panting; 'you are very
hard on me, John; but I know you mean it for the best. 
If somebody else--I am sure I don't know who, and have
no right to know, no doubt, but she must be a wicked
thing--if somebody else had been taken so with a pain
all round the heart, John, and no power of telling it,
perhaps you would have coaxed, and kissed her, and come
a little nearer, and made opportunity to be very
loving.'

Now this was so exactly what I had tried to do to
Lorna, that my breath was almost taken away at Annie's
so describing it.  For a while I could not say a word,
but wondered if she were a witch, which had never been
in our family: and then, all of a sudden, I saw the way
to beat her, with the devil at my elbow.

'From your knowledge of these things, Annie, you must
have had them done to you.  I demand to know this very
moment who has taken such liberties.'

'Then, John, you shall never know, if you ask in that
manner.  Besides, it was no liberty in the least at
all, Cousins have a right to do things--and when they
are one's godfather--' Here Annie stopped quite
suddenly having so betrayed herself; but met me in the
full moonlight, being resolved to face it out, with a
good face put upon it.

'Alas, I feared it would come to this,' I answered very
sadly; 'I know he has been here many a time, without
showing himself to me.  There is nothing meaner than
for a man to sneak, and steal a young maid's heart,
without her people knowing it.'

'You are not doing anything of that sort yourself then,
dear John, are you?'

'Only a common highwayman!' I answered, without heeding
her; 'a man without an acre of his own, and liable to
hang upon any common, and no other right of common over
it--'

'John,' said my sister, 'are the Doones privileged not
to be hanged upon common land?'

At this I was so thunderstruck, that I leaped in the
air like a shot rabbit, and rushed as hard as I could
through the gate and across the yard, and back into the
kitchen; and there I asked Farmer Nicholas Snowe to
give me some tobacco, and to lend me a spare pipe.

This he did with a grateful manner, being now some
five-fourths gone; and so I smoked the very first pipe
that ever had entered my lips till then; and beyond a
doubt it did me good, and spread my heart at leisure.

Meanwhile the reapers were mostly gone, to be up
betimes in the morning; and some were led by their
wives; and some had to lead their wives themselves,
according to the capacity of man and wife respectively. 
But Betty was as lively as ever, bustling about with
every one, and looking out for the chance of groats,
which the better off might be free with.  And over the
kneading-pan next day, she dropped three and sixpence
out of her pocket; and Lizzie could not tell for her
life how much more might have been in it.

Now by this time I had almost finished smoking that
pipe of tobacco, and wondering at myself for having so
despised it hitherto, and making up my mind to have
another trial to-morrow night, it began to occur to me
that although dear Annie had behaved so very badly and
rudely, and almost taken my breath away with the
suddenness of her allusion, yet it was not kind of me
to leave her out there at that time of night, all
alone, and in such distress.  Any of the reapers going
home might be gotten so far beyond fear of ghosts as to
venture into the churchyard; and although they would
know a great deal better than to insult a sister of
mine when sober, there was no telling what they might
do in their present state of rejoicing.  Moreover, it
was only right that I should learn, for Lorna's sake,
how far Annie, or any one else, had penetrated our
secret.

Therefore, I went forth at once, bearing my pipe in a
skilful manner, as I had seen Farmer Nicholas do; and
marking, with a new kind of pleasure, how the rings and
wreaths of smoke hovered and fluttered in the
moonlight, like a lark upon his carol.  Poor Annie was
gone back again to our father's grave, and there she
sat upon the turf, sobbing very gently, and not wishing
to trouble any one.  So I raised her tenderly, and made
much of her, and consoled her, for I could not scold
her there; and perhaps after all she was not to be
blamed so much as Tom Faggus himself was.  Annie was
very grateful to me, and kissed me many times, and
begged my pardon ever so often for her rudeness to me. 
And then having gone so far with it, and finding me so
complaisant, she must needs try to go a little further,
and to lead me away from her own affairs, and into mine
concerning Lorna.  But although it was clever enough of
her she was not deep enough for me there; and I soon
discovered that she knew nothing, not even the name of
my darling; but only suspected from things she had
seen, and put together like a woman.  Upon this I
brought her back again to Tom Faggus and his doings.

'My poor Annie, have you really promised him to be his
wife?'

'Then after all you have no reason, John, no particular
reason, I mean, for slighting poor Sally Snowe so?'

'Without even asking mother or me! Oh, Annie, it was
wrong of you!'

'But, darling, you know that mother wishes you so much
to marry Sally; and I am sure you could have her
to-morrow.  She dotes on the very ground--'

'I dare say he tells you that, Annie, that he dotes on
the ground you walk upon--but did you believe him,
child?'

'You may believe me, I assure you, John, and half the
farm to be settled upon her, after the old man's time;
and though she gives herself little airs, it is only
done to entice you; she has the very best hand in the
dairy John, and the lightest at a turn-over cake--'

'Now, Annie, don't talk nonsense so.  I wish just to
know the truth about you and Tom Faggus.  Do you mean
to marry him?'

'I to marry before my brother, and leave him with none
to take care of him!  Who can do him a red deer collop,
except Sally herself, as I can?  Come home, dear, at
once, and I will do you one; for you never ate a morsel
of supper, with all the people you had to attend upon.'

This was true enough; and seeing no chance of anything
more than cross questions and crooked purposes, at
which a girl was sure to beat me, I even allowed her to
lead me home, with the thoughts of the collop
uppermost.  But I never counted upon being beaten so
thoroughly as I was; for knowing me now to be off my
guard, the young hussy stopped at the farmyard gate, as
if with a brier entangling her, and while I was
stooping to take it away, she looked me full in the
face by the moonlight, and jerked out quite suddenly,--

'Can your love do a collop, John?'

'No, I should hope not,' I answered rashly; 'she is not
a mere cook-maid I should hope.'

'She is not half so pretty as Sally Snowe; I will
answer for that,' said Annie.  

'She is ten thousand times as pretty as ten thousand
Sally Snowes,' I replied with great indignation.

'Oh, but look at Sally's eyes!' cried my sister
rapturously.

'Look at Lorna Doone's,' said I; 'and you would never
look again at Sally's.'

'Oh Lorna Doone.  Lorna Doone!' exclaimed our Annie
half-frightened, yet clapping her hands with triumph,
at having found me out so: 'Lorna Doone is the lovely
maiden, who has stolen poor somebody's heart so.  Ah, I
shall remember it; because it is so queer a name.  But
stop, I had better write it down.  Lend me your hat,
poor boy, to write on.'

'I have a great mind to lend you a box on the ear,' I
answered her in my vexation, 'and I would, if you had
not been crying so, you sly good-for-nothing baggage. 
As it is, I shall keep it for Master Faggus, and add
interest for keeping.'

'Oh no, John; oh no, John,' she begged me earnestly,
being sobered in a moment.  'Your hand is so terribly
heavy, John; and he never would forgive you; although
he is so good-hearted, he cannot put up with an insult. 
Promise me, dear John, that you will not strike him;
and I will promise you faithfully to keep your secret,
even from mother, and even from Cousin Tom himself.'

'And from Lizzie; most of all, from Lizzie,' I answered
very eagerly, knowing too well which of my relations
would be hardest with me.

'Of course from little Lizzie,' said Annie, with some
contempt; 'a young thing like her cannot be kept too
long, in my opinion, from the knowledge of such
subjects.  And besides, I should be very sorry if
Lizzie had the right to know your secrets, as I have,
dearest John.  Not a soul shall be the wiser for your
having trusted me, John; although I shall be very
wretched when you are late away at night, among those
dreadful people.'

'Well,' I replied, 'it is no use crying over spilt milk
Annie.  You have my secret, and I have yours; and I
scarcely know which of the two is likely to have the
worst time of it, when it comes to mother's ears.  I
could put up with perpetual scolding but not with
mother's sad silence.'

'That is exactly how I feel, John.' and as Annie said
it she brightened up, and her soft eyes shone upon me;
'but now I shall be much happier, dear; because I shall
try to help you.  No doubt the young lady deserves it,
John.  She is not after the farm, I hope?'

'She!' I exclaimed; and that was enough, there was so
much scorn in my voice and face.

'Then, I am sure, I am very glad,' Annie always made
the best of things; 'for I do believe that Sally Snowe
has taken a fancy to our dairy-place, and the pattern
of our cream-pans; and she asked so much about our
meadows, and the colour of the milk--'

'Then, after all, you were right, dear Annie; it is the
ground she dotes upon.'

'And the things that walk upon it,' she answered me
with another kiss; 'Sally has taken a wonderful fancy
to our best cow, "Nipple-pins."  But she never shall
have her now; what a consolation!'

We entered the house quite gently thus, and found
Farmer Nicholas Snowe asleep, little dreaming how his
plans had been overset between us.  And then Annie said
to me very slyly, between a smile and a blush,--

'Don't you wish Lorna Doone was here, John, in the
parlour along with mother; instead of those two
fashionable milkmaids, as Uncle Ben will call them, and
poor stupid Mistress Kebby?'

'That indeed I do, Annie.  I must kiss you for only
thinking of it.  Dear me, it seems as if you had known
all about us for a twelvemonth.'

'She loves you, with all her heart, John.  No doubt
about that of course.' And Annie looked up at me, as
much as to say she would like to know who could help
it.

'That's the very thing she won't do,' said I, knowing
that Annie would love me all the more for it, 'she is
only beginning to like me, Annie; and as for loving,
she is so young that she only loves her grandfather. 
But I hope she will come to it by-and-by.'

'Of course she must,' replied my sister, 'it will be
impossible for her to help it.'

'Ah well! I don't know,' for I wanted more assurance of
it.  'Maidens are such wondrous things!''

'Not a bit of it,' said Annie, casting her bright eyes
downwards: 'love is as simple as milking, when people
know how to do it.  But you must not let her alone too
long; that is my advice to you.  What a simpleton you
must have been not to tell me long ago.  I would have
made Lorna wild about you, long before this time,
Johnny.  But now you go into the parlour, dear, while I
do your collop.  Faith Snowe is not come, but Polly and
Sally.  Sally has made up her mind to conquer you this
very blessed evening, John.  Only look what a thing of
a scarf she has on; I should be quite ashamed to wear
it.  But you won't strike poor Tom, will you?'

'Not I, my darling, for your sweet sake.'

And so dear Annie, having grown quite brave, gave me a
little push into the parlour, where I was quite abashed
to enter after all I had heard about Sally.  And I made
up my mind to examine her well, and try a little
courting with her, if she should lead me on, that I
might be in practice for Lorna.  But when I perceived
how grandly and richly both the young damsels were
apparelled; and how, in their curtseys to me, they
retreated, as if I were making up to them, in a way
they had learned from Exeter; and how they began to
talk of the Court, as if they had been there all their
lives, and the latest mode of the Duchess of this, and
the profile of the Countess of that, and the last good
saying of my Lord something; instead of butter, and
cream, and eggs, and things which they understood; I
knew there must be somebody in the room besides Jasper
Kebby to talk at.

And so there was; for behind the curtain drawn across
the window-seat no less a man than Uncle Ben was
sitting half asleep and weary; and by his side a little
girl very quiet and very watchful.  My mother led me
to Uncle Ben, and he took my hand without rising,
muttering something not over-polite, about my being
bigger than ever.  I asked him heartily how he was, and
he said, 'Well enough, for that matter; but none the
better for the noise you great clods have been making.'

'I am sorry if we have disturbed you, sir,' I answered
very civilly; 'but I knew not that you were here even;
and you must allow for harvest time.'

'So it seems,' he replied; 'and allow a great deal,
including waste and drunkenness.  Now (if you can see
so small a thing, after emptying flagons much larger)
this is my granddaughter, and my heiress'--here he
glanced at mother--'my heiress, little Ruth Huckaback.'

'I am very glad to see you, Ruth,' I answered, offering
her my hand, which she seemed afraid to take, 'welcome
to Plover's Barrows, my good cousin Ruth.' 

However, my good cousin Ruth only arose, and made me a
curtsey, and lifted her great brown eyes at me, more in
fear, as I thought, than kinship.  And if ever any one
looked unlike the heiress to great property, it was the
little girl before me.

'Come out to the kitchen, dear, and let me chuck you to
the ceiling,' I said, just to encourage her; 'I always
do it to little girls; and then they can see the hams
and bacon.' But Uncle Reuben burst out laughing; and
Ruth turned away with a deep rich colour.

'Do you know how old she is, you numskull?' said Uncle
Ben, in his dryest drawl; 'she was seventeen last July,
sir.'

'On the first of July, grandfather,' Ruth whispered,
with her back still to me; 'but many people will not
believe it.'

Here mother came up to my rescue, as she always loved
to do; and she said, 'If my son may not dance Miss
Ruth, at any rate he may dance with her.  We have only
been waiting for you, dear John, to have a little
harvest dance, with the kitchen door thrown open.  You
take Ruth; Uncle Ben take Sally; Master Debby pair off
with Polly; and neighbour Nicholas will be good enough,
if I can awake him, to stand up with fair Mistress
Kebby.  Lizzie will play us the virginal.  Won't you,
Lizzie dear?'

'But who is to dance with you, madam?' Uncle Ben asked,
very politely.  'I think you must rearrange your
figure.  I have not danced for a score of years; and I
will not dance now, while the mistress and the owner of
the harvest sits aside neglected.'

'Nay, Master Huckaback,' cried Sally Snowe, with a
saucy toss of her hair; 'Mistress Ridd is too kind a
great deal, in handing you over to me.  You take her;
and I will fetch Annie to be my partner this evening. 
I like dancing very much better with girls, for they
never squeeze and rumple one.  Oh, it is so much
nicer!'

'Have no fear for me, my dears,' our mother answered
smiling: 'Parson Bowden promised to come back again; I
expect him every minute; and he intends to lead me off,
and to bring a partner for Annie too, a very pretty
young gentleman.  Now begin; and I will join you.'

There was no disobeying her, without rudeness; and
indeed the girls' feet were already jigging; and Lizzie
giving herself wonderful airs with a roll of learned
music; and even while Annie was doing my collop, her
pretty round instep was arching itself, as I could see
from the parlour-door.  So I took little Ruth, and I
spun her around, as the sound of the music came lively
and ringing; and after us came all the rest with much
laughter, begging me not to jump over her; and anon my
grave partner began to smile sweetly, and look up at me
with the brightest of eyes, and drop me the prettiest
curtseys; till I thought what a great stupe I must have
been to dream of putting her in the cheese-rack.  But
one thing I could not at all understand; why mother,
who used to do all in her power to throw me across
Sally Snowe, should now do the very opposite; for she
would not allow me one moment with Sally, not even to
cross in the dance, or whisper, or go anywhere near a
corner (which as I said, I intended to do, just by way
of practice), while she kept me, all the evening, as
close as possible with Ruth Huckaback, and came up and
praised me so to Ruth, times and again, that I declare
I was quite ashamed.  Although of course I knew that I
deserved it all, but I could not well say that.

Then Annie came sailing down the dance, with her
beautiful hair flowing round her; the lightest figure
in all the room, and the sweetest, and the loveliest. 
She was blushing, with her fair cheeks red beneath her
dear blue eyes, as she met my glance of surprise and
grief at the partner she was leaning on.  It was Squire
Marwood de Whichehalse.  I would sooner have seen her
with Tom Faggus, as indeed I had expected, when I heard
of Parson Bowden.  And to me it seemed that she had no
right to be dancing so with any other; and to this
effect I contrived to whisper; but she only said, 'See
to yourself, John.  No, but let us both enjoy
ourselves.  You are not dancing with Lorna, John.  But
you seem uncommonly happy.'

'Tush,' I said; 'could I flip about so, if I had my
love with me?'



CHAPTER XXXI

JOHN FRY'S ERRAND

We kept up the dance very late that night, mother being in such
wonderful spirits, that she would not hear of our going to bed:
while she glanced from young Squire Marwood, very deep
in his talk with our Annie, to me and Ruth Huckaback
who were beginning to be very pleasant company.  Alas,
poor mother, so proud as she was, how little she
dreamed that her good schemes already were hopelessly
going awry! 

Being forced to be up before daylight next day, in
order to begin right early, I would not go to my
bedroom that night for fear of disturbing my mother,
but determined to sleep in the tallat awhile, that
place being cool, and airy, and refreshing with the
smell of sweet hay.  Moreover, after my dwelling in
town, where I had felt like a horse on a lime-kiln, I
could not for a length of time have enough of country
life.  The mooing of a calf was music, and the chuckle
of a fowl was wit, and the snore of the horses was news
to me.

'Wult have thee own wai, I reckon,' said Betty, being
cross with sleepiness, for she had washed up
everything; 'slape in hog-pound, if thee laikes, Jan.'

Letting her have the last word of it (as is the due of
women) I stood in the court, and wondered awhile at the
glory of the harvest moon, and the yellow world it
shone upon.  Then I saw, as sure as ever I was standing
there in the shadow of the stable, I saw a short wide
figure glide across the foot of the courtyard, between
me and the six-barred gate.  Instead of running after
it, as I should have done, I began to consider who it
could be, and what on earth was doing there, when all
our people were in bed, and the reapers gone home, or
to the linhay close against the wheatfield.

Having made up my mind at last, that it could be none
of our people--though not a dog was barking--and also
that it must have been either a girl or a woman, I ran
down with all speed to learn what might be the meaning
of it.  But I came too late to learn, through my own
hesitation, for this was the lower end of the
courtyard, not the approach from the parish highway,
but the end of the sledd-way, across the fields where
the brook goes down to the Lynn stream, and where
Squire Faggus had saved the old drake.  And of course
the dry channel of the brook, being scarcely any water
now, afforded plenty of place to hide, leading also to
a little coppice, beyond our cabbage-garden, and so
further on to the parish highway.

I saw at once that it was vain to make any pursuit by
moonlight; and resolving to hold my own counsel about
it (though puzzled not a little) and to keep watch
there another night, back I returned to the tallatt-ladder, and
slept without leaving off till morning.

Now many people may wish to know, as indeed I myself
did very greatly, what had brought Master Huckaback
over from Dulverton, at that time of year, when the
clothing business was most active on account of harvest
wages, and when the new wheat was beginning to sample
from the early parts up the country (for he meddled as
well in corn-dealing) and when we could not attend to
him properly by reason of our occupation.  And yet more
surprising it seemed to me that he should have brought
his granddaughter also, instead of the troop of
dragoons, without which he had vowed he would never
come here again.  And how he had managed to enter the
house together with his granddaughter, and be sitting
quite at home in the parlour there, without any
knowledge or even suspicion on my part.  That last
question was easily solved, for mother herself had
admitted them by means of the little passage, during a
chorus of the harvest-song which might have drowned an
earthquake: but as for his meaning and motive, and
apparent neglect of his business, none but himself
could interpret them; and as he did not see fit to do
so, we could not be rude enough to inquire.

He seemed in no hurry to take his departure, though his
visit was so inconvenient to us, as himself indeed must
have noticed: and presently Lizzie, who was the
sharpest among us, said in my hearing that she believed
he had purposely timed his visit so that he might have
liberty to pursue his own object, whatsoever it were,
without interruption from us.  Mother gazed hard upon
Lizzie at this, having formed a very different opinion;
but Annie and myself agreed that it was worth looking
into.

Now how could we look into it, without watching Uncle
Reuben, whenever he went abroad, and trying to catch
him in his speech, when he was taking his ease at
night.  For, in spite of all the disgust with which he
had spoken of harvest wassailing, there was not a man
coming into our kitchen who liked it better than he
did; only in a quiet way, and without too many
witnesses.  Now to endeavour to get at the purpose of
any guest, even a treacherous one (which we had no
right to think Uncle Reuben) by means of observing him
in his cups, is a thing which even the lowest of people
would regard with abhorrence.  And to my mind it was
not clear whether it would be fair-play at all to
follow a visitor even at a distance from home and clear
of our premises; except for the purpose of fetching him
back, and giving him more to go on with.  Nevertheless
we could not but think, the times being wild and
disjointed, that Uncle Ben was not using fairly the
part of a guest in our house, to make long expeditions
we knew not whither, and involve us in trouble we knew
not what.

For his mode was directly after breakfast to pray to
the Lord a little (which used not to be his practice),
and then to go forth upon Dolly, the which was our
Annie's pony, very quiet and respectful, with a bag of
good victuals hung behind him, and two great cavalry
pistols in front.  And he always wore his meanest
clothes as if expecting to be robbed, or to disarm the
temptation thereto; and he never took his golden
chronometer neither his bag of money.  So much the
girls found out and told me (for I was never at home
myself by day); and they very craftily spurred me on,
having less noble ideas perhaps, to hit upon Uncle
Reuben's track, and follow, and see what became of him. 
For he never returned until dark or more, just in time
to be in before us, who were coming home from the
harvest.  And then Dolly always seemed very weary, and
stained with a muck from beyond our parish.

But I refused to follow him, not only for the loss of a
day's work to myself, and at least half a day to the
other men, but chiefly because I could not think that
it would be upright and manly.  It was all very well to
creep warily into the valley of the Doones, and heed
everything around me, both because they were public
enemies, and also because I risked my life at every
step I took there.  But as to tracking a feeble old man
(however subtle he might be), a guest moreover of our
own, and a relative through my mother.--'Once for all,'
I said, 'it is below me, and I won't do it.'

Thereupon, the girls, knowing my way, ceased to torment
me about it:  but what was my astonishment the very next
day to perceive that instead of fourteen reapers, we
were only thirteen left, directly our breakfast was
done with--or mowers rather I should say, for we were
gone into the barley now.

'Who  has been and left his scythe?' I asked; 'and here's a tin
cup never been handled!'

'Whoy, dudn't ee knaw, Maister Jan,' said Bill Dadds,
looking at me queerly, 'as Jan Vry wur gane avore
braxvass.'

'Oh, very well,' I answered, 'John knows what he is
doing.'  For John Fry was a kind of foreman now, and it
would not do to say anything that might lessen his
authority.  However, I made up my mind to rope him,
when I should catch him by himself, without peril to
his dignity.

But when I came home in the evening, late and almost
weary, there was no Annie cooking my supper, nor Lizzie
by the fire reading, nor even little Ruth Huckaback
watching the shadows and pondering.  Upon this, I went
to the girls' room, not in the very best of tempers,
and there I found all three of them in the little place
set apart for Annie, eagerly listening to John Fry, who
was telling some great adventure.  John had a great jug
of ale beside him, and a horn well drained; and he
clearly looked upon himself as a hero, and the maids
seemed to be of the same opinion.

'Well done, John,' my sister was saying, 'capitally
done, John Fry.  How very brave you have been, John. 
Now quick, let us hear the rest of it.' 

'What does all this nonsense mean?' I said, in a voice
which frightened them, as I could see by the light of
our own mutton candles: 'John Fry, you be off to your
wife at once, or you shall have what I owe you now, instead of
to-morrow morning.' 

John made no answer, but scratched his head, and looked
at the maidens to take his part.

'It is you that must be off, I think,' said Lizzie,
looking straight at me with all the impudence in the
world; 'what right have you to come in here to the
young ladies' room, without an invitation even?'

'Very well, Miss Lizzie, I suppose mother has some
right here.'  And with that, I was going away to fetch
her, knowing that she always took my side, and never
would allow the house to be turned upside down in that
manner.  But Annie caught hold of me by the arm, and
little Ruth stood in the doorway; and Lizzie said,
'Don't be a fool, John.  We know things of you, you
know; a great deal more than you dream of.'

Upon this I glanced at Annie, to learn whether she had
been telling, but her pure true face reassured me at
once, and then she said very gently,--

'Lizzie, you talk too fast, my child.  No one knows
anything of our John which he need be ashamed of; and
working as he does from light to dusk, and earning the
living of all of us, he is entitled to choose his own
good time for going out and for coming in, without
consulting a little girl five years younger than
himself.  Now, John, sit down, and you shall know all
that we have done, though I doubt whether you will
approve of it.'

Upon this I kissed Annie, and so did Ruth; and John Fry
looked a deal more comfortable, but Lizzie only made a
face at us.  Then Annie began as follows:--

'You must know, dear John, that we have been extremely
curious, ever since Uncle Reuben came, to know what he
was come for, especially at this time of year, when he
is at his busiest.  He never vouchsafed any
explanation, neither gave any reason, true or false,
which shows his entire ignorance of all feminine
nature.  If Ruth had known, and refused to tell us, we
should have been much easier, because we must have got
it out of Ruth before two or three days were over.  But
darling Ruth knew no more than we did, and indeed I
must do her the justice to say that she has been quite
as inquisitive.  Well, we might have put up with it, if
it had not been for his taking Dolly, my own pet Dolly,
away every morning, quite as if she belonged to him,
and keeping her out until close upon dark, and then
bringing her home in a frightful condition.  And he
even had the impudence, when I told him that Dolly was
my pony, to say that we owed him a pony, ever since you
took from him that little horse upon which you found
him strapped so snugly; and he means to take Dolly to
Dulverton with him, to run in his little cart.  If
there is law in the land he shall not.  Surely, John,
you will not let him?'

'That I won't,' said I, 'except upon the conditions
which I offered him once before.  If we owe him the
pony, we owe him the straps.'

Sweet Annie laughed, like a bell, at this, and then she
went on with her story.

'Well, John, we were perfectly miserable.  You cannot
understand it, of course; but I used to go every
evening, and hug poor Dolly, and kiss her, and beg her
to tell me where she had been, and what she had seen,
that day.  But never having belonged to Balaam, darling
Dolly was quite unsuccessful, though often she strove
to tell me, with her ears down, and both eyes rolling. 
Then I made John Fry tie her tail in a knot, with a
piece of white ribbon, as if for adornment, that I
might trace her among the hills, at any rate for a mile
or two.  But Uncle Ben was too deep for that; he cut
off the ribbon before he started, saying he would have
no Doones after him.  And then, in despair, I applied
to you, knowing how quick of foot you are, and I got
Ruth and Lizzie to help me, but you answered us very
shortly; and a very poor supper you had that night,
according to your deserts.

'But though we were dashed to the ground for a time, we
were not wholly discomfited.  Our determination to know
all about it seemed to increase with the difficulty. 
And Uncle Ben's manner last night was so dry, when we
tried to romp and to lead him out, that it was much
worse than Jamaica ginger grated into a poor sprayed
finger.  So we sent him to bed at the earliest moment,
and held a small council upon him.  If you remember
you, John, having now taken to smoke (which is a
hateful practice), had gone forth grumbling about your
bad supper and not taking it as a good lesson.'

'Why, Annie,' I cried, in amazement at this, 'I will
never trust you again for a supper.  I thought you were
so sorry.'

'And so I was, dear; very sorry.  But still we must do
our duty.  And when we came to consider it, Ruth was
the cleverest of us all; for she said that surely we
must have some man we could trust about the farm to go
on a little errand; and then I remembered that old John
Fry would do anything for money.' 

'Not for money, plaize, miss,' said John Fry, taking a
pull at the beer; 'but for the love of your swate
face.'

'To be sure, John; with the King's behind it.  And so
Lizzie ran for John Fry at once, and we gave him full
directions, how he was to slip out of the barley in the
confusion of the breakfast, so that none might miss
him; and to run back to the black combe bottom, and
there he would find the very same pony which Uncle Ben
had been tied upon, and there is no faster upon the
farm.  And then, without waiting for any breakfast
unless he could eat it either running or trotting, he
was to travel all up the black combe, by the track
Uncle Reuben had taken, and up at the top to look
forward carefully, and so to trace him without being
seen.'

'Ay; and raight wull a doo'd un,' John cried, with his
mouth in the bullock's horn.

'Well, and what did you see, John?' I asked, with great
anxiety; though I meant to have shown no interest.

'John was just at the very point of it,' Lizzie
answered me sharply, 'when you chose to come in and
stop him.'

'Then let him begin again,' said I; 'things being gone
so far, it is now my duty to know everything, for the
sake of you girls and mother.'

'Hem!' cried Lizzie, in a nasty way; but I took no
notice of her, for she was always bad to deal with. 
Therefore John Fry began again, being heartily glad to
do so, that his story might get out of the tumble which
all our talk had made in it.  But as he could not tell
a tale in the manner of my Lorna (although he told it
very well for those who understood him) I will take it
from his mouth altogether, and state in brief what
happened.

When John, upon his forest pony, which he had much ado
to hold (its mouth being like a bucket), was come to
the top of the long black combe, two miles or more from
Plover's Barrows, and winding to the southward, he
stopped his little nag short of the crest, and got off
and looked ahead of him, from behind a tump of
whortles.  It was a long flat sweep of moorland over
which he was gazing, with a few bogs here and there,
and brushy places round them.  Of course, John Fry,
from his shepherd life and reclaiming of strayed
cattle, knew as well as need be where he was, and the
spread of the hills before him, although it was beyond
our beat, or, rather, I should say, beside it.  Not but
what we might have grazed there had it been our
pleasure, but that it was not worth our while, and
scarcely worth Jasper Kebby's even; all the land being
cropped (as one might say) with desolation.  And nearly
all our knowledge of it sprang from the unaccountable
tricks of cows who have young calves with them; at
which time they have wild desire to get away from the
sight of man, and keep calf and milk for one another,
although it be in a barren land.  At least, our cows
have gotten this trick, and I have heard other people
complain of it.

John Fry, as I said, knew the place well enough, but he
liked it none the more for that, neither did any of our
people; and, indeed, all the neighbourhood of Thomshill
and Larksborough, and most of all Black Barrow Down lay
under grave imputation of having been enchanted with a
very evil spell.  Moreover, it was known, though folk
were loath to speak of it, even on a summer morning,
that Squire Thom, who had been murdered there, a
century ago or more, had been seen by several
shepherds, even in the middle day, walking with his
severed head carried in his left hand, and his right
arm lifted towards the sun.

Therefore it was very bold in John (as I acknowledged)
to venture across that moor alone, even with a fast
pony under him, and some whisky by his side.  And he
would never have done so (of that I am quite certain),
either for the sake of Annie's sweet face, or of the
golden guinea, which the three maidens had subscribed
to reward his skill and valour.  But the truth was that
he could not resist his own great curiosity.  For,
carefully spying across the moor, from behind the tuft
of whortles, at first he could discover nothing having
life and motion, except three or four wild cattle
roving in vain search for nourishment, and a diseased
sheep banished hither, and some carrion crows keeping
watch on her.  But when John was taking his very last
look, being only too glad to go home again, and
acknowledge himself baffled, he thought he saw a figure
moving in the farthest distance upon Black Barrow Down,
scarcely a thing to be sure of yet, on account of the
want of colour.  But as he watched, the figure passed
between him and a naked cliff, and appeared to be a man
on horseback, making his way very carefully, in fear of
bogs and serpents.  For all about there it is adders'
ground, and large black serpents dwell in the marshes,
and can swim as well as crawl.

John knew that the man who was riding there could be
none but Uncle Reuben, for none of the Doones ever
passed that way, and the shepherds were afraid of it. 
And now it seemed an unkind place for an unarmed man to
venture through, especially after an armed one who
might not like to be spied upon, and must have some
dark object in visiting such drear solitudes. 
Nevertheless John Fry so ached with unbearable
curiosity to know what an old man, and a stranger, and
a rich man, and a peaceable could possibly be after in
that mysterious manner.  Moreover, John so throbbed
with hope to find some wealthy secret, that come what
would of it he resolved to go to the end of the matter.

Therefore he only waited awhile for fear of being
discovered, till Master Huckaback turned to the left
and entered a little gully, whence he could not survey
the moor.  Then John remounted and crossed the rough
land and the stony places, and picked his way among the
morasses as fast as ever he dared to go; until, in
about half an hour, he drew nigh the entrance of the
gully.  And now it behoved him to be most wary; for
Uncle Ben might have stopped in there, either to rest
his horse or having reached the end of his journey. 
And in either case, John had little doubt that he
himself would be pistolled, and nothing more ever heard
of him.  Therefore he made his pony come to the mouth
of it sideways, and leaned over and peered in around
the rocky corner, while the little horse cropped at the
briars.

But he soon perceived that the gully was empty, so far
at least as its course was straight; and with that he
hastened into it, though his heart was not working
easily.  When he had traced the winding hollow for half
a mile or more, he saw that it forked, and one part led
to the left up a steep red bank, and the other to the
right, being narrow and slightly tending downwards. 
Some yellow sand lay here and there between the
starving grasses, and this he examined narrowly for a
trace of Master Huckaback.

At last he saw that, beyond all doubt, the man he was
pursuing had taken the course which led down hill; and
down the hill he must follow him.  And this John did
with deep misgivings, and a hearty wish that he had
never started upon so perilous an errand.  For now he
knew not where he was, and scarcely dared to ask
himself, having heard of a horrible hole, somewhere in
this neighbourhood, called the Wizard's Slough. 
Therefore John rode down the slope, with sorrow, and
great caution.  And these grew more as he went onward,
and his pony reared against him, being scared, although
a native of the roughest moorland.  And John had just
made up his mind that God meant this for a warning, as
the passage seemed darker and deeper, when suddenly he
turned a corner, and saw a scene which stopped him.

For there was the Wizard's Slough itself, as black as
death, and bubbling, with a few scant yellow reeds in a
ring around it.  Outside these, bright water-grass of
the liveliest green was creeping, tempting any unwary
foot to step, and plunge, and founder.  And on the
marge were blue campanula, sundew, and forget-me-not,
such as no child could resist.  On either side, the
hill fell back, and the ground was broken with tufts of
rush, and flag, and mares-tail, and a few rough
alder-trees overclogged with water.  And not a bird was
seen or heard, neither rail nor water-hen, wag-tail
nor reed-warbler.

Of this horrible quagmire, the worst upon all Exmoor,
John had heard from his grandfather, and even from his
mother, when they wanted to keep him quiet; but his
father had feared to speak of it to him, being a man of
piety, and up to the tricks of the evil one.  This made
John the more desirous to have a good look at it now,
only with his girths well up, to turn away and flee at
speed, if anything should happen.  And now he proved
how well it is to be wary and wide-awake, even in
lonesome places.  For at the other side of the Slough,
and a few land-yards beyond it, where the ground was
less noisome, he had observed a felled tree lying over
a great hole in the earth, with staves of wood, and
slabs of stone, and some yellow gravel around it.  But
the flags of reeds around the morass partly screened it
from his eyes, and he could not make out the meaning of
it, except that it meant no good, and probably was
witchcraft.  Yet Dolly seemed not to be harmed by it,
for there she was as large as life, tied to a stump not
far beyond, and flipping the flies away with her tail.

While John was trembling within himself, lest Dolly
should get scent of his pony, and neigh and reveal
their presence, although she could not see them,
suddenly to his great amazement something white arose
out of the hole, under the brown trunk of the tree.  
Seeing this his blood went back within him, yet he was
not able to turn and flee, but rooted his face in among
the loose stones, and kept his quivering shoulders
back, and prayed to God to protect him.  However, the
white thing itself was not so very awful, being nothing
more than a long-coned night-cap with a tassel on the
top, such as criminals wear at hanging-time.  But when
John saw a man's face under it, and a man's neck and
shoulders slowly rising out of the pit, he could not
doubt that this was the place where the murderers come
to life again, according to the Exmoor story.  He knew
that a man had been hanged last week, and that this was
the ninth day after it.

Therefore he could bear no more, thoroughly brave as he
had been, neither did he wait to see what became of the
gallows-man; but climbed on his horse with what speed
he might, and rode away at full gallop.  Neither did he
dare go back by the way he came, fearing to face Black
Barrow Down! therefore he struck up the other track
leading away towards Cloven Rocks, and after riding
hard for an hour and drinking all his whisky, he
luckily fell in with a shepherd, who led him on to a
public-house somewhere near Exeford.  And here he was
so unmanned, the excitement being over, that nothing
less than a gallon of ale and half a gammon of bacon,
brought him to his right mind again.  And he took good
care to be home before dark, having followed a
well-known sheep track.

When John Fry finished his story at last, after many
exclamations from Annie, and from Lizzie, and much
praise of his gallantry, yet some little disappointment
that he had not stayed there a little longer, while he
was about it, so as to be able to tell us more, I said
to him very sternly,--

'Now, John, you have dreamed half this, my man.  I
firmly believe that you fell asleep at the top of the
black combe, after drinking all your whisky, and never
went on the moor at all.  You know what a liar you are,
John.'

The girls were exceedingly angry at this, and laid
their hands before my mouth; but I waited for John to
answer, with my eyes fixed upon him steadfastly.

'Bain't for me to denai,' said John, looking at me very
honestly, 'but what a maight tull a lai, now and
awhiles, zame as other men doth, and most of arl them
as spaks again it; but this here be no lai, Maister
Jan.  I wush to God it wor, boy: a maight slape this
naight the better.'

'I believe you speak the truth, John; and I ask your
pardon.  Now not a word to any one, about this strange
affair.  There is mischief brewing, I can see; and it
is my place to attend to it.  Several things come
across me now--onlyI will not tell you.'


They were not at all contented with this; but I would
give them no better; except to say, when they plagued
me greatly, and vowed to sleep at my door all night,--

'Now, my dears, this is foolish of you.  Too much of
this matter is known already.  It is for your own dear
sakes that I am bound to be cautious.  I have an
opinion of my own; but it may be a very wrong one; I
will not ask you to share it with me; neither will I
make you inquisitive.'

Annie pouted, and Lizzie frowned, and Ruth looked at me
with her eyes wide open, but no other mark of regarding
me.  And I saw that if any one of the three (for John
Fry was gone home with the trembles) could be trusted
to keep a secret, that one was Ruth Huckaback.



CHAPTER XXXII

FEEDING OF THE PIGS

The story told by John Fry that night, and my
conviction of its truth, made me very uneasy,
especially as following upon the warning of Judge
Jeffreys, and the hints received from Jeremy Stickles,
and the outburst of the tanner at Dunster, as well as
sundry tales and rumours, and signs of secret
understanding, seen and heard on market-days, and at
places of entertainment.  We knew for certain that at
Taunton, Bridgwater, and even Dulverton, there was much
disaffection towards the King, and regret for the days
of the Puritans.  Albeit I had told the truth, and the
pure and simple truth, when, upon my examination, I
had assured his lordship, that to the best of my knowledge
there was nothing of the sort with us.

But now I was beginning to doubt whether I might not
have been mistaken; especially when we heard, as we
did, of arms being landed at Lynmouth, in the dead of
the night, and of the tramp of men having reached some
one's ears, from a hill where a famous echo was.  For
it must be plain to any conspirator (without the
example of the Doones) that for the secret muster of
men and the stowing of unlawful arms, and communication
by beacon lights, scarcely a fitter place could be
found than the wilds of Exmoor, with deep ravines
running far inland from an unwatched and mostly a
sheltered sea.  For the Channel from Countisbury
Foreland up to Minehead, or even farther, though rocky,
and gusty, and full of currents, is safe from great
rollers and the sweeping power of the south-west
storms, which prevail with us more than all the others,
and make sad work on the opposite coast.

But even supposing it probable that something against
King Charles the Second (or rather against his Roman
advisers, and especially his brother) were now in
preparation amongst us, was it likely that Master
Huckaback, a wealthy man, and a careful one, known
moreover to the Lord Chief Justice, would have anything
to do with it?  To this I could make no answer; Uncle
Ben was so close a man, so avaricious, and so
revengeful, that it was quite impossible to say what
course he might pursue, without knowing all the chances
of gain, or rise, or satisfaction to him.  That he
hated the Papists I knew full well, though he never
spoke much about them; also that he had followed the
march of Oliver Cromwell's army, but more as a suttler
(people said) than as a real soldier; and that he would
go a long way, and risk a great deal of money, to have
his revenge on the Doones; although their name never
passed his lips during the present visit.

But how was it likely to be as to the Doones
themselves?  Which side would they probably take in the
coming movement, if movement indeed it would be?  So
far as they had any religion at all, by birth they were
Roman Catholics--so much I knew from Lorna; and indeed
it was well known all around, that a priest had been
fetched more than once to the valley, to soothe some
poor outlaw's departure.  On the other hand, they were
not likely to entertain much affection for the son of
the man who had banished them and confiscated their
property. And it was not at all impossible that desperate
men, such as they were, having nothing to lose, but estates
to recover, and not being held by religion much, should
cast away all regard for the birth from which they had
been cast out, and make common cause with a Protestant
rising, for the chance of revenge and replacement.

However I do not mean to say that all these things
occurred to me as clearly as I have set them down; only
that I was in general doubt, and very sad perplexity. 
For mother was so warm, and innocent, and kind so to
every one, that knowing some little by this time of the
English constitution, I feared very greatly lest she
should be punished for harbouring malcontents.  As well
as possible I knew, that if any poor man came to our
door, and cried, 'Officers are after me; for God's sake
take and hide me,' mother would take him in at once,
and conceal, and feed him, even though he had been very
violent; and, to tell the truth, so would both my
sisters, and so indeed would I do.  Whence it will be
clear that we were not the sort of people to be safe
among disturbances.

Before I could quite make up my mind how to act in this
difficulty, and how to get at the rights of it (for I
would not spy after Uncle Reuben, though I felt no
great fear of the Wizard's Slough, and none of the man
with the white night-cap), a difference came again upon
it, and a change of chances.  For Uncle Ben went away
as suddenly as he first had come to us, giving no
reason for his departure, neither claiming the pony,
and indeed leaving something behind him of great value
to my mother.  For he begged her to see to his young
grand-daughter, until he could find opportunity of
fetching her safely to Dulverton.  Mother was overjoyed
at this, as she could not help displaying; and Ruth was
quite as much delighted, although she durst not show
it.  For at Dulverton she had to watch and keep such
ward on the victuals, and the in and out of the
shopmen, that it went entirely against her heart, and
she never could enjoy herself.  Truly she was an
altered girl from the day she came to us; catching our
unsuspicious manners, and our free goodwill, and hearty
noise of laughing.

By this time, the harvest being done, and the thatching
of the ricks made sure against south-western tempests,
and all the reapers being gone, with good money and
thankfulness, I began to burn in spirit for the sight
of Lorna.  I had begged my sister Annie to let Sally
Snowe know, once for all, that it was not in my power
to have any thing more to do with her.  Of course our
Annie was not to grieve Sally, neither to let it appear
for a moment that I suspected her kind views upon me,
and her strong regard for our dairy:  only I thought it
right upon our part not to waste Sally's time any
longer, being a handsome wench as she was, and many
young fellows glad to marry her.

And Annie did this uncommonly well, as she herself told
me afterwards, having taken Sally in the sweetest
manner into her pure confidence, and opened half her
bosom to her, about my very sad love affair.  Not that
she let Sally know, of course, who it was, or what it
was; only that she made her understand, without hinting
at any desire of it, that there was no chance now of
having me.  Sally changed colour a little at this, and
then went on about a red cow which had passed seven
needles at milking time.

Inasmuch as there are two sorts of month well
recognised by the calendar, to wit the lunar and the
solar, I made bold to regard both my months, in the
absence of any provision, as intended to be strictly
lunar.  Therefore upon the very day when the eight
weeks were expiring forth I went in search of Lorna,
taking the pearl ring hopefully, and all the new-laid
eggs I could find, and a dozen and a half of small
trout from our brook.  And the pleasure it gave me to
catch those trout, thinking as every one came forth and
danced upon the grass, how much she would enjoy him, is
more than I can now describe, although I well remember
it.  And it struck me that after accepting my ring, and
saying how much she loved me, it was possible that my
Queen might invite me even to stay and sup with her:
and so I arranged with dear Annie beforehand, who was
now the greatest comfort to me, to account for my
absence if I should be late.

But alas, I was utterly disappointed; for although I
waited and waited for hours, with an equal amount both
of patience and peril, no Lorna ever appeared at all,
nor even the faintest sign of her.  And another thing
occurred as well, which vexed me more than it need have
done, for so small a matter.  And this was that my little
offering of the trout and the new-laid eggs was carried
off in the coolest manner by that vile Carver Doone.  For
thinking to keep them the fresher and nicer, away from so
much handling, I laid them in a little bed of reeds by the
side of the water, and placed some dog-leaves over them.
And when I had quite forgotten about them, and was watching
from my hiding-place beneath the willow-tree (for I liked
not to enter Lorna's bower, without her permission; except
just to peep that she was not there), and while I was turning
the ring in my pocket, having just seen the new moon, I
became aware of a great man coming eisurely down the valley.
He had a broad-brimmed hat, and a leather jerkin, and heavy
jack-boots to his middle thigh, and what was worst of all
for me, on his shoulder he bore a long carbine.  Having
nothing to meet him withal but my staff, and desiring to
avoid disturbance, I retired promptly into the chasm,
keeping the tree betwixt us that he might not descry me,
and watching from behind the jut of a rock, where now I
had scraped myself a neat little hole for the purpose. 

Presently the great man reappeared, being now within
fifty yards of me, and the light still good enough, as
he drew nearer for me to descry his features: and
though I am not a judge of men's faces, there was
something in his which turned me cold, as though with a
kind of horror.  Not that it was an ugly face; nay,
rather it seemed a handsome one, so far as mere form
and line might go, full of strength, and vigour, and
will, and steadfast resolution.  From the short black
hair above the broad forehead, to the long black beard
descending below the curt, bold chin, there was not any
curve or glimpse of weakness or of afterthought. 
Nothing playful, nothing pleasant, nothing with a track
of smiles; nothing which a friend could like, and laugh
at him for having.  And yet he might have been a good
man (for I have known very good men so fortified by
their own strange ideas of God): I say that he might
have seemed a good man, but for the cold and cruel
hankering of his steel-blue eyes.

Now let no one suppose for a minute that I saw all this
in a moment; for I am very slow, and take a long time
to digest things; only I like to set down, and have
done with it, all the results of my knowledge, though
they be not manifold.  But what I said to myself, just
then, was no more than this:  'What a fellow to have
Lorna!'  Having my sense of right so outraged (although,
of course, I would never allow her to go so far as
that), I almost longed that he might thrust his head in
to look after me.  For there I was, with my ash staff
clubbed, ready to have at him, and not ill inclined to
do so; if only he would come where strength, not
firearms, must decide it.  However, he suspected
nothing of my dangerous neighbourhood, but walked his
round like a sentinel, and turned at the brink of the
water.

Then as he marched back again, along the margin of the
stream, he espied my little hoard, covered up with
dog-leaves.  He saw that the leaves were upside down,
and this of course drew his attention.  I saw him
stoop, and lay bare the fish, and the eggs set a little
way from them and in my simple heart, I thought that
now he knew all about me.  But to my surprise, he
seemed well-pleased; and his harsh short laughter came
to me without echo,--

'Ha, ha! Charlie boy!  Fisherman Charlie, have I caught
thee setting bait for Lorna?  Now, I understand thy
fishings, and the robbing of Counsellor's hen roost. 
May I never have good roasting, if I have it not
to-night and roast thee, Charlie, afterwards!'

With this he calmly packed up my fish, and all the best
of dear Annie's eggs; and went away chuckling
steadfastly, to his home, if one may call it so.  But I
was so thoroughly grieved and mortified by this most
impudent robbery, that I started forth from my rocky
screen with the intention of pursuing him, until my better sense
arrested me, barely in time to escape his eyes.  For I
said to myself, that even supposing I could contend
unarmed with him, it would be the greatest folly in the
world to have my secret access known, and perhaps a
fatal barrier placed between Lorna and myself, and I
knew not what trouble brought upon her, all for the
sake of a few eggs and fishes.  It was better to bear
this trifling loss, however ignominious and goading to
the spirit, than to risk my love and Lorna's welfare, and
perhaps be shot into the bargain.  And I think that all
will agree with me, that I acted for the wisest, in
withdrawing to my shelter, though deprived of eggs and
fishes.

Having waited (as I said) until there was no chance
whatever of my love appearing, I hastened homeward very
sadly; and the wind of early autumn moaned across the
moorland.  All the beauty of the harvest, all the
gaiety was gone, and the early fall of dusk was like a
weight upon me.  Nevertheless, I went every evening
thenceforward for a fortnight; hoping, every time in
vain to find my hope and comfort.  And meanwhile, what
perplexed me most was that the signals were replaced,
in order as agreed upon, so that Lorna could scarcely
be restrained by any rigour.

One time I had a narrow chance of being shot and
settled with; and it befell me thus.  I was waiting
very carelessly, being now a little desperate, at the
entrance to the glen, instead of watching through my
sight-hole, as the proper practice was.  Suddenly a
ball went by me, with a whizz and whistle, passing
through my hat and sweeping it away all folded up.  My
soft hat fluttered far down the stream, before I had
time to go after it, and with the help of both wind and
water, was fifty yards gone in a moment.  At this I had
just enough mind left to shrink back very suddenly, and
lurk very still and closely; for I knew what a narrow
escape it had been, as I heard the bullet, hard set by
the powder, sing mournfully down the chasm, like a
drone banished out of the hive.  And as I peered
through my little cranny, I saw a wreath of smoke still
floating where the thickness was of the withy-bed; and
presently Carver Doone came forth, having stopped to
reload his piece perhaps, and ran very swiftly to the
entrance to see what he had shot.

Sore trouble had I to keep close quarters, from the
slipperiness of the stone beneath me with the water
sliding over it.  My foe came quite to the verge of the
fall, where the river began to comb over; and there he
stopped for a minute or two, on the utmost edge of dry
land, upon the very spot indeed where I had fallen
senseless when I clomb it in my boyhood.  I could hear
him breathing hard and grunting, as in doubt and
discontent, for he stood within a yard of me, and I
kept my right fist ready for him, if he should discover
me.  Then at the foot of the waterslide, my black hat
suddenly appeared, tossing in white foam, and
fluttering like a raven wounded.  Now I had doubted
which hat to take, when I left home that day; till I
thought that the black became me best, and might seem
kinder to Lorna.

'Have I killed thee, old bird, at last?' my enemy cried
in triumph; ''tis the third time I have shot at thee,
and thou wast beginning to mock me.  No more of thy
cursed croaking now, to wake me in the morning.  Ha,
ha! there are not many who get three chances from
Carver Doone; and none ever go beyond it.'

I laughed within myself at this, as he strode away in
his triumph; for was not this his third chance of me,
and he no whit the wiser?  And then I thought that
perhaps the chance might some day be on the other side.

For to tell the truth, I was heartily tired of lurking
and playing bo-peep so long; to which nothing could
have reconciled me, except my fear for Lorna.  And here
I saw was a man of strength fit for me to encounter,
such as I had never met, but would be glad to meet
with; having found no man of late who needed not my
mercy at wrestling, or at single-stick.  And growing
more and more uneasy, as I found no Lorna, I would have
tried to force the Doone Glen from the upper end, and
take my chance of getting back, but for Annie and her
prayers.

Now that same night I think it was, or at any rate the
next one, that I noticed Betty Muxworthy going on most
strangely.  She made the queerest signs to me, when
nobody was looking, and laid her fingers on her lips,
and pointed over her shoulder.  But I took little heed
of her, being in a kind of dudgeon, and oppressed with
evil luck; believing too that all she wanted was to
have some little grumble about some petty grievance.

But presently she poked me with the heel of a
fire-bundle, and passing close to my ear whispered, so
that none else could hear her, 'Larna Doo-un.'

By these words I was so startled, that I turned round
and stared at her; but she pretended not to know it,
and began with all her might to scour an empty crock
with a besom.

'Oh, Betty, let me help you! That work is much too hard
for you,' I cried with a sudden chivalry, which only
won rude answer.

'Zeed me adooing of thic, every naight last ten year,
Jan, wiout vindin' out how hard it wor.  But if zo bee
thee wants to help, carr peg's bucket for me.  Massy,
if I ain't forgotten to fade the pegs till now.'

Favouring me with another wink, to which I now paid the
keenest heed, Betty went and fetched the lanthorn from
the hook inside the door.  Then when she had kindled
it, not allowing me any time to ask what she was after,
she went outside, and pointed to the great bock of
wash, and riddlings, and brown hulkage (for we ground
our own corn always), and though she knew that Bill
Dadds and Jem Slocombe had full work to carry it on a
pole (with another to help to sling it), she said to me
as quietly as a maiden might ask one to carry a glove,
'Jan Ridd, carr thic thing for me.'

So I carried it for her, without any words; wondering
what she was up to next, and whether she had ever heard
of being too hard on the willing horse.  And when we
came to hog-pound, she turned upon me suddenly, with
the lanthorn she was bearing, and saw that I had the
bock by one hand very easily.

'Jan Ridd,' she said, 'there be no other man in England
cud a' dood it.  Now thee shalt have Larna.'

While I was wondering how my chance of having Lorna
could depend upon my power to carry pig's wash, and how
Betty could have any voice in the matter (which seemed
to depend upon her decision), and in short, while I was
all abroad as to her knowledge and everything, the
pigs, who had been fast asleep and dreaming in their
emptiness, awoke with one accord at the goodness of the
smell around them.  They had resigned themselves, as
even pigs do, to a kind of fast, hoping to break their
fast more sweetly on the morrow morning.  But now they
tumbled out all headlong, pigs below and pigs above,
pigs point-blank and pigs across, pigs courant and pigs
rampant, but all alike prepared to eat, and all in good
cadence squeaking.

'Tak smarl boocket, and bale un out; wad 'e waste sich
stoof as thic here be?' So Betty set me to feed the
pigs, while she held the lanthorn; and knowing what she
was, I saw that she would not tell me another word
until all the pigs were served.  And in truth no man
could well look at them, and delay to serve them, they
were all expressing appetite in so forcible a manner;
some running to and fro, and rubbing, and squealing as
if from starvation, some rushing down to the oaken
troughs, and poking each other away from them; and the
kindest of all putting up their fore-feet on the
top-rail on the hog-pound, and blinking their little
eyes, and grunting prettily to coax us; as who would
say, 'I trust you now; you will be kind, I know, and
give me the first and the very best of it.'

'Oppen ge-at now, wull 'e, Jan?  Maind, young sow wi'
the baible back arlway hath first toorn of it, 'cos I
brought her up on my lap, I did.  Zuck, zuck, zuck! How
her stickth her tail up; do me good to zee un! Now
thiccy trough, thee zany, and tak thee girt legs out o'
the wai.  Wish they wud gie thee a good baite, mak thee
hop a bit vaster, I reckon.  Hit that there girt
ozebird over's back wi' the broomstick, he be robbing
of my young zow.  Choog, choog, choog! and a drap more
left in the dripping-pail.'

'Come now, Betty,' I said, when all the pigs were at it
sucking, swilling, munching, guzzling, thrusting, and
ousting, and spilling the food upon the backs of their
brethren (as great men do with their charity), 'come
now, Betty, how much longer am I to wait for your
message?  Surely I am as good as a pig.'

'Dunno as thee be, Jan.  No straikiness in thy bakkon. 
And now I come to think of it, Jan, thee zed, a wake
agone last Vriday, as how I had got a girt be-ard. 
Wull 'e stick to that now, Maister Jan?'

'No, no, Betty, certainly not; I made a mistake about
it.  I should have said a becoming mustachio, such as
you may well be proud of.'

'Then thee be a laiar, Jan Ridd.  Zay so, laike a man,
lad.'

'Not exactly that, Betty; but I made a great mistake;
and I humbly ask your pardon; and if such a thing as a
crown-piece, Betty'--

'No fai, no fai!' said Betty, however she put it into
her pocket; 'now tak my advice, Jan; thee marry Zally
Snowe.'

'Not with all England for her dowry.  Oh, Betty, you
know better.'

'Ah's me! I know much worse, Jan.  Break thy poor
mother's heart it will.  And to think of arl the
danger! Dost love Larna now so much?'

'With all the strength of my heart and soul.  I will
have her, or I will die, Betty.'

'Wull.  Thee will die in either case.  But it baint for
me to argify.  And do her love thee too, Jan?'

'I hope she does, Betty I hope she does.  What do you
think about it?'

'Ah, then I may hold my tongue to it.  Knaw what boys
and maidens be, as well as I knew young pegs.  I myzell
been o' that zort one taime every bit so well as you
be.' And Betty held the lanthorn up, and defied me to
deny it; and the light through the horn showed a gleam
in her eyes, such as I had never seer there before.  
'No odds, no odds about that,' she continued; 'mak a
fool of myzell to spake of it.  Arl gone into
churchyard.  But it be a lucky foolery for thee, my
boy, I can tull 'ee.  For I love to see the love in
thee.  Coom'th over me as the spring do, though I be
naigh three score.  Now, Jan, I will tell thee one
thing, can't abear to zee thee vretting so.  Hould thee
head down, same as they pegs do.'

So I bent my head quite close to her; and she whispered
in my ear, 'Goo of a marning, thee girt soft.  Her
can't get out of an avening now, her hath zent word to
me, to tull 'ee.'

In the glory of my delight at this, I bestowed upon
Betty a chaste salute, with all the pigs for witnesses;
and she took it not amiss, considering how long she had
been out of practice.  But then she fell back, like a
broom on its handle, and stared at me, feigning anger.

'Oh fai, oh fai!  Lunnon impudence, I doubt.  I vear
thee hast gone on zadly, Jan.'



CHAPTER XXXIII

AN EARLY MORNING CALL

Of course I was up the very next morning before the
October sunrise, and away through the wild and the
woodland towards the Bagworthy water, at the foot of
the long cascade.  The rising of the sun was noble in
the cold and warmth of it; peeping down the spread of
light, he raised his shoulder heavily over the edge of
grey mountain, and wavering length of upland.  Beneath
his gaze the dew-fogs dipped, and crept to the hollow
places; then stole away in line and column, holding
skirts, and clinging subtly at the sheltering corners,
where rock hung over grass-land; while the brave lines
of the hills came forth, one beyond other gliding.  

Then the woods arose in folds, like drapery of awakened
mountains, stately with a depth of awe, and memory of
the tempests.  Autumn's mellow hand was on them, as
they owned already, touched with gold, and red, and
olive; and their joy towards the sun was less to a
bridegroom than a father.

Yet before the floating impress of the woods could
clear itself, suddenly the gladsome light leaped over
hill and valley, casting amber, blue, and purple, and a
tint of rich red rose; according to the scene they lit
on, and the curtain flung around; yet all alike
dispelling fear and the cloven hoof of darkness, all on
the wings of hope advancing, and proclaiming, 'God is
here.' Then life and joy sprang reassured from every
crouching hollow; every flower, and bud, and bird, had
a fluttering sense of them; and all the flashing of
God's gaze merged into soft beneficence.

So perhaps shall break upon us that eternal morning,
when crag and chasm shall be no more, neither hill and
valley, nor great unvintaged ocean; when glory shall
not scare happiness, neither happiness envy glory; but
all things shall arise and shine in the light of the
Father's countenance, because itself is risen.

Who maketh His sun to rise upon both the just and the
unjust.  And surely but for the saving clause, Doone
Glen had been in darkness.  Now, as I stood with
scanty breath--for few men could have won that
climb--at the top of the long defile, and the bottom of
the mountain gorge all of myself, and the pain of it,
and the cark of my discontent fell away into wonder and
rapture.  For I cannot help seeing things now and then,
slow-witted as I have a right to be; and perhaps
because it comes so rarely, the sight dwells with me
like a picture.

The bar of rock, with the water-cleft breaking steeply
through it, stood bold and bare, and dark in shadow,
grey with red gullies down it.  But the sun was
beginning to glisten over the comb of the eastern
highland, and through an archway of the wood hung with
old nests and ivy.  The lines of many a leaning tree
were thrown, from the cliffs of the foreland, down upon
the sparkling grass at the foot of the western crags. 
And through the dewy meadow's breast, fringed with
shade, but touched on one side with the sun-smile, ran
the crystal water, curving in its brightness like
diverted hope.

On either bank, the blades of grass, making their last
autumn growth, pricked their spears and crisped their
tuftings with the pearly purity.  The tenderness of
their green appeared under the glaucous mantle; while
that grey suffusion, which is the blush of green life,
spread its damask chastity.  Even then my soul was
lifted, worried though my mind was: who can see such
large kind doings, and not be ashamed of human grief?

Not only unashamed of grief, but much abashed with joy,
was I, when I saw my Lorna coming, purer than the
morning dew, than the sun more bright and clear.  That
which made me love her so, that which lifted my heart
to her, as the Spring wind lifts the clouds, was the
gayness of her nature, and its inborn playfulness.  And
yet all this with maiden shame, a conscious dream of
things unknown, and a sense of fate about them.

Down the valley still she came, not witting that I
looked at her, having ceased (through my own misprison)
to expect me yet awhile; or at least she told herself
so.  In the joy of awakened life and brightness of the
morning, she had cast all care away, and seemed to
float upon the sunrise, like a buoyant silver wave. 
Suddenly at sight of me, for I leaped forth at once, in
fear of seeming to watch her unawares, the bloom upon
her cheeks was deepened, and the radiance of her eyes;
and she came to meet me gladly.

'At last then, you are come, John.  I thought you had
forgotten me.  I could not make you understand--they
have kept me prisoner every evening: but come into my
house; you are in danger here.'

Meanwhile I could not answer, being overcome with joy,
but followed to her little grotto, where I had been
twice before.  I knew that the crowning moment of my
life was coming--that Lorna would own her love for me.

She made for awhile as if she dreamed not of the
meaning of my gaze, but tried to speak of other things,
faltering now and then, and mantling with a richer
damask below her long eyelashes.

'This is not what I came to know,' I whispered very
softly, 'you know what I am come to ask.'

'If you are come on purpose to ask anything, why do you
delay so?'  She turned away very bravely, but I saw
that her lips were trembling.

'I delay so long, because I fear; because my whole life
hangs in balance on a single word; because what I have
near me now may never more be near me after, though
more than all the world, or than a thousand worlds, to
me.'  As I spoke these words of passion in a low soft
voice, Lorna trembled more and more; but she made no
answer, neither yet looked up at me.

'I have loved you long and long,' I pursued, being
reckless now, 'when you were a little child, as a boy I
worshipped you: then when I saw you a comely girl, as a
stripling I adored you: now that you are a full-grown
maiden all the rest I do, and more--I love you more
than tongue can tell, or heart can hold in silence.  I
have waited long and long; and though I am so far below
you I can wait no longer; but must have my answer.'

'You have been very faithful, John,' she murmured to
the fern and moss; 'I suppose I must reward you.'

'That will not do for me,' I said; 'I will not have
reluctant liking, nor assent for pity's sake; which
only means endurance.  I must have all love, or none, I
must have your heart of hearts; even as you have mine,
Lorna.'

While I spoke, she glanced up shyly through her
fluttering lashes, to prolong my doubt one moment, for
her own delicious pride.  Then she opened wide upon me
all the glorious depth and softness of her loving eyes,
and flung both arms around my neck, and answered with
her heart on mine,--

'Darling, you have won it all.  I shall never be my own
again.  I am yours, my own one, for ever and for ever.'

I am sure I know not what I did, or what I said
thereafter, being overcome with transport by her words
and at her gaze.  Only one thing I remember, when she
raised her bright lips to me, like a child, for me to
kiss, such a smile of sweet temptation met me through
her flowing hair, that I almost forgot my manners,
giving her no time to breathe.

'That will do,' said Lorna gently, but violently
blushing; 'for the present that will do, John.  And now
remember one thing, dear.  All the kindness is to be
on my side; and you are to be very distant, as behoves
to a young maiden; except when I invite you.  But you
may kiss my hand, John; oh, yes, you may kiss my hand,
you know.  Ah to be sure!  I had forgotten; how very
stupid of me!'

For by this time I had taken one sweet hand and gazed
on it, with the pride of all the world to think that
such a lovely thing was mine; and then I slipped my
little ring upon the wedding finger; and this time
Lorna kept it, and looked with fondness on its beauty,
and clung to me with a flood of tears.

'Every time you cry,' said I, drawing her closer to me
'I shall consider it an invitation not to be too
distant.  There now, none shall make you weep.  Darling,
you shall sigh no more, but live in peace and
happiness, with me to guard and cherish you: and who
shall dare to vex you?'  But she drew a long sad sigh,
and looked at the ground with the great tears rolling,
and pressed one hand upon the trouble of her pure young
breast.

'It can never, never be,' she murmured to herself
alone: 'Who am I, to dream of it?  Something in my
heart tells me it can be so never, never.'



CHAPTER XXXIV

TWO NEGATIVES MAKE AN AFFIRMATIVE

There was, however, no possibility of depressing me at
such a time.  To be loved by Lorna, the sweet, the
pure, the playful one, the fairest creature on God's
earth and the most enchanting, the lady of high birth
and mind; that I, a mere clumsy, blundering yeoman,
without wit, or wealth, or lineage, should have won
that loving heart to be my own for ever, was a thought
no fears could lessen, and no chance could steal from
me.  

Therefore at her own entreaty taking a very quick
adieu, and by her own invitation an exceeding kind one,
I hurried home with deep exulting, yet some sad
misgivings, for Lorna had made me promise now to tell
my mother everything; as indeed I always meant to do,
when my suit should be gone too far to stop.  I knew,
of course, that my dear mother would be greatly moved
and vexed, the heirship of Glen Doone not being a very
desirable dower, but in spite of that, and all
disappointment as to little Ruth Huckaback, feeling my
mother's tenderness and deep affection to me, and
forgiving nature, I doubted not that before very long
she would view the matter as I did.  Moreover, I felt
that if once I could get her only to look at Lorna, she
would so love and glory in her, that I should obtain
all praise and thanks, perchance without deserving
them.

Unluckily for my designs, who should be sitting down at
breakfast with my mother and the rest but Squire
Faggus, as everybody now began to entitle him.  I
noticed something odd about him, something
uncomfortable in his manner, and a lack of that ease
and humour which had been wont to distinguish him.  He
took his breakfast as it came, without a single joke
about it, or preference of this to that; but with sly
soft looks at Annie, who seemed unable to sit quiet, or
to look at any one steadfastly.  I feared in my heart
what was coming on, and felt truly sorry for poor
mother.  After breakfast it became my duty to see to
the ploughing of a barley-stubble ready for the sowing
of a French grass, and I asked Tom Faggus to come with
me, but he refused, and I knew the reason.  Being
resolved to allow him fair field to himself, though
with great displeasure that a man of such illegal
repute should marry into our family, which had always
been counted so honest, I carried my dinner upon my
back, and spent the whole day with the furrows.

When I returned, Squire Faggus was gone; which appeared
to me but a sorry sign, inasmuch as if mother had taken
kindly to him and his intentions, she would surely have
made him remain awhile to celebrate the occasion.  And
presently no doubt was left: for Lizzie came running to
meet me, at the bottom of the woodrick, and cried,--

'Oh, John, there is such a business.  Mother is in such
a state of mind, and Annie crying her eyes out.  What
do you think?  You would never guess, though I have
suspected it, ever so long.'

'No need for me to guess,' I replied, as though with
some indifference, because of her self-important air;
'I knew all about it long ago.  You have not been
crying much, I see.  I should like you better if you
had.'

'Why should I cry?  I like Tom Faggus.  He is the only
one I ever see with the spirit of a man.'

This was a cut, of course, at me.  Mr. Faggus had won
the goodwill of Lizzie by his hatred of the Doones, and
vows that if he could get a dozen men of any courage to
join him, he would pull their stronghold about their
ears without any more ado.  This malice of his seemed
strange to me, as he had never suffered at their hands,
so far at least as I knew; was it to be attributed to
his jealousy of outlaws who excelled him in his
business?  Not being good at repartee, I made no answer
to Lizzie, having found this course more irksome to her
than the very best invective: and so we entered the
house together; and mother sent at once for me, while I
was trying to console my darling sister Annie.

'Oh, John! speak one good word for me,' she cried with
both hands laid in mine, and her tearful eyes looking
up at me.  

'Not one, my pet, but a hundred,' I answered, kindly
embracing her: 'have no fear, little sister: I am going
to make your case so bright, by comparison, I mean,
that mother will send for you in five minutes, and call
you her best, her most dutiful child, and praise Cousin
Tom to the skies, and send a man on horseback after
him; and then you will have a harder task to intercede
for me, my dear.'

'Oh, John, dear John, you won't tell her about
Lorna--oh, not to-day, dear.'

'Yes, to-day, and at once, Annie.  I want to have it
over, and be done with it.'

'Oh, but think of her, dear.  I am sure she could not
bear it, after this great shock already.'

'She will bear it all the better,' said I; 'the one
will drive the other out.  I know exactly what mother
is.  She will be desperately savage first with you, and
then with me, and then for a very little while with
both of us together; and then she will put one against
the other (in her mind I mean) and consider which was
most to blame; and in doing that she will be compelled
to find the best in either's case, that it may beat the
other; and so as the pleas come before her mind, they
will gain upon the charges, both of us being her
children, you know: and before very long (particularly
if we both keep out of the way) she will begin to think
that after all she has been a little too hasty, and
then she will remember how good we have always been to
her; and how like our father.  Upon that, she will
think of her own love-time, and sigh a good bit, and
cry a little, and then smile, and send for both of us,
and beg our pardon, and call us her two darlings.'

'Now, John, how on earth can you know all that?'
exclaimed my sister, wiping her eyes, and gazing at me
with a soft bright smile.  'Who on earth can have told
you, John?  People to call you stupid indeed! Why, I
feel that all you say is quite true, because you
describe so exactly what I should do myself; I mean--I
mean if I had two children, who had behaved as we have
done.  But tell me, darling John, how you learned all
this.'

'Never you mind,' I replied, with a nod of some
conceit, I fear: 'I must be a fool if I did not know
what mother is by this time.'

Now inasmuch as the thing befell according to my
prediction, what need for me to dwell upon it, after
saying how it would be?  Moreover, I would regret to
write down what mother said about Lorna, in her first
surprise and tribulation; not only because I was
grieved by the gross injustice of it, and frightened
mother with her own words (repeated deeply after her);
but rather because it is not well, when people repent
of hasty speech, to enter it against them.

That is said to be the angels' business; and I doubt if
they can attend to it much, without doing injury to
themselves.

However, by the afternoon, when the sun began to go
down upon us, our mother sat on the garden bench, with
her head on my great otter-skin waistcoat (which was
waterproof), and her right arm round our Annie's waist,
and scarcely knowing which of us she ought to make the
most of, or which deserved most pity.  Not that she had
forgiven yet the rivals to her love--Tom Faggus, I
mean, and Lorna--but that she was beginning to think a
tattle better of them now, and a vast deal better of
her own children.

And it helped her much in this regard, that she was not
thinking half so well as usual of herself, or rather of
her own judgment; for in good truth she had no self,
only as it came home to her, by no very distant road,
but by way of her children.  A better mother never
lived; and can I, after searching all things, add
another word to that?

And indeed poor Lizzie was not so very bad; but behaved
(on the whole) very well for her.  She was much to be
pitied, poor thing, and great allowances made for her,
as belonging to a well-grown family, and a very comely
one; and feeling her own shortcomings.  This made her
leap to the other extreme, and reassert herself too
much, endeavouring to exalt the mind at the expense of
the body; because she had the invisible one (so far as
can be decided) in better share than the visible.  Not
but what she had her points, and very comely points of
body; lovely eyes to wit, and very beautiful hands and
feet (almost as good as Lorna's), and a neck as white
as snow; but Lizzie was not gifted with our gait and
port, and bounding health.

Now, while we sat on the garden bench, under the great
ash-tree, we left dear mother to take her own way, and
talk at her own pleasure.  Children almost always are
more wide-awake than their parents.  The fathers and
the mothers laugh; but the young ones have the best of
them.  And now both Annie knew, and I, that we had
gotten the best of mother; and therefore we let her lay
down the law, as if we had been two dollies.

'Darling John,' my mother said, 'your case is a very
hard one.  A young and very romantic girl--God send
that I be right in my charitable view of her--has met
an equally simple boy, among great dangers and
difficulties, from which my son has saved her, at the
risk of his life at every step.  Of course, she became
attached to him, and looked up to him in every way, as
a superior being'--

'Come now, mother,' I said; 'if you only saw Lorna, you
would look upon me as the lowest dirt'--

'No doubt I should,' my mother answered; 'and the king
and queen, and all the royal family.  Well, this poor
angel, having made up her mind to take compassion upon
my son, when he had saved her life so many times,
persuades him to marry her out of pure pity, and throw
his poor mother overboard.  And the saddest part of it
all is this--'

'That my mother will never, never, never understand the
truth,' said I.

'That is all I wish,' she answered; 'just to get at the
simple truth from my own perception of it.  John, you
are very wise in kissing me; but perhaps you would not
be so wise in bringing Lorna for an afternoon, just to
see what she thinks of me.  There is a good saddle of
mutton now; and there are some very good sausages left,
on the blue dish with the anchor, Annie, from the last
little sow we killed.'

'As if Lorna would eat sausages!' said I, with
appearance of high contempt, though rejoicing all the
while that mother seemed to have her name so pat; and
she pronounced it in a manner which made my heart leap
to my ears: 'Lorna to eat sausages!'

'I don't see why she shouldn't,' my mother answered
smiling, 'if she means to be a farmer's wife, she must
take to farmer's ways, I think.  What do you say,
Annie?'

'She will eat whatever John desires, I should hope,'
said Annie gravely; 'particularly as I made them.'

'Oh that I could only get the chance of trying her!' I
answered, 'if you could once behold her, mother, you
would never let her go again.  And she would love you
with all her heart, she is so good and gentle.'

'That is a lucky thing for me'; saying this my mother
wept, as she had been doing off and on, when no one
seemed to look at her; 'otherwise I suppose, John, she
would very soon turn me out of the farm, having you so
completely under her thumb, as she seems to have.  I
see now that my time is over.  Lizzie and I will seek
our fortunes.  It is wiser so.'

'Now, mother,' I cried; 'will you have the kindness not
to talk any nonsense?  Everything belongs to you; and
so, I hope, your children do.  And you, in turn, belong
to us; as you have proved ever since--oh, ever since we
can remember.  Why do you make Annie cry so?  You ought
to know better than that.'

Mother upon this went over all the things she had done
before; how many times I know not; neither does it
matter.  Only she seemed to enjoy it more, every time
of doing it.  And then she said she was an old fool;
and Annie (like a thorough girl) pulled her one grey
hair out.



CHAPTER XXXV

RUTH IS NOT LIKE LORNA

Although by our mother's reluctant consent a large
part of the obstacles between Annie and her lover
appeared to be removed, on the other hand Lorna and
myself gained little, except as regarded comfort of
mind, and some ease to the conscience.  Moreover, our
chance of frequent meetings and delightful converse was
much impaired, at least for the present; because though
mother was not aware of my narrow escape from Carver
Doone, she made me promise never to risk my life by
needless visits.  And upon this point, that is to say,
the necessity of the visit, she was well content, as
she said, to leave me to my own good sense and honour;
only begging me always to tell her of my intention
beforehand.  This pledge, however, for her own sake, I
declined to give; knowing how wretched she would be
during all the time of my absence; and, on that
account, I promised instead, that I would always give
her a full account of my adventure upon returning.

Now my mother, as might be expected, began at once to
cast about for some means of relieving me from all
further peril, and herself from great anxiety.  She was
full of plans for fetching Lorna, in some wonderful
manner, out of the power of the Doones entirely, and
into her own hands, where she was to remain for at
least a twelve-month, learning all mother and Annie
could teach her of dairy business, and farm-house life,
and the best mode of packing butter.  And all this
arose from my happening to say, without meaning
anything, how the poor dear had longed for quiet, and a
life of simplicity, and a rest away from violence!
Bless thee, mother--now long in heaven, there is no
need to bless thee; but it often makes a dimness now in
my well-worn eyes, when I think of thy loving-kindness,
warmth, and romantic innocence.

As to stealing my beloved from that vile Glen Doone,
the deed itself was not impossible, nor beyond my
daring; but in the first place would she come, leaving
her old grandfather to die without her tendence?  And
even if, through fear of Carver and that wicked
Counsellor, she should consent to fly, would it be
possible to keep her without a regiment of soldiers? 
Would not the Doones at once ride forth to scour the
country for their queen, and finding her (as they must
do), burn our house, and murder us, and carry her back
triumphantly?

All this I laid before my mother, and to such effect
that she acknowledged, with a sigh that nothing else
remained for me (in the present state of matters)
except to keep a careful watch upon Lorna from safe
distance, observe the policy of the Doones, and wait
for a tide in their affairs.  Meanwhile I might even
fall in love (as mother unwisely hinted) with a certain
more peaceful heiress, although of inferior blood, who
would be daily at my elbow.  I am not sure but what
dear mother herself would have been disappointed, had I
proved myself so fickle; and my disdain and indignation
at the mere suggestion did not so much displease her;
for she only smiled and answered,--

'Well, it is not for me to say; God knows what is good
for us.  Likings will not come to order; otherwise I
should not be where I am this day.  And of one thing I
am rather glad; Uncle Reuben well deserves that his pet
scheme should miscarry.  He who called my boy a coward,
an ignoble coward, because he would not join some
crack-brained plan against the valley which sheltered
his beloved one! And all the time this dreadful
"coward" risking his life daily there, without a word
to any one! How glad I am that you will not have, for
all her miserable money, that little dwarfish
granddaughter of the insolent old miser!'

She turned, and by her side was standing poor Ruth
Huckaback herself, white, and sad, and looking steadily
at my mother's face, which became as red as a plum
while her breath deserted her.

'If you please, madam,' said the little maiden, with
her large calm eyes unwavering, 'it is not my fault,
but God Almighty's, that I am a little dwarfish
creature.  I knew not that you regarded me with so much
contempt on that account; neither have you told my
grandfather, at least within my hearing, that he was an
insolent old miser.  When I return to Dulverton, which
I trust to do to-morrow (for it is too late to-day), I
shall be careful not to tell him your opinion of him,
lest I should thwart any schemes you may have upon his
property.  I thank you all for your kindness to me,
which has been very great, far more than a little
dwarfish creature could, for her own sake, expect.  I
will only add for your further guidance one more little
truth.  It is by no means certain that my grandfather
will settle any of his miserable money upon me.  If I
offend him, as I would in a moment, for the sake of a
brave and straightforward man'--here she gave me a
glance which I scarcely knew what to do with--'my
grandfather, upright as he is, would leave me without a
shilling.  And I often wish it were so.  So many
miseries come upon me from the miserable money--' Here
she broke down, and burst out crying, and ran away with
a faint good-bye; while we three looked at one another,
and felt that we had the worst of it.

'Impudent little dwarf!' said my mother, recovering her
breath after ever so long.  'Oh, John, how thankful you
ought to be!  What a life she would have led you!'

'Well, I am sure!' said Annie, throwing her arms around
poor mother: 'who could have thought that little atomy
had such an outrageous spirit! For my part I cannot
think how she can have been sly enough to hide it in
that crafty manner, that John might think her an
angel!'

'Well, for my part,' I answered, laughing, 'I never
admired Ruth Huckaback half, or a quarter so much
before.  She is rare stuff.  I would have been glad to
have married her to-morrow, if I had never seen my
Lorna.'

'And a nice nobody I should have been, in my own
house!' cried mother: 'I never can be thankful enough
to darling Lorna for saving me.  Did you see how her
eyes flashed?'

'That I did; and very fine they were.  Now nine maidens
out of ten would have feigned not to have heard one
word that was said, and have borne black malice in
their hearts.  Come, Annie, now, would not you have
done so?' 

'I think,' said Annie, 'although of course I cannot
tell, you know, John, that I should have been ashamed
at hearing what was never meant for me, and should have
been almost as angry with myself as anybody.'

'So you would,' replied my mother; 'so any daughter of
mine would have done, instead of railing and reviling. 
However, I am very sorry that any words of mine which
the poor little thing chose to overhear should have
made her so forget herself.  I shall beg her pardon
before she goes, and I shall expect her to beg mine.'

'That she will never do,' said I; 'a more resolute
little maiden never yet had right upon her side;
although it was a mere accident.  I might have said the
same thing myself, and she was hard upon you, mother
dear.'

After this, we said no more, at least about that
matter; and little Ruth, the next morning, left us, in
spite of all that we could do.  She vowed an
everlasting friendship to my younger sister Eliza; but
she looked at Annie with some resentment, when they
said good-bye, for being so much taller.  At any rate
so Annie fancied, but she may have been quite wrong.  I
rode beside the little maid till far beyond Exeford,
when all danger of the moor was past, and then I left
her with John Fry, not wishing to be too particular,
after all the talk about her money.  She had tears in
her eyes when she bade me farewell, and she sent a kind
message home to mother, and promised to come again at
Christmas, if she could win permission.

Upon the whole, my opinion was that she had behaved
uncommonly well for a maid whose self-love was
outraged, with spirit, I mean, and proper pride; and
yet with a great endeavour to forgive, which is,
meseems, the hardest of all things to a woman, outside
of her own family.

After this, for another month, nothing worthy of notice
happened, except of course that I found it needful,
according to the strictest good sense and honour, to
visit Lorna immediately after my discourse with mother,
and to tell her all about it.  My beauty gave me one
sweet kiss with all her heart (as she always did, when
she kissed at all), and I begged for one more to take
to our mother, and before leaving, I obtained it.  It
is not for me to tell all she said, even supposing
(what is not likely) that any one cared to know it,
being more and more peculiar to ourselves and no one
else.  But one thing that she said was this, and I took
good care to carry it, word for word, to my mother and
Annie:--

'I never can believe, dear John, that after all the
crime and outrage wrought by my reckless family, it
ever can be meant for me to settle down to peace and
comfort in a simple household.  With all my heart I
long for home; any home, however dull and wearisome to
those used to it, would seem a paradise to me, if only
free from brawl and tumult, and such as I could call my
own.  But even if God would allow me this, in lieu of
my wild inheritance, it is quite certain that the
Doones never can and never will.'

Again, when I told her how my mother and Annie, as well
as myself, longed to have her at Plover's Barrows, and
teach her all the quiet duties in which she was sure to
take such delight, she only answered with a bright
blush, that while her grandfather was living she would
never leave him; and that even if she were free,
certain ruin was all she should bring to any house that
received her, at least within the utmost reach of her
amiable family.  This was too plain to be denied, and
seeing my dejection at it, she told me bravely that we
must hope for better times, if possible, and asked how
long I would wait for her.

'Not a day if I had my will,' I answered very warmly;
at which she turned away confused, and would not look
at me for awhile; 'but all my life,' I went on to say,
'if my fortune is so ill.  And how long would you wait
for me, Lorna?'

'Till I could get you,' she answered slyly, with a
smile which was brighter to me than the brightest wit
could be.  'And now,' she continued, 'you bound me,
John, with a very beautiful ring to you, and when I
dare not wear it, I carry it always on my heart.  But I
will bind you to me, you dearest, with the very poorest
and plainest thing that ever you set eyes on.  I could
give you fifty fairer ones, but they would not be
honest; and I love you for your honesty, and nothing
else of course, John; so don't you be conceited.  Look
at it, what a queer old thing!  There are some ancient
marks upon it, very grotesque and wonderful; it looks
like a cat in a tree almost, but never mind what it
looks like.  This old ring must have been a giant's;
therefore it will fit you perhaps, you enormous John. 
It has been on the front of my old glass necklace
(which my grandfather found them taking away, and very
soon made them give back again) ever since I can
remember; and long before that, as some woman told me. 
Now you seem very greatly amazed; pray what thinks my
lord of it?'

'That is worth fifty of the pearl thing which I gave
you, you darling; and that I will not take it from
you.'

'Then you will never take me, that is all.  I will have
nothing to do with a gentleman'--

'No gentleman, dear--a yeoman.'

'Very well, a yeoman--nothing to do with a yeoman who
will not accept my love-gage.  So, if you please, give
it back again, and take your lovely ring back.'

She looked at me in such a manner, half in earnest,
half in jest, and three times three in love, that in
spite of all good resolutions, and her own faint
protest, I was forced to abandon all firm ideas, and
kiss her till she was quite ashamed, and her head hung
on my bosom, with the night of her hair shed over me.  
Then I placed the pearl ring back on the soft elastic
bend of the finger she held up to scold me; and on my
own smallest finger drew the heavy hoop she had given
me.  I considered this with satisfaction, until my
darling recovered herself; and then I began very
gravely about it, to keep her (if I could) from chiding
me:--

'Mistress Lorna, this is not the ring of any giant.  It
is nothing more nor less than a very ancient
thumb-ring, such as once in my father's time was
ploughed up out of the ground in our farm, and sent to
learned doctors, who told us all about it, but kept the
ring for their trouble.  I will accept it, my own one
love; and it shall go to my grave with me.' And so it
shall, unless there be villains who would dare to rob
the dead.

Now I have spoken about this ring (though I scarcely
meant to do so, and would rather keep to myself things
so very holy) because it holds an important part in the
history of my Lorna.  I asked her where the glass
necklace was from which the ring was fastened, and
which she had worn in her childhood, and she answered
that she hardly knew, but remembered that her
grandfather had begged her to give it up to him, when
she was ten years old or so, and had promised to keep
it for her until she could take care of it; at the same
time giving her back the ring, and fastening it from
her pretty neck, and telling her to be proud of it. 
And so she always had been, and now from her sweet
breast she took it, and it became John Ridd's delight.

All this, or at least great part of it, I told my
mother truly, according to my promise; and she was
greatly pleased with Lorna for having been so good to
me, and for speaking so very sensibly; and then she
looked at the great gold ring, but could by no means
interpret it.  Only she was quite certain, as indeed I
myself was, that it must have belonged to an ancient
race of great consideration, and high rank, in their
time.  Upon which I was for taking it off, lest it
should be degraded by a common farmer's finger.  But
mother said 'No,' with tears in her eyes; 'if the
common farmer had won the great lady of the ancient
race, what were rings and old-world trinkets, when
compared to the living jewel?'  Being quite of her
opinion in this, and loving the ring (which had no gem
in it) as the token of my priceless gem, I resolved to
wear it at any cost, except when I should be ploughing,
or doing things likely to break it; although I must own
that it felt very queer (for I never had throttled a
finger before), and it looked very queer, for a length
of time, upon my great hard-working hand.

And before I got used to my ring, or people could think
that it belonged to me (plain and ungarnished though it
was), and before I went to see Lorna again, having
failed to find any necessity, and remembering my duty
to mother, we all had something else to think of, not so
pleasant, and more puzzling.  



CHAPTER XXXVI

JOHN RETURNS TO BUSINESS

Now November was upon us, and we had kept 
Allhallowmass, with roasting of skewered apples (like
so many shuttlecocks), and after that the day of
Fawkes, as became good Protestants, with merry bonfires
and burned batatas, and plenty of good feeding in
honour of our religion; and then while we were at
wheat-sowing, another visitor arrived.

This was Master Jeremy Stickles, who had been a good
friend to me (as described before) in London, and had
earned my mother's gratitude, so far as ever he chose
to have it.  And he seemed inclined to have it all; for
he made our farm-house his headquarters, and kept us
quite at his beck and call, going out at any time of
the evening, and coming back at any time of the
morning, and always expecting us to be ready, whether
with horse, or man, or maiden, or fire, or provisions. 
We knew that he was employed somehow upon the service
of the King, and had at different stations certain
troopers and orderlies quite at his disposal; also we
knew that he never went out, nor even slept in his
bedroom, without heavy firearms well loaded, and a
sharp sword nigh his hand; and that he held a great
commission, under royal signet, requiring all good
subjects, all officers of whatever degree, and
especially justices of the peace, to aid him to the 
utmost, with person, beast, and chattel, or to
answer it at their peril.

Now Master Jeremy Stickles, of course, knowing well
what women are, durst not open to any of them the
nature of his instructions.  But, after awhile,
perceiving that I could be relied upon, and that it was
a great discomfort not to have me with him, he took me
aside in a lonely place, and told me nearly everything;
having bound me first by oath, not to impart to any
one, without his own permission, until all was over.

But at this present time of writing, all is over long
ago; ay and forgotten too, I ween, except by those who
suffered.  Therefore may I tell the whole without any
breach of confidence.  Master Stickles was going forth
upon his usual night journey, when he met me coming
home, and I said something half in jest, about his zeal
and secrecy; upon which he looked all round the yard,
and led me to an open space in the clover field
adjoining.

'John,' he said, 'you have some right to know the
meaning of all this, being trusted as you were by the
Lord Chief Justice.  But he found you scarcely supple
enough, neither gifted with due brains.'

'Thank God for that same,' I answered, while he tapped
his head, to signify his own much larger allowance. 
Then he made me bind myself, which in an evil hour I
did, to retain his secret; and after that he went on
solemnly, and with much importance,--

'There be some people fit to plot, and others to be
plotted against, and others to unravel plots, which
is the highest gift of all.  This last hath fallen
to my share, and a very thankless gift it is,
although a rare and choice one.  Much of peril too
attends it; daring courage and great coolness are as
needful for the work as ready wit and spotless honour. 
Therefore His Majesty's advisers have chosen me for
this high task, and they could not have chosen a better
man.  Although you have been in London, Jack, much
longer than you wished it, you are wholly ignorant, of
course, in matters of state, and the public weal.'

'Well,' said I, 'no doubt but I am, and all the better
for me.  Although I heard a deal of them; for
everybody was talking, and ready to come to blows; if
only it could be done without danger.  But one said
this, and one said that; and they talked so much about
Birminghams, and Tantivies, and Whigs and Tories, and
Protestant flails and such like, that I was only too
glad to have my glass and clink my spoon for answer.'

'Right, John, thou art right as usual.  Let the King go
his own gait.  He hath too many mistresses to be ever
England's master.  Nobody need fear him, for he is not
like his father: he will have his own way, 'tis true,
but without stopping other folk of theirs: and well he
knows what women are, for he never asks them questions. 
 Now heard you much in London town about the Duke of
Monmouth?'

'Not so very much,' I answered; 'not half so much as in
Devonshire: only that he was a hearty man, and a very
handsome one, and now was banished by the Tories; and
most people wished he was coming back, instead of the
Duke of York, who was trying boots in Scotland.'

'Things are changed since you were in town.  The Whigs
are getting up again, through the folly of the Tories
killing poor Lord Russell; and now this Master Sidney
(if my Lord condemns him) will make it worse again. 
There is much disaffection everywhere, and it must grow
to an outbreak.  The King hath many troops in London,
and meaneth to bring more from Tangier; but he cannot
command these country places; and the trained bands
cannot help him much, even if they would.  Now, do you
understand me, John?'

'In truth, not I.  I see not what Tangier hath to do
with Exmoor; nor the Duke of Monmouth with Jeremy
Stickles.'

'Thou great clod, put it the other way.  Jeremy
Stickles may have much to do about the Duke of
Monmouth.  The Whigs having failed of Exclusion, and
having been punished bitterly for the blood they shed,
are ripe for any violence.  And the turn of the balance
is now to them.  See-saw is the fashion of England
always; and the Whigs will soon be the top-sawyers.'

'But,' said I, still more confused, '"The King is the
top-sawyer," according to our proverb.  How then can
the Whigs be?'

'Thou art a hopeless ass, John.  Better to sew with a
chestnut than to teach thee the constitution.  Let it
be so, let it be.  I have seen a boy of five years old
more apt at politics than thou.  Nay, look not
offended, lad.  It is my fault for being over-deep to
thee.  I should have considered thy intellect.'

'Nay, Master Jeremy, make no apologies.  It is I that
should excuse myself; but, God knows, I have no
politics.'

'Stick to that, my lad,' he answered; 'so shalt thou
die easier.  Now, in ten words (without parties, or
trying thy poor brain too much), I am here to watch the
gathering of a secret plot, not so much against the
King as against the due succession.'

'Now I understand at last.  But, Master Stickles, you
might have said all that an hour ago almost.'

'It would have been better, if I had, to thee,' he
replied with much compassion; 'thy hat is nearly off
thy head with the swelling of brain I have given thee. 
Blows, blows, are thy business, Jack.  There thou art
in thine element.  And, haply, this business will bring
thee plenty even for thy great head to take.  Now
hearken to one who wishes thee well, and plainly sees
the end of it--stick thou to the winning side, and have
naught to do with the other one.'

'That,' said I, in great haste and hurry, 'is the very
thing I want to do, if I only knew which was the
winning side, for the sake of Lorna--that is to say,
for the sake of my dear mother and sisters, and the
farm.'

'Ha!' cried Jeremy Stickles, laughing at the redness of
my face--'Lorna, saidst thou; now what Lorna?  Is it
the name of a maiden, or a light-o'-love?'

'Keep to your own business,' I answered, very proudly;
'spy as much as e'er thou wilt, and use our house for
doing it, without asking leave or telling; but if I
ever find thee spying into my affairs, all the King's
lifeguards in London, and the dragoons thou bringest
hither, shall not save thee from my hand--or one finger
is enough for thee.'

Being carried beyond myself by his insolence about
Lorna, I looked at Master Stickles so, and spake in
such a voice, that all his daring courage and his
spotless honour quailed within him, and he shrank--as
if I would strike so small a man.

Then I left him, and went to work at the sacks upon the
corn-floor, to take my evil spirit from me before I
should see mother.  For (to tell the truth) now my
strength was full, and troubles were gathering round
me, and people took advantage so much of my easy
temper, sometimes when I was over-tried, a sudden heat
ran over me, and a glowing of all my muscles, and a
tingling for a mighty throw, such as my utmost
self-command, and fear of hurting any one, could but
ill refrain.  Afterwards, I was always very sadly
ashamed of myself, knowing how poor a thing bodily
strength is, as compared with power of mind, and that
it is a coward's part to misuse it upon weaker folk. 
For the present there was a little breach between
Master Stickles and me, for which I blamed myself very
sorely.  But though, in full memory of his kindness and
faithfulness in London, I asked his pardon many times
for my foolish anger with him, and offered to undergo
any penalty he would lay upon me, he only said it was
no matter, there was nothing to forgive.  When people
say that, the truth often is that they can forgive
nothing.

So for the present a breach was made between Master
Jeremy and myself, which to me seemed no great loss,
inasmuch as it relieved me from any privity to his
dealings, for which I had small liking.  All I feared
was lest I might, in any way, be ungrateful to him; but
when he would have no more of me, what could I do to
help it?  However, in a few days' time I was of good
service to him, as you shall see in its proper place.

But now my own affairs were thrown into such disorder
that I could think of nothing else, and had the
greatest difficulty in hiding my uneasiness.  For
suddenly, without any warning, or a word of message,
all my Lorna's signals ceased, which I had been
accustomed to watch for daily, and as it were to feed
upon them, with a glowing heart.  The first time I
stood on the wooded crest, and found no change from
yesterday, I could hardly believe my eyes, or thought
at least that it must be some great mistake on the
part of my love.  However, even that oppressed me with
a heavy heart, which grew heavier, as I found from day
to day no token.

Three times I went and waited long at the bottom of the
valley, where now the stream was brown and angry with
the rains of autumn, and the weeping trees hung
leafless.  But though I waited at every hour of day,
and far into the night, no light footstep came to meet
me, no sweet voice was in the air; all was lonely,
drear, and drenched with sodden desolation.  It seemed
as if my love was dead, and the winds were at her
funeral.

Once I sought far up the valley, where I had never been
before, even beyond the copse where Lorna had found and
lost her brave young cousin.  Following up the river
channel, in shelter of the evening fog, I gained a
corner within stone's throw of the last outlying cot. 
This was a gloomy, low, square house, without any light
in the windows, roughly built of wood and stone, as I
saw when I drew nearer.  For knowing it to be Carver's
dwelling (or at least suspecting so, from some words of
Lorna's), I was led by curiosity, and perhaps by jealousy,
to have a closer look at it.  Therefore, I crept up the
stream, losing half my sense of fear, by reason of anxiety.
And in truth there was not much to fear, the sky being now
too dark for even a shooter of wild fowl to make good aim. 
And nothing else but guns could hurt me, as in the pride of
my strength I thought, and in my skill of single-stick.

Nevertheless, I went warily, being now almost among
this nest of cockatrices.  The back of Carver's house
abutted on the waves of the rushing stream; and seeing
a loop-hole, vacant for muskets, I looked in, but all
was quiet.  So far as I could judge by listening, there
was no one now inside, and my heart for a moment leaped
with joy, for I had feared to find Lorna there.  Then I
took a careful survey of the dwelling, and its windows,
and its door, and aspect, as if I had been a robber
meaning to make privy entrance.  It was well for me
that I did this, as you will find hereafter.

Having impressed upon my mind (a slow but, perhaps
retentive mind), all the bearings of the place, and all
its opportunities, and even the curve of the stream
along it, and the bushes near the door, I was much
inclined to go farther up, and understand all the
village.  But a bar of red light across the river, some
forty yards on above me, and crossing from the opposite
side like a chain, prevented me.  In that second house
there was a gathering of loud and merry outlaws, making
as much noise as if they had the law upon their side. 
Some, indeed, as I approached, were laying down both
right and wrong, as purely, and with as high a sense,
as if they knew the difference.  Cold and troubled as I
was, I could hardly keep from laughing.

Before I betook myself home that night, and eased dear
mother's heart so much, and made her pale face spread
with smiles, I had resolved to penetrate Glen Doone
from the upper end, and learn all about my Lorna.  Not
but what I might have entered from my unsuspected
channel, as so often I had done; but that I saw fearful
need for knowing something more than that.  Here was
every sort of trouble gathering upon me, here was
Jeremy Stickles stealing upon every one in the dark;
here was Uncle Reuben plotting Satan only could tell
what; here was a white night-capped man coming bodily
from the grave; here was my own sister Annie committed
to a highwayman, and mother in distraction; most of all
--here, there, and where--was my Lorna stolen,
dungeoned, perhaps outraged.  It was no time for shilly
shally, for the balance of this and that, or for a man
with blood and muscle to pat his nose and ponder.  If I
left my Lorna so; if I let those black-soul'd villains
work their pleasure on my love; if the heart that clave
to mine could find no vigour in it--then let maidens
cease from men, and rest their faith in tabby-cats.

Rudely rolling these ideas in my heavy head and brain I
resolved to let the morrow put them into form and
order, but not contradict them.  And then, as my
constitution willed (being like that of England), I
slept, and there was no stopping me.



CHAPTER XXXVII

A VERY DESPERATE VENTURE

That the enterprise now resolved upon was far more
dangerous than any hitherto attempted by me, needs no
further proof than this:--I went and made my will at
Porlock, with a middling honest lawyer there; not that
I had much to leave, but that none could say how far
the farm, and all the farming stock, might depend on my
disposition.  It makes me smile when I remember how
particular I was, and how for the life of me I was
puzzled to bequeath most part of my clothes, and hats,
and things altogether my own, to Lorna, without the
shrewd old lawyer knowing who she was and where she
lived.  At last, indeed, I flattered myself that I had
baffled old Tape's curiosity; but his wrinkled smile
and his speech at parting made me again uneasy.  

'A very excellent will, young sir.  An admirably just
and virtuous will; all your effects to your nearest of
kin; filial and fraternal duty thoroughly exemplified;
nothing diverted to alien channels, except a small
token of esteem and reverence to an elderly lady, I
presume:  and which may or may not be valid, or invalid,
on the ground of uncertainty, or the absence of any
legal status on the part of the legatee.  Ha, ha!  Yes,
yes!  Few young men are so free from exceptionable
entanglements.  Two guineas is my charge, sir:  and a
rare good will for the money.  Very prudent of you,
sir.  Does you credit in every way.  Well, well; we all
must die; and often the young before the old.'

Not only did I think two guineas a great deal too much
money for a quarter of an hour's employment, but also I
disliked particularly the words with which he
concluded; they sounded, from his grating voice, like
the evil omen of a croaking raven.  Nevertheless I
still abode in my fixed resolve to go, and find out, if
I died for it, what was become of Lorna.  And herein I
lay no claim to courage; the matter being simply a
choice between two evils, of which by far the greater
one was, of course, to lose my darling.

The journey was a great deal longer to fetch around the
Southern hills, and enter by the Doone-gate, than to
cross the lower land and steal in by the water-slide. 
However, I durst not take a horse (for fear of the
Doones who might be abroad upon their usual business),
but started betimes in the evening, so as not to hurry,
or waste any strength upon the way.  And thus I came to
the robbers' highway, walking circumspectly, scanning
the sky-line of every hill, and searching the folds of
every valley, for any moving figure.

Although it was now well on towards dark, and the sun
was down an hour or so, I could see the robbers' road
before me, in a trough of the winding hills, where the
brook ploughed down from the higher barrows, and the
coving banks were roofed with furze.  At present, there
was no one passing, neither post nor sentinel, so far
as I could descry; but I thought it safer to wait a
little, as twilight melted into night; and then I crept
down a seam of the highland, and stood upon the
Doone-track.

As the road approached the entrance, it became more
straight and strong, like a channel cut from rock, with
the water brawling darkly along the naked side of it. 
Not a tree or bush was left, to shelter a man from
bullets: all was stern, and stiff, and rugged, as I
could not help perceiving, even through the darkness,
and a smell as of churchyard mould, a sense of being
boxed in and cooped, made me long to be out again.

And here I was, or seemed to be, particularly unlucky;
for as I drew near the very entrance, lightly of foot
and warily, the moon (which had often been my friend)
like an enemy broke upon me, topping the eastward ridge
of rock, and filling all the open spaces with the play
of wavering light.  I shrank back into the shadowy
quarter on the right side of the road; and gloomily
employed myself to watch the triple entrance, on which
the moonlight fell askew.

All across and before the three rude and beetling
archways hung a felled oak overhead, black, and thick,
and threatening.  This, as I heard before, could be let
fall in a moment, so as to crush a score of men, and
bar the approach of horses.  Behind this tree, the
rocky mouth was spanned, as by a gallery with brushwood
and piled timber, all upon a ledge of stone, where
thirty men might lurk unseen, and fire at any invader. 
From that rampart it would be impossible to dislodge
them, because the rock fell sheer below them twenty
feet, or it may be more; while overhead it towered
three hundred, and so jutted over that nothing could be
cast upon them; even if a man could climb the height. 
And the access to this portcullis place--if I may so
call it, being no portcullis there--was through certain
rocky chambers known to the tenants only.

But the cleverest of their devices, and the most
puzzling to an enemy, was that, instead of one mouth
only, there were three to choose from, with nothing to
betoken which was the proper access; all being pretty
much alike, and all unfenced and yawning.  And the
common rumour was that in times of any danger, when any
force was known to be on muster in their neighbourhood,
they changed their entrance every day, and diverted the
other two, by means of sliding doors to the chasms and
dark abysses.

Now I could see those three rough arches, jagged,
black, and terrible; and I knew that only one of them
could lead me to the valley; neither gave the river now
any further guidance; but dived underground with a
sullen roar, where it met the cross-bar of the
mountain.  Having no means at all of judging which was
the right way of the three, and knowing that the other
two would lead to almost certain death, in the
ruggedness and darkness,--for how could a man, among
precipices and bottomless depths of water, without a
ray of light, have any chance to save his life?--I do
declare that I was half inclined to go away, and have
done with it.

However, I knew one thing for certain, to wit, that the
longer I stayed debating the more would the enterprise
pall upon me, and the less my relish be.  And it struck
me that, in times of peace, the middle way was the
likeliest; and the others diverging right and left in
their farther parts might be made to slide into it (not
far from the entrance), at the pleasure of the warders. 
Also I took it for good omen that I remembered (as
rarely happened) a very fine line in the Latin grammar,
whose emphasis and meaning is 'middle road is safest.'

Therefore, without more hesitation, I plunged into the
middle way, holding a long ash staff before me, shodden
at the end with iron.  Presently I was in black
darkness groping along the wall, and feeling a deal
more fear than I wished to feel; especially when upon
looking back I could no longer see the light, which I
had forsaken.  Then I stumbled over something hard, and
sharp, and very cold, moreover so grievous to my legs
that it needed my very best doctrine and humour to
forbear from swearing, in the manner they use in
London.  But when I arose and felt it, and knew it to
be a culverin, I was somewhat reassured thereby,
inasmuch as it was not likely that they would plant
this engine except in the real and true entrance.

Therefore I went on again, more painfully and wearily,
and presently found it to be good that I had received
that knock, and borne it with such patience; for
otherwise I might have blundered full upon the
sentries, and been shot without more ado.  As it was, I
had barely time to draw back, as I turned a corner upon
them; and if their lanthorn had been in its place, they
could scarce have failed to descry me, unless indeed I
had seen the gleam before I turned the corner.

There seemed to be only two of them, of size indeed and
stature as all the Doones must be, but I need not have
feared to encounter them both, had they been unarmed,
as I was.  It was plain, however, that each had a long
and heavy carbine, not in his hands (as it should have
been), but standing close beside him.  Therefore it
behoved me now to be exceedingly careful, and even that
might scarce avail, without luck in proportion.  So I
kept well back at the corner, and laid one cheek to the
rock face, and kept my outer eye round the jut, in the
wariest mode I could compass, watching my opportunity:
and this is what I saw.

The two villains looked very happy--which villains have
no right to be, but often are, meseemeth--they were
sitting in a niche of rock, with the lanthorn in the
corner, quaffing something from glass measures, and
playing at push-pin, or shepherd's chess, or basset; or
some trivial game of that sort.  Each was smoking a
long clay pipe, quite of new London shape, I could see,
for the shadow was thrown out clearly; and each would
laugh from time to time, as he fancied he got the
better of it.  One was sitting with his knees up, and
left hand on his thigh; and this one had his back to
me, and seemed to be the stouter.  The other leaned
more against the rock, half sitting and half astraddle,
and wearing leathern overalls, as if newly come from
riding.  I could see his face quite clearly by the
light of the open lanthorn, and a handsomer or a bolder
face I had seldom, if ever, set eyes upon; insomuch
that it made me very unhappy to think of his being so
near my Lorna.

'How long am I to stand crouching here?' I asked of
myself, at last, being tired of hearing them cry,
'score one,' 'score two,' 'No, by --, Charlie,'  'By --,
I say it is, Phelps.'  And yet my only chance of
slipping by them unperceived was to wait till they
quarrelled more, and came to blows about it. 
Presently, as I made up my mind to steal along towards
them (for the cavern was pretty wide, just there),
Charlie, or Charleworth Doone, the younger and taller
man, reached forth his hand to seize the money, which
he swore he had won that time.  Upon this, the other
jerked his arm, vowing that he had no right to it;
whereupon Charlie flung at his face the contents of the
glass he was sipping, but missed him and hit the
candle, which sputtered with a flare of blue flame
(from the strength perhaps of the spirit) and then went
out completely.  At this, one swore, and the other
laughed; and before they had settled what to do, I was
past them and round the corner.

And then, like a giddy fool as I was, I needs must give
them a startler--the whoop of an owl, done so exactly,
as John Fry had taught me, and echoed by the roof so
fearfully, that one of them dropped the tinder box; and
the other caught up his gun and cocked it, at least as
I judged by the sounds they made.  And then, too late,
I knew my madness, for if either of them had fired, no
doubt but what all the village would have risen and
rushed upon me.  However, as the luck of the matter
went, it proved for my advantage; for I heard one say
to the other,--

'Curse it, Charlie, what was that?  It scared me so, I
have dropped my box; my flint is gone, and everything. 
Will the brimstone catch from your pipe, my lad?'

'My pipe is out, Phelps, ever so long.  Damn it, I am
not afraid of an owl, man.  Give me the lanthorn, and
stay here.  I'm not half done with you yet, my friend.'

'Well said, my boy, well said! Go straight to Carver's,
mind you.  The other sleepy heads be snoring, as there
is nothing up to-night.  No dallying now under
Captain's window.  Queen will have nought to say to
you; and Carver will punch your head into a new wick
for your lanthorn.'

'Will he though?  Two can play at that.' And so after
some rude jests, and laughter, and a few more oaths, I
heard Charlie (or at any rate somebody) coming toward
me, with a loose and not too sober footfall.  As he
reeled a little in his gait, and I would not move from
his way one inch, after his talk of Lorna, but only
longed to grasp him (if common sense permitted it), his
braided coat came against my thumb, and his leathern
gaiters brushed my knee.  If he had turned or noticed
it, he would have been a dead man in a moment; but his
drunkenness saved him.

So I let him reel on unharmed; and thereupon it
occurred to me that I could have no better guide,
passing as he would exactly where I wished to be; that
is to say under Lorna's window.  Therefore I followed
him without any especial caution; and soon I had the
pleasure of seeing his form against the moonlit sky. 
Down a steep and winding path, with a handrail at the
corners (such as they have at Ilfracombe), Master
Charlie tripped along--and indeed there was much
tripping, and he must have been an active fellow to
recover as he did--and after him walked I, much hoping
(for his own poor sake) that be might not turn and espy
me.

But Bacchus (of whom I read at school, with great
wonder about his meaning--and the same I may say of
Venus) that great deity preserved Charlie, his pious
worshipper, from regarding consequences.  So he led me
very kindly to the top of the meadow land, where the
stream from underground broke forth, seething quietly
with a little hiss of bubbles.  Hence I had fair view
and outline of the robbers' township, spread with
bushes here and there, but not heavily overshadowed. 
The moon, approaching now the full, brought the forms
in manner forth, clothing each with character, as the
moon (more than the sun) does, to an eye accustomed.

I knew that the Captain's house was first, both from
what Lorna had said of it, and from my mother's
description, and now again from seeing Charlie halt
there for a certain time, and whistle on his fingers,
and hurry on, fearing consequence.  The tune that he
whistled was strange to me, and lingered in my ears, as
having something very new and striking, and fantastic
in it.  And I repeated it softly to myself, while I
marked the position of the houses and the beauty of the
village.  For the stream, in lieu of any street,
passing between the houses, and affording perpetual
change, and twinkling, and reflections moreover by its
sleepy murmur soothing all the dwellers there, this and
the snugness of the position, walled with rock and
spread with herbage, made it look, in the quiet
moonlight, like a little paradise.  And to think of all
the inmates there, sleeping with good consciences,
having plied their useful trade of making others work
for them, enjoying life without much labour, yet with
great renown.

Master Charlie went down the village, and I followed
him carefully, keeping as much as possible in the
shadowy places, and watching the windows of every
house, lest any light should be burning.  As I passed
Sir Ensor's house, my heart leaped up, for I spied a
window, higher than the rest above the ground, and with
a faint light moving.  This could hardly fail to be the
room wherein my darling lay; for here that impudent
young fellow had gazed while he was whistling.  And
here my courage grew tenfold, and my spirit feared no
evil--for lo, if Lorna had been surrendered to that
scoundrel, Carver, she would not have been at her
grandfather's house, but in Carver's accursed dwelling.

Warm with this idea, I hurried after Charleworth Doone,
being resolved not to harm him now, unless my own life
required it.  And while I watched from behind a tree,
the door of the farthest house was opened; and sure
enough it was Carver's self, who stood bareheaded, and
half undressed in the doorway.  I could see his great
black chest, and arms, by the light of the lamp he
bore.

'Who wants me this time of night?' he grumbled, in a
deep gruff voice; 'any young scamp prowling after the
maids shall have sore bones for his trouble.'

'All the fair maids are for thee, are they, Master
Carver?' Charlie answered, laughing; 'we young scamps
must be well-content with coarser stuff than thou
wouldst have.'

'Would have?  Ay, and will have,' the great beast
muttered angrily.  'I bide my time; but not very long. 
Only one word for thy good, Charlie.  I will fling thee
senseless into the river, if ever I catch thy girl-face
there again.'

'Mayhap, Master Carver, it is more than thou couldst
do.  But I will not keep thee; thou art not pleasant
company to-night.  All I want is a light for my
lanthorn, and a glass of schnapps, if thou hast it.'

'What is become of thy light, then?  Good for thee I am
not on duty.'

'A great owl flew between me and Phelps, as we watched
beside the culvern, and so scared was he at our fierce
bright eyes that he fell and knocked the light out.'

'Likely tale, or likely lie, Charles! We will have the
truth to-morrow.  Here take thy light, and be gone with
thee.  All virtuous men are in bed now.'

'Then so will I be, and why art thou not?  Ha, have I
earned my schnapps now?'

'If thou hast, thou hast paid a bad debt; there is too
much in thee already.  Be off! my patience is done
with.'

Then he slammed the door in the young man's face,
having kindled his lanthorn by this time:  and Charlie
went up to the watchplace again, muttering as he passed
me, 'Bad look-out for all of us, when that surly old
beast is Captain.  No gentle blood in him, no
hospitality, not even pleasant language, nor a good new
oath in his frowsy pate!  I've a mind to cut the whole
of it; and but for the girls I would so.'

My heart was in my mouth, as they say, when I stood in
the shade by Lorna's window, and whispered her name
gently.  The house was of one story only, as the others
were, with pine-ends standing forth the stone, and only
two rough windows upon that western side of it, and
perhaps both of them were Lorna's.  The Doones had been
their own builders, for no one should know their ins
and outs; and of course their work was clumsy.  As for
their windows, they stole them mostly from the houses
round about.  But though the window was not very close,
I might have whispered long enough, before she would
have answered me; frightened as she was, no doubt by
many a rude overture.  And I durst not speak aloud
because I saw another watchman posted on the western
cliff, and commanding all the valley.  And now this man
(having no companion for drinking or for gambling)
espied me against the wall of the house, and advanced
to the brink, and challenged me.  

'Who are you there?  Answer!  One, two, three; and I
fire at thee.'

The nozzle of his gun was pointed full upon me, as I
could see, with the moonlight striking on the barrel;
he was not more than fifty yards off, and now he began
to reckon.  Being almost desperate about it, I began to
whistle, wondering how far I should get before I lost
my windpipe: and as luck would have it, my lips fell
into that strange tune I had practised last; the one I
had heard from Charlie.  My mouth would scarcely frame
the notes, being parched with terror; but to my
surprise, the man fell back, dropped his gun, and
saluted.  Oh, sweetest of all sweet melodies!

That tune was Carver Doone's passport (as I heard long
afterwards), which Charleworth Doone had imitated, for
decoy of Lorna.  The sentinel took me for that vile
Carver; who was like enough to be prowling there, for
private talk with Lorna; but not very likely to shout
forth his name, if it might be avoided.  The watchman,
perceiving the danger perhaps of intruding on Carver's
privacy, not only retired along the cliff, but withdrew
himself to good distance.

Meanwhile he had done me the kindest service; for Lorna
came to the window at once, to see what the cause of
the shout was, and drew back the curtain timidly.  Then
she opened the rough lattice; and then she watched the
cliff and trees; and then she sighed very sadly.

'Oh, Lorna, don't you know me?' I whispered from the
side, being afraid of startling her by appearing over
suddenly.

Quick though she always was of thought, she knew me not
from my whisper, and was shutting the window hastily
when I caught it back, and showed myself.

'John!' she cried, yet with sense enough not to speak
aloud: 'oh, you must be mad, John.'

'As mad as a March hare,' said I, 'without any news of
my darling.  You knew I would come:  of course you
did.'

'Well, I thought, perhaps--you know:  now, John, you
need not eat my hand.  Do you see they have put iron
bars across?' 

'To be sure.  Do you think I should be contented, even
with this lovely hand, but for these vile iron bars.  I
will have them out before I go.  Now, darling, for one
moment--just the other hand, for a change, you know.'

So I got the other, but was not honest; for I kept them
both, and felt their delicate beauty trembling, as I
laid them to my heart.

'Oh, John, you will make me cry directly'--she had been
crying long ago--'if you go on in that way.  You know
we can never have one another; every one is against it. 
Why should I make you miserable?  Try not to think of
me any more.'

'And will you try the same of me, Lorna?'

'Oh yes, John; if you agree to it.  At least I will try
to try it.'

'Then you won't try anything of the sort,' I cried with
great enthusiasm, for her tone was so nice and
melancholy: 'the only thing we will try to try, is to
belong to one another.  And if we do our best, Lorna,
God alone can prevent us.'

She crossed herself, with one hand drawn free as I
spoke so boldly; and something swelled in her little
throat, and prevented her from answering.

'Now tell me,' I said; 'what means all this?  Why are
you so pent up here?  Why have you given me no token? 
Has your grandfather turned against you?  Are you in
any danger?'

'My poor grandfather is very ill: I fear that he will
not live long.  The Counsellor and his son are now the
masters of the valley; and I dare not venture forth,
for fear of anything they might do to me.  When I went
forth, to signal for you, Carver tried to seize me; but
I was too quick for him.  Little Gwenny is not allowed
to leave the valley now; so that I could send no
message.  I have been so wretched, dear, lest you
should think me false to you.  The tyrants now make
sure of me.  You must watch this house, both night and
day, if you wish to save me.  There is nothing they
would shrink from; if my poor grandfather--oh, I cannot
bear to think of myself, when I ought to think of him
only; dying without a son to tend him, or a daughter to
shed a tear.'

'But surely he has sons enough; and a deal too many,' I
was going to say, but stopped myself in time: 'why do
none of them come to him?' 

'I know not.  I cannot tell.  He is a very strange old
man; and few have ever loved him.  He was black with
wrath at the Counsellor, this very afternoon--but I
must not keep you here--you are much too brave, John;
and I am much too selfish: there, what was that
shadow?'

'Nothing more than a bat, darling, come to look for his
sweetheart.  I will not stay long; you tremble so: and
yet for that very reason, how can I leave you, Lorna?'

'You must--you must,' she answered; 'I shall die if
they hurt you.  I hear the old nurse moving. 
Grandfather is sure to send for me.  Keep back from
the window.'

However, it was only Gwenny Carfax, Lorna's little
handmaid: my darling brought her to the window and
presented her to me, almost laughing through her grief.

'Oh, I am so glad, John; Gwenny, I am so glad you came. 
I have wanted long to introduce you to my "young man,"
as you call him.  It is rather dark, but you can see
him.  I wish you to know him again, Gwenny.'

'Whoy!' cried Gwenny, with great amazement, standing on
tiptoe to look out, and staring as if she were weighing
me: 'her be bigger nor any Doone!  Heared as her have
bate our Cornish champion awrastling.  'Twadn't fair
play nohow: no, no; don't tell me, 'twadn't fair play
nohow.'

'True enough, Gwenny,' I answered her; for the play had
been very unfair indeed on the side of the Bodmin
champion; 'it was not a fair bout, little maid; I am
free to acknowledge that.' By that answer, or rather by
the construction she put upon it, the heart of the
Cornish girl was won, more than by gold and silver.

'I shall knoo thee again, young man; no fear of that,'
she answered, nodding with an air of patronage.  'Now,
missis, gae on coortin', and I wall gae outside and
watch for 'ee.' Though expressed not over delicately,
this proposal arose, no doubt, from Gwenny's sense of
delicacy; and I was very thankful to her for taking her
departure.

'She is the best little thing in the world,' said
Lorna, softly laughing; 'and the queerest, and the
truest.  Nothing will bribe her against me.  If she
seems to be on the other side, never, never doubt her. 
Now no more of your "coortin'," John! I love you far
too well for that.  Yes, yes, ever so much! If you will
take a mean advantage of me.  And as much as ever you
like to imagine; and then you may double it, after
that.  Only go, do go, good John; kind, dear, darling
John; if you love me, go.'

'How can I go without settling anything?' I asked very
sensibly.  'How shall I know of your danger now?  Hit
upon something; you are so quick.  Anything you can
think of; and then I will go, and not frighten you.'

'I have been thinking long of something,' Lorna answered
rapidly, with that peculiar clearness of voice which
made every syllable ring like music of a several note,
'you see that tree with the seven rooks' nests bright
against the cliffs there?  Can you count them, from
above, do you think?  From a place where you will be
safe, dear'--

'No doubt, I can; or if I cannot, it will not take me
long to find a spot, whence I can do it.'

'Gwenny can climb like any cat.  She has been up there
in the summer, watching the young birds, day by day,
and daring the boys to touch them.  There are neither
birds, nor eggs there now, of course, and nothing
doing.  If you see but six rooks' nests; I am in peril
and want you.  If you see but five, I am carried off by
Carver.'

'Good God!' said I, at the mere idea; in a tone which
frightened Lorna.

'Fear not, John,' she whispered sadly, and my blood
grew cold at it: 'I have means to stop him; or at least
to save myself.  If you can come within one day of that
man's getting hold of me, you will find me quite
unharmed.  After that you will find me dead, or alive,
according to circumstances, but in no case such that
you need blush to look at me.'

Her dear sweet face was full of pride, as even in the
gloom I saw: and I would not trespass on her feelings
by such a thing, at such a moment, as an attempt at any
caress.  I only said, 'God bless you, darling!' and she
said the same to me, in a very low sad voice.  And then
I stole below Carver's house, in the shadow from the
eastern cliff; and knowing enough of the village now to
satisfy all necessity, betook myself to my well-known
track in returning from the valley; which was neither
down the waterslide (a course I feared in the darkness)
nor up the cliffs at Lorna's bower; but a way of my own
inventing, which there is no need to dwell upon.

A weight of care was off my mind; though much of
trouble hung there still.  One thing was quite
certain--if Lorna could not have John Ridd, no one else
should have her.  And my mother, who sat up for me, and
with me long time afterwards, agreed that this was
comfort.



CHAPTER XXXVIII

A GOOD TURN FOR JEREMY

John Fry had now six shillings a week of regular and
permanent wage, besides all harvest and shearing money,
as well as a cottage rent-free, and enough of
garden-ground to rear pot-herbs for his wife and all
his family.  Now the wages appointed by our justices,
at the time of sessions, were four-and-sixpence a week
for summer, and a shilling less for the winter-time;
and we could be fined, and perhaps imprisoned, for
giving more than the sums so fixed.  Therefore John
Fry was looked upon as the richest man upon Exmoor, I
mean of course among labourers, and there were many
jokes about robbing him, as if he were the mint of the
King; and Tom Faggus promised to try his hand, if he
came across John on the highway, although he had ceased
from business, and was seeking a Royal pardon.

Now is it according to human nature, or is it a thing
contradictory (as I would fain believe)?  But anyhow,
there was, upon Exmoor, no more discontented man, no
man more sure that he had not his worth, neither half
so sore about it, than, or as, John Fry was.  And one
thing he did which I could not wholly (or indeed I may
say, in any measure) reconcile with my sense of right,
much as I laboured to do John justice, especially
because of his roguery; and this was, that if we said
too much, or accused him at all of laziness (which he
must have known to be in him), he regularly turned
round upon us, and quite compelled us to hold our
tongues, by threatening to lay information against us
for paying him too much wages!

Now I have not mentioned all this of John Fry, from any
disrespect for his memory (which is green and honest
amongst us), far less from any desire to hurt the
feelings of his grandchildren; and I will do them the
justice, once for all, to avow, thus publicly, that I
have known a great many bigger rogues, and most of
themselves in the number.  But I have referred, with
moderation, to this little flaw in a worthy character
(or foible, as we call it, when a man is dead) for this
reason only--that without it there was no explaining
John's dealings with Jeremy Stickles.

Master Jeremy, being full of London and Norwich
experience, fell into the error of supposing that we
clods and yokels were the simplest of the simple, and
could be cheated at his good pleasure.  Now this is
not so: when once we suspect that people have that idea
of us, we indulge them in it to the top of their bent,
and grieve that they should come out of it, as they do
at last in amazement, with less money than before, and
the laugh now set against them.

Ever since I had offended Jeremy, by threatening him
(as before related) in case of his meddling with my
affairs, he had more and more allied himself with
simple-minded John, as he was pleased to call him. 
John Fry was everything: it was 'run and fetch my
horse, John'--'John, are my pistols primed well?'--'I
want you in the stable, John, about something very
particular', until except for the rudeness of it, I was
longing to tell Master Stickles that he ought to pay
John's wages.  John for his part was not backward, but
gave himself the most wonderful airs of secrecy and
importance, till half the parish began to think that
the affairs of the nation were in his hand, and he
scorned the sight of a dungfork.

It was not likely that this should last; and being the
only man in the parish with any knowledge of politics,
I gave John Fry to understand that he must not presume
to talk so freely, as if he were at least a constable,
about the constitution; which could be no affair of
his, and might bring us all into trouble.  At this he
only tossed his nose, as if he had been in London at
least three times for my one; which vexed me so that I
promised him the thick end of the plough-whip if even
the name of a knight of the shire should pass his lips
for a fortnight.

Now I did not suspect in my stupid noddle that John Fry
would ever tell Jeremy Stickles about the sight at the
Wizard's Slough and the man in the white nightcap;
because John had sworn on the blade of his knife not to
breathe a word to any soul, without my full permission. 
However, it appears that John related, for a certain
consideration, all that he had seen, and doubtless more
which had accrued to it.  Upon this Master Stickles was
much astonished at Uncle Reuben's proceedings, having
always accounted him a most loyal, keen, and wary
subject.

All this I learned upon recovering Jeremy's good
graces, which came to pass in no other way than by the
saving of his life.  Being bound to keep the strictest
watch upon the seven rooks' nests, and yet not bearing
to be idle and to waste my mother's stores, I contrived
to keep my work entirely at the western corner of our
farm, which was nearest to Glen Doone, and whence I
could easily run to a height commanding the view I
coveted.

One day Squire Faggus had dropped in upon us, just in
time for dinner; and very soon he and King's messenger
were as thick as need be.  Tom had brought his beloved
mare to show her off to Annie, and he mounted his
pretty sweetheart upon her, after giving Winnie notice
to be on her very best behaviour.  The squire was in
great spirits, having just accomplished a purchase of
land which was worth ten times what he gave for it; and
this he did by a merry trick upon old Sir Roger
Bassett, who never supposed him to be in earnest, as
not possessing the money.  The whole thing was done on
a bumper of claret in a tavern where they met; and the
old knight having once pledged his word, no lawyers
could hold him back from it.  They could only say that
Master Faggus, being attainted of felony, was not a
capable grantee.  'I will soon cure that,' quoth Tom,
'my pardon has been ready for months and months, so
soon as I care to sue it.'

And now he was telling our Annie, who listened very
rosily, and believed every word he said, that, having
been ruined in early innocence by the means of lawyers,
it was only just, and fair turn for turn, that having
become a match for them by long practice upon the
highway, he should reinstate himself, at their expense,
in society.  And now he would go to London at once, and
sue out his pardon, and then would his lovely darling
Annie, etc., etc.--things which I had no right to
hear, and in which I was not wanted.

Therefore I strode away up the lane to my afternoon's
employment, sadly comparing my love with theirs (which
now appeared so prosperous), yet heartily glad for
Annie's sake; only remembering now and then the old
proverb 'Wrong never comes right.'

I worked very hard in the copse of young ash, with my
billhook and a shearing-knife; cutting out the saplings
where they stooled too close together, making spars to
keep for thatching, wall-crooks to drive into the cob,
stiles for close sheep hurdles, and handles for rakes,
and hoes, and two-bills, of the larger and straighter
stuff.  And all the lesser I bound in faggots, to come
home on the sledd to the woodrick.  It is not to be
supposed that I did all this work, without many peeps
at the seven rooks' nests, which proved my Lorna's
safety.  Indeed, whenever I wanted a change, either
from cleaving, or hewing too hard, or stooping too much
at binding, I was up and away to the ridge of the hill,
instead of standing and doing nothing.

Soon I forgot about Tom and Annie; and fell to thinking
of Lorna only; and how much I would make of her; and
what I should call our children; and how I would
educate them, to do honour to her rank; yet all the
time I worked none the worse, by reason of meditation.  
Fresh-cut spars are not so good as those of a little
seasoning; especially if the sap was not gone down at
the time of cutting.  Therefore we always find it
needful to have plenty still in stock.

It was very pleasant there in the copse, sloping to the
west as it was, and the sun descending brightly, with
rocks and banks to dwell upon.  The stems of mottled
and dimpled wood, with twigs coming out like elbows,
hung and clung together closely, with a mode of bending
in, as children do at some danger; overhead the
shrunken leaves quivered and rustled ripely, having
many points like stars, and rising and falling
delicately, as fingers play sad music.  Along the bed
of the slanting ground, all between the stools of wood,
there were heaps of dead brown leaves, and sheltered
mats of lichen, and drifts of spotted stick gone
rotten, and tufts of rushes here and there, full of
fray and feathering.

All by the hedge ran a little stream, a thing that
could barely name itself, flowing scarce more than a
pint in a minute, because of the sunny weather.  Yet
had this rill little crooks and crannies dark and
bravely bearded, and a gallant rush through a reeden
pipe--the stem of a flag that was grounded; and here
and there divided threads, from the points of a
branching stick, into mighty pools of rock (as large as
a grown man's hat almost) napped with moss all around
the sides and hung with corded grasses.  Along and
down the tiny banks, and nodding into one another, even
across main channel, hung the brown arcade of ferns;
some with gold tongues languishing; some with countless
ear-drops jerking, some with great quilled ribs
uprising and long saws aflapping; others cupped, and
fanning over with the grace of yielding, even as a
hollow fountain spread by winds that have lost their
way.

Deeply each beyond other, pluming, stooping, glancing,
glistening, weaving softest pillow lace, coying to the
wind and water, when their fleeting image danced, or by
which their beauty moved,--God has made no lovelier
thing; and only He takes heed of them.

It was time to go home to supper now, and I felt very
friendly towards it, having been hard at work for some
hours, with only the voice of the little rill, and some
hares and a pheasant for company.  The sun was gone
down behind the black wood on the farther cliffs of
Bagworthy, and the russet of the tufts and spear-beds
was becoming gray, while the greyness of the sapling
ash grew brown against the sky; the hollow curves of
the little stream became black beneath the grasses and
the fairy fans innumerable, while outside the hedge our
clover was crimping its leaves in the dewfall, like the
cocked hats of wood-sorrel,--when, thanking God for all
this scene, because my love had gifted me with the key
to all things lovely, I prepared to follow their
example, and to rest from labour.

Therefore I wiped my bill-hook and shearing-knife very
carefully, for I hate to leave tools dirty; and was
doubting whether I should try for another glance at the
seven rooks' nests, or whether it would be too dark for
it.  It was now a quarter of an hour mayhap, since I
had made any chopping noise, because I had been
assorting my spars, and tying them in bundles, instead
of plying the bill-hook; and the gentle tinkle of the
stream was louder than my doings.  To this, no doubt, I
owe my life, which then (without my dreaming it) was in
no little jeopardy.

For, just as I was twisting the bine of my very last
faggot, before tucking the cleft tongue under, there
came three men outside the hedge, where the western
light was yellow; and by it I could see that all three
of them carried firearms.  These men were not walking
carelessly, but following down the hedge-trough, as if
to stalk some enemy: and for a moment it struck me cold
to think it was I they were looking for.  With the
swiftness of terror I concluded that my visits to Glen
Doone were known, and now my life was the forfeit.

It was a most lucky thing for me, that I heard their
clothes catch in the brambles, and saw their hats under
the rampart of ash, which is made by what we call
'splashing,' and lucky, for me that I stood in a goyal,
and had the dark coppice behind me.  To this I had no
time to fly, but with a sort of instinct, threw myself
flat in among the thick fern, and held my breath, and
lay still as a log.  For I had seen the light gleam on
their gun-barrels, and knowing the faults of the
neighbourhood, would fain avoid swelling their number. 
Then the three men came to the gap in the hedge, where
I had been in and out so often; and stood up, and
looked in over.

It is all very well for a man to boast that, in all his
life, he has never been frightened, and believes that
he never could be so.  There may be men of that
nature--I will not dare to deny it; only I have never
known them.  The fright I was now in was horrible, and
all my bones seemed to creep inside me; when lying
there helpless, with only a billet and the comb of fern
to hide me, in the dusk of early evening, I saw three
faces in the gap; and what was worse, three
gun-muzzles.  

'Somebody been at work here--' it was the deep voice of
Carver Doone; 'jump up, Charlie, and look about; we
must have no witnesses.'

'Give me a hand behind,' said Charlie, the same
handsome young Doone I had seen that night; 'this bank
is too devilish steep for me.'

'Nonsense, man!' cried Marwood de Whichehalse, who to
my amazement was the third of the number; 'only a hind
cutting faggots; and of course he hath gone home long
ago.  Blind man's holiday, as we call it.  I can see
all over the place; and there is not even a rabbit
there.'

At that I drew my breath again, and thanked God I had
gotten my coat on.

'Squire is right,' said Charlie, who was standing up
high (on a root perhaps), 'there is nobody there now,
captain; and lucky for the poor devil that he keepeth
workman's hours.  Even his chopper is gone, I see.'

'No dog, no man, is the rule about here, when it comes
to coppice work,' continued young de Whichehalse; there
is not a man would dare work there, without a dog to
scare the pixies.'

'There is a big young fellow upon this farm,' Carver
Doone muttered sulkily, 'with whom I have an account to
settle, if ever I come across him.  He hath a cursed
spite to us, because we shot his father.  He was going
to bring the lumpers upon us, only he was afeared, last
winter.  And he hath been in London lately, for some
traitorous job, I doubt.'

'Oh, you mean that fool, John Ridd,' answered the young
squire; 'a very simple clod-hopper.  No treachery in
him I warrant; he hath not the head for it.  All he
cares about is wrestling.  As strong as a bull, and
with no more brains.'

'A bullet for that bull,' said Carver; and I could see
the grin on his scornful face; 'a bullet for ballast to
his brain, the first time I come across him.'

'Nonsense, captain! I won't have him shot, for he is my
old school-fellow, and hath a very pretty sister.  But
his cousin is of a different mould, and ten times as
dangerous.'

'We shall see, lads, we shall see,' grumbled the great
black-bearded man.  'Ill bodes for the fool that would
hinder me.  But come, let us onward.  No lingering, or
the viper will be in the bush from us.  Body and soul,
if he give us the slip, both of you shall answer it.'

'No fear, captain, and no hurry,' Charlie answered
gallantly, 'would I were as sure of living a
twelvemonth as he is of dying within the hour!  Extreme
unction for him in my bullet patch.  Remember, I claim
to be his confessor, because he hath insulted me.'

'Thou art welcome to the job for me,' said Marwood, as
they turned away, and kept along the hedge-row; 'I love
to meet a man sword to sword; not to pop at him from a
foxhole.'

What answer was made I could not hear, for by this time
the stout ashen hedge was between us, and no other gap
to be found in it, until at the very bottom, where the
corner of the copse was.  Yet I was not quit of danger
now; for they might come through that second gap, and
then would be sure to see me, unless I crept into the
uncut thicket, before they could enter the clearing. 
But in spite of all my fear, I was not wise enough to
do that.  And in truth the words of Carver Doone had
filled me with such anger, knowing what I did about him
and his pretence to Lorna; and the sight of Squire
Marwood, in such outrageous company, had so moved my
curiosity, and their threats against some unknown
person so aroused my pity, that much of my prudence was
forgotten, or at least the better part of courage,
which loves danger at long distance.

Therefore, holding fast my bill-hook, I dropped myself
very quietly into the bed of the runnel, being resolved
to take my chance of their entrance at the corner,
where the water dived through the hedge-row.  And so I
followed them down the fence, as gently as a rabbit
goes, only I was inside it, and they on the outside;
but yet so near that I heard the branches rustle as
they pushed them.

Perhaps I had never loved ferns so much as when I came
to the end of that little gully, and stooped betwixt
two patches of them, now my chiefest shelter, for
cattle had been through the gap just there, in quest of
fodder and coolness, and had left but a mound of
trodden earth between me and the outlaws.  I mean at
least on my left hand (upon which side they were), for
in front where the brook ran out of the copse was a
good stiff hedge of holly.  And now I prayed Heaven to
lead them straight on; for if they once turned to their
right, through the gap, the muzzles of their guns would
come almost against my forehead.

I heard them, for I durst not look; and could scarce
keep still for trembling--I heard them trampling
outside the gap, uncertain which track they should
follow.  And in that fearful moment, with my soul
almost looking out of my body, expecting notice to quit
it, what do you think I did?  I counted the threads in
a spider's web, and the flies he had lately eaten, as
their skeletons shook in the twilight.

'We shall see him better in there,' said Carver, in his
horrible gruff voice, like the creaking of the gallows
chain; 'sit there, behind holly hedge, lads, while he
cometh down yonder hill; and then our good-evening to
him; one at his body, and two at his head; and good
aim, lest we baulk the devil.' 

'I tell you, captain, that will not do,' said Charlie,
almost whispering:  'you are very proud of your skill,
we know, and can hit a lark if you see it: but he may
not come until after dark, and we cannot be too nigh to
him.  This holly hedge is too far away.  He crosses
down here from Slocomslade, not from Tibbacot, I tell
you; but along that track to the left there, and so by
the foreland to Glenthorne, where his boat is in the
cove.  Do you think I have tracked him so many
evenings, without knowing his line to a hair?  Will you
fool away all my trouble?'

'Come then, lad, we will follow thy lead.  Thy life for
his, if we fail of it.'

'After me then, right into the hollow; thy legs are
growing stiff, captain.'

'So shall thy body be, young man, if thou leadest me
astray in this.'

I heard them stumbling down the hill, which was steep
and rocky in that part; and peering through the hedge,
I saw them enter a covert, by the side of the track
which Master Stickles followed, almost every evening,
when he left our house upon business.  And then I knew
who it was they were come on purpose to murder--a thing
which I might have guessed long before, but for terror
and cold stupidity.

'Oh that God,' I thought for a moment, waiting for my
blood to flow; 'Oh that God had given me brains, to
meet such cruel dastards according to their villainy!
The power to lie, and the love of it; the stealth to
spy, and the glory in it; above all, the quiet relish
for blood, and joy in the death of an enemy--these are
what any man must have, to contend with the Doones upon
even terms.  And yet, I thank God that I have not any
of these.'

It was no time to dwell upon that, only to try, if
might be, to prevent the crime they were bound upon. 
To follow the armed men down the hill would have been
certain death to me, because there was no covert there,
and the last light hung upon it.  It seemed to me that
my only chance to stop the mischief pending was to
compass the round of the hill, as fast as feet could be
laid to ground; only keeping out of sight from the
valley, and then down the rocks, and across the brook,
to the track from Slocombslade: so as to stop the
King's messenger from travelling any farther, if only I
could catch him there.

And this was exactly what I did; and a terrible run I
had for it, fearing at every step to hear the echo of
shots in the valley, and dropping down the scrubby
rocks with tearing and violent scratching.  Then I
crossed Bagworthy stream, not far below Doone-valley,
and breasted the hill towards Slocombslade, with my
heart very heavily panting.  Why Jeremy chose to ride
this way, instead of the more direct one which would
have been over Oare-hill), was more than I could
account for: but I had nothing to do with that; all I
wanted was to save his life.

And this I did by about a minute; and (which was the
hardest thing of all) with a great horse-pistol at my
head as I seized upon his bridle.

'Jeremy, Jerry,' was all I could say, being so fearfully
short of breath; for I had crossed the ground quicker
than any horse could.

'Spoken just in time, John Ridd!' cried Master
Stickles, still however pointing the pistol at me:  'I
might have known thee by thy size, John.  What art
doing here?'

'Come to save your life.  For God's sake, go no
farther.  Three men in the covert there, with long
guns, waiting for thee.'

'Ha!  I have been watched of late.  That is why I
pointed at thee, John.  Back round this corner, and get
thy breath, and tell me all about it.  I never saw a
man so hurried.  I could beat thee now, John.'

Jeremy Stickles was a man of courage, and presence of
mind, and much resource:  otherwise he would not have
been appointed for this business; nevertheless he
trembled greatly when he heard what I had to tell him. 
But I took good care to keep back the name of young
Marwood de Whichehalse; neither did I show my knowledge
of the other men; for reasons of my own not very hard
to conjecture.

'We will let them cool their heels, John Ridd,' said
Jeremy, after thinking a little.  'I cannot fetch my
musketeers either from Glenthorne or Lynmouth, in time
to seize the fellows.  And three desperate Doones,
well-armed, are too many for you and me.  One result
this attempt will have, it will make us attack them
sooner than we had intended.  And one more it will
have, good John, it will make me thy friend for ever. 
Shake hands my lad, and forgive me freely for having
been so cold to thee.  Mayhap, in the troubles coming,
it will help thee not a little to have done me this
good turn.'

Upon this he shook me by the hand, with a pressure such
as we feel not often; and having learned from me how to
pass quite beyond view of his enemies, he rode on to
his duty, whatever it might be.  For my part I was
inclined to stay, and watch how long the three
fusiliers would have the patience to lie in wait; but
seeing less and less use in that, as I grew more and
more hungry, I swung my coat about me, and went home to
Plover's Barrows.



CHAPTER XXXIX

TROUBLED STATE AND A FOOLISH JOKE

Stickles took me aside the next day, and opened all
his business to me, whether I would or not.  But I gave
him clearly to understand that he was not to be vexed
with me, neither to regard me as in any way dishonest,
if I should use for my own purpose, or for the benefit
of my friends, any part of the knowledge and privity
thus enforced upon me.  To this he agreed quite
readily; but upon the express provision that I should
do nothing to thwart his schemes, neither unfold them
to any one; but otherwise be allowed to act according
to my own conscience, and as consisted with the honour
of a loyal gentleman--for so he was pleased to term me. 
Now what he said lay in no great compass and may be
summed in smaller still; especially as people know the
chief part of it already.  Disaffection to the King, or
rather dislike to his brother James, and fear of Roman
ascendancy, had existed now for several years, and of
late were spreading rapidly; partly through the
downright arrogance of the Tory faction, the cruelty
and austerity of the Duke of York, the corruption of
justice, and confiscation of ancient rights and
charters; partly through jealousy of the French king,
and his potent voice in our affairs; and partly (or
perhaps one might even say, mainly) through that
natural tide in all political channels, which verily
moves as if it had the moon itself for its mistress. 
No sooner is a thing done and fixed, being set far in
advance perhaps of all that was done before (like a new
mole in the sea), but immediately the waters retire,
lest they should undo it; and every one says how fine
it is, but leaves other people to walk on it.  Then
after awhile, the vague endless ocean, having retired
and lain still without a breeze or murmur, frets and
heaves again with impulse, or with lashes laid on it,
and in one great surge advances over every rampart.

And so there was at the time I speak of, a great surge
in England, not rolling yet, but seething; and one
which a thousand Chief Justices, and a million Jeremy
Stickles, should never be able to stop or turn, by
stringing up men in front of it; any more than a rope
of onions can repulse a volcano.  But the worst of it
was that this great movement took a wrong channel at
first; not only missing legitimate line, but roaring
out that the back ditchway was the true and established
course of it.

Against this rash and random current nearly all the
ancient mariners of the State were set; not to allow
the brave ship to drift there, though some little boats
might try it.  For the present there seemed to be a
pause, with no open onset, but people on the shore
expecting, each according to his wishes, and the feel
of his own finger, whence the rush of wind should come
which might direct the water.

Now,--to reduce high figures of speech into our own
little numerals,--all the towns of Somersetshire and
half the towns of Devonshire were full of pushing eager
people, ready to swallow anything, or to make others
swallow it.  Whether they believed the folly about the
black box, and all that stuff, is not for me to say;
only one thing I know, they pretended to do so, and
persuaded the ignorant rustics.  Taunton, Bridgwater,
Minehead, and Dulverton took the lead of the other
towns in utterance of their discontent, and threats of
what they meant to do if ever a Papist dared to climb
the Protestant throne of England.  On the other hand,
the Tory leaders were not as yet under apprehension of
an immediate outbreak, and feared to damage their own
cause by premature coercion, for the struggle was not
very likely to begin in earnest during the life of the
present King; unless he should (as some people hoped)
be so far emboldened as to make public profession of
the faith which he held (if any).  So the Tory policy
was to watch, not indeed permitting their opponents to
gather strength, and muster in armed force or with
order, but being well apprised of all their schemes and
intended movements, to wait for some bold overt act,
and then to strike severely.  And as a Tory
watchman--or spy, as the Whigs would call him--Jeremy
Stickles was now among us; and his duty was threefold.

First, and most ostensibly, to see to the levying of
poundage in the little haven of Lynmouth, and farther
up the coast, which was now becoming a place of resort
for the folk whom we call smugglers, that is to say,
who land their goods without regard to King's revenue
as by law established.  And indeed there had been no
officer appointed to take toll, until one had been sent
to Minehead, not so very long before.  The excise as
well (which had been ordered in the time of the Long
Parliament) had been little heeded by the people
hereabouts.

Second, his duty was (though only the Doones had
discovered it) to watch those outlaws narrowly, and
report of their manners (which were scanty), doings
(which were too manifold), reputation (which was
execrable), and politics, whether true to the King and
the Pope, or otherwise.

Jeremy Stickles' third business was entirely political;
to learn the temper of our people and the gentle
families, to watch the movements of the trained bands
(which could not always be trusted), to discover any
collecting of arms and drilling of men among us, to
prevent (if need were, by open force) any importation
of gunpowder, of which there had been some rumour; in a
word, to observe and forestall the enemy.

Now in providing for this last-mentioned service, the
Government had made a great mistake, doubtless through
their anxiety to escape any public attention.  For all
the disposable force at their emissary's command
amounted to no more than a score of musketeers, and
these so divided along the coast as scarcely to suffice
for the duty of sentinels.  He held a commission, it is
true, for the employment of the train-bands, but upon
the understanding that he was not to call upon them
(except as a last resource), for any political object;
although he might use them against the Doones as
private criminals, if found needful; and supposing that
he could get them.

'So you see, John,' he said in conclusion, 'I have more
work than tools to do it with.  I am heartily sorry I
ever accepted such a mixed and meagre commission.  At
the bottom of it lies (I am well convinced) not only
the desire to keep things quiet, but the paltry
jealousy of the military people.  Because I am not a
Colonel, forsooth, or a Captain in His Majesty's
service, it would never do to trust me with a company
of soldiers! And yet they would not send either Colonel
or Captain, for fear of a stir in the rustic mind.  The
only thing that I can do with any chance of success, is
to rout out these vile Doone fellows, and burn their
houses over their heads.  Now what think you of that,
John Ridd?'

'Destroy the town of the Doones,' I said, 'and all the
Doones inside it!  Surely, Jeremy, you would never think
of such a cruel act as that!'

'A cruel act, John!  It would be a mercy for at least
three counties.  No doubt you folk, who live so near,
are well accustomed to them, and would miss your
liveliness in coming home after nightfall, and the joy
of finding your sheep and cattle right, when you not
expected it.  But after awhile you might get used to
the dullness of being safe in your beds, and not losing
your sisters and sweethearts.  Surely, on the whole, it
is as pleasant not to be robbed as to be robbed.'

'I think we should miss them very much,' I answered
after consideration; for the possibility of having no
Doones had never yet occurred to me, and we all were so
thoroughly used to them, and allowed for it in our
year's reckoning; 'I am sure we should miss them very
sadly; and something worse would come of it.'

'Thou art the staunchest of all staunch Tories,' cried
Stickles, laughing, as he shook my hand; 'thou
believest in the divine right of robbers, who are good
enough to steal thy own fat sheep.  I am a jolly Tory,
John, but thou art ten times jollier: oh! the grief in
thy face at the thought of being robbed no longer!'

He laughed in a very unseemly manner; while I descried
nothing to laugh about.  For we always like to see our
way; and a sudden change upsets us.  And unless it were
in the loss of the farm, or the death of the King, or
of Betty Muxworthy, there was nothing that could so
unsettle our minds as the loss of the Doones of
Bagworthy.

And beside all this, I was thinking, of course, and
thinking more than all the rest, about the troubles
that might ensue to my own beloved Lorna.  If an attack
of Glen Doone were made by savage soldiers and rude
train-bands, what might happen, or what might not, to
my delicate, innocent darling?  Therefore, when Jeremy
Stickles again placed the matter before me, commending
my strength and courage and skill (to flatter me of the
highest), and finished by saying that I would be worth
at least four common men to him, I cut him short as
follows:--

'Master Stickles, once for all, I will have naught to
do with it.  The reason why is no odds of thine, nor
in any way disloyal.  Only in thy plans remember that I
will not strike a blow, neither give any counsel,
neither guard any prisoners.'

'Not strike a blow,' cried Jeremy, 'against thy
father's murderers, John!'

'Not a single blow, Jeremy; unless I knew the man who
did it, and he gloried in his sin.  It was a foul and
dastard deed, yet not done in cold blood; neither in
cold blood will I take God's task of avenging it.'

'Very well, John,' answered Master Stickles, 'I know
thine obstinacy.  When thy mind is made up, to argue
with thee is pelting a rock with peppercorns.  But thou
hast some other reason, lad, unless I am much mistaken,
over and above thy merciful nature and Christian
forgiveness.  Anyhow, come and see it, John.  There
will be good sport, I reckon; especially when we thrust
our claws into the nest of the ravens.  Many a yeoman
will find his daughter, and some of the Porlock lads
their sweethearts.  A nice young maiden, now, for thee,
John; if indeed, any--'

'No more of this!' I answered very sternly: 'it is no
business of thine, Jeremy; and I will have no joking
upon this matter.'

'Good, my lord; so be it.  But one thing I tell thee in
earnest.  We will have thy old double-dealing uncle,
Huckaback of Dulverton, and march him first to assault
Doone Castle, sure as my name is Stickles.  I hear that
he hath often vowed to storm the valley himself, if
only he could find a dozen musketeers to back him.  
Now, we will give him chance to do it, and prove his
loyalty to the King, which lies under some suspicion of
late.'

With regard to this, I had nothing to say; for it
seemed to me very reasonable that Uncle Reuben should
have first chance of recovering his stolen goods, about
which he had made such a sad to-do, and promised
himself such vengeance.  I made bold, however, to ask
Master Stickles at what time he intended to carry out
this great and hazardous attempt.  He answered that he
had several things requiring first to be set in order,
and that he must make an inland Journey, even as far as
Tiverton, and perhaps Crediton and Exeter, to collect
his forces and ammunition for them.  For he meant to
have some of the yeomanry as well as of the trained
bands, so that if the Doones should sally forth, as
perhaps they would, on horseback, cavalry might be
there to meet them, and cut them off from returning.

All this made me very uncomfortable, for many and many
reasons, the chief and foremost being of course my
anxiety about Lorna.  If the attack succeeded, what was
to become of her?  Who would rescue her from the brutal
soldiers, even supposing that she escaped from the
hands of her own people, during the danger and
ferocity?  And in smaller ways, I was much put out; for
instance, who would ensure our corn-ricks, sheep, and
cattle, ay, and even our fat pigs, now coming on for
bacon, against the spreading all over the country of
unlicensed marauders?  The Doones had their rights, and
understood them, and took them according to
prescription, even as the parsons had, and the lords of
manors, and the King himself, God save him!  But how
were these low soldiering fellows (half-starved at
home very likely, and only too glad of the fat of the
land, and ready, according to our proverb, to burn the
paper they fried in), who were they to come hectoring
and heroing over us, and Heliogabalising, with our
pretty sisters to cook for them, and be chucked under
chin perhaps afterwards?  There is nothing England
hates so much, according to my sense of it, as that
fellows taken from plough-tail, cart-tail, pot-houses
and parish-stocks, should be hoisted and foisted upon
us (after a few months' drilling, and their lying
shaped into truckling) as defenders of the public weal,
and heroes of the universe.

In another way I was vexed, moreover--for after all we
must consider the opinions of our neighbours--namely,
that I knew quite well how everybody for ten miles
round (for my fame must have been at least that wide,
after all my wrestling), would lift up hands and cry
out thus--'Black shame on John Ridd, if he lets them go
without him!'

Putting all these things together, as well as many
others, which our own wits will suggest to you, it is
impossible but what you will freely acknowledge that
this unfortunate John Ridd was now in a cloven stick. 
There was Lorna, my love and life, bound by her duty to
that old vil--nay, I mean to her good grandfather, who
could now do little mischief, and therefore deserved
all praise--Lorna bound, at any rate, by her womanly
feelings, if not by sense of duty, to remain in the
thick danger, with nobody to protect her, but everybody
to covet her, for beauty and position.  Here was all
the country roused with violent excitement, at the
chance of snapping at the Doones; and not only getting
tit for tat; but every young man promising his
sweetheart a gold chain, and his mother at least a
shilling.  And here was our own mow-yard, better filled
than we could remember, and perhaps every sheaf in it
destined to be burned or stolen, before we had finished
the bread we had baked.

Among all these troubles, there was, however, or seemed
to be, one comfort.  Tom Faggus returned from London
very proudly and very happily, with a royal pardon in
black and white, which everybody admired the more,
because no one could read a word of it.  The Squire
himself acknowledged cheerfully that he could sooner
take fifty purses than read a single line of it.  Some
people indeed went so far as to say that the parchment
was made from a sheep Tom had stolen, and that was why
it prevaricated so in giving him a character.  But I,
knowing something by this time, of lawyers, was able to
contradict them; affirming that the wolf had more than
the sheep to do with this matter.

For, according to our old saying, the three learned
professions live by roguery on the three parts of a
man.  The doctor mauls our bodies; the parson starves
our souls, but the lawyer must be the adroitest knave,
for he has to ensnare our minds.  Therefore he takes a
careful delight in covering his traps and engines with
a spread of dead-leaf words, whereof himself knows
little more than half the way to spell them.

But now Tom Faggus, although having wit to gallop away
on his strawberry mare, with the speed of terror, from
lawyers (having paid them with money too honest to
stop), yet fell into a reckless adventure, ere ever he
came home, from which any lawyer would have saved him,
although he ought to have needed none beyond common
thought for dear Annie.  Now I am, and ever have been,
so vexed about this story that I cannot tell it
pleasantly (as I try to write in general) in my own
words and manner.  Therefore I will let John Fry (whom
I have robbed of another story, to which he was more
entitled, and whom I have robbed of many speeches
(which he thought very excellent), lest I should grieve
any one with his lack of education,--the last lack he
ever felt, by the bye), now with your good leave, I
will allow poor John to tell this tale, in his own
words and style; which he has a perfect right to do,
having been the first to tell us.  For Squire Faggus
kept it close; not trusting even Annie with it (or at
least she said so); because no man knows much of his
sweetheart's tongue, until she has borne him a child or
two.

Only before John begins his story, this I would say, in
duty to him, and in common honesty,--that I dare not
write down some few of his words, because they are not
convenient, for dialect or other causes; and that I
cannot find any way of spelling many of the words which
I do repeat, so that people, not born on Exmoor, may
know how he pronounced them; even if they could bring
their lips and their legs to the proper attitude.  And
in this I speak advisedly; having observed some
thousand times that the manner a man has of spreading
his legs, and bending his knees, or stiffening, and
even the way he will set his heel, make all the
difference in his tone, and time of casting his voice
aright, and power of coming home to you.

We always liked John's stories, not for any wit in
them; but because we laughed at the man, rather than
the matter.  The way he held his head was enough, with
his chin fixed hard like a certainty (especially during
his biggest lie), not a sign of a smile in his lips or
nose, but a power of not laughing; and his eyes not
turning to anybody, unless somebody had too much of it
(as young girls always do) and went over the brink of
laughter.  Thereupon it was good to see John Fry; how
he looked gravely first at the laughter, as much as to
ask, 'What is it now?' then if the fool went laughing
more, as he or she was sure to do upon that dry
inquiry, John would look again, to be sure of it, and
then at somebody else to learn whether the laugh had
company; then if he got another grin, all his mirth
came out in glory, with a sudden break; and he wiped
his lips, and was grave again.

Now John, being too much encouraged by the girls (of
which I could never break them), came into the house
that December evening, with every inch of him full of
a tale.  Annie saw it, and Lizzie, of course; and even
I, in the gloom of great evils, perceived that John was
a loaded gun; but I did not care to explode him.  Now
nothing primed him so hotly as this: if you wanted to
hear all John Fry had heard, the surest of all sure ways
to it was, to pretend not to care for a word of it.

'I wor over to Exeford in the morning,' John began from
the chimney-corner, looking straight at Annie; 'for to
zee a little calve, Jan, as us cuddn't get thee to lave
houze about.  Meesus have got a quare vancy vor un,
from wutt her have heer'd of the brade.  Now zit quite,
wull 'e Miss Luzzie, or a 'wunt goo on no vurder. 
Vaine little tayl I'll tull' ee, if so be thee zits
quite.  Wull, as I coom down the hill, I zeed a saight
of volks astapping of the ro-udwai.  Arl on 'em wi'
girt goons, or two men out of dree wi' 'em.  Rackon
there wor dree score on 'em, tak smarl and beg togather
laike; latt aloun the women and chillers; zum on em wi'
matches blowing, tothers wi' flint-lacks.  "Wutt be up
now?" I says to Bill Blacksmith, as had knowledge of
me: "be the King acoomin?  If her be, do 'ee want to
shutt 'un?"

'"Thee not knaw!" says Bill Blacksmith, just the zame
as I be a tullin of it:  "whai, man, us expex Tam
Faggus, and zum on us manes to shutt 'un."

'"Shutt 'un wi'out a warrant!"  says I:  "sure 'ee knaws
better nor thic, Bill!  A man mayn't shutt to another
man, wi'out have a warrant, Bill.  Warship zed so, last
taime I zeed un, and nothing to the contrairy."

'"Haw, haw! Never frout about that," saith Bill, zame
as I be tullin you; "us has warrants and warships enow,
dree or vour on 'em.  And more nor a dizzen warranties;
fro'ut I know to contrairy.  Shutt 'un, us manes; and
shutt 'un, us will--"  Whai, Miss Annie, good Lord,
whuttiver maks 'ee stear so?'

'Nothing at all, John,' our Annie answered; 'only the
horrible ferocity of that miserable blacksmith.'

'That be nayther here nor there,' John continued, with
some wrath at his own interruption:  'Blacksmith knawed
whutt the Squire had been; and veared to lose his own
custom, if Squire tuk to shooin' again.  Shutt any man
I would myzell as intervared wi' my trade laike.  "Lucky
for thee," said Bill Blacksmith, "as thee bee'st so
shart and fat, Jan.  Dree on us wor a gooin' to shutt 'ee,
till us zeed how fat thee waz, Jan."

'"Lor now, Bill!" I answered 'un, wi' a girt cold swat
upon me: "shutt me, Bill; and my own waife niver drame
of it!'

Here John Fry looked round the kitchen; for he had
never said anything of the kind, I doubt; but now made
it part of his discourse, from thinking that Mistress
Fry was come, as she generally did, to fetch him.

'Wull done then, Jan Vry,' said the woman, who had
entered quietly, but was only our old Molly.  'Wutt
handsome manners thee hast gat, Jan, to spake so well
of thy waife laike; after arl the laife she leads
thee!'

'Putt thee pot on the fire, old 'ooman, and bile thee
own bakkon,' John answered her, very sharply: 'nobody
no raight to meddle wi' a man's bad ooman but himzell. 
Wull, here was all these here men awaitin', zum wi'
harses, zum wi'out; the common volk wi' long girt guns,
and tha quarlity wi' girt broad-swords.  Who wor there? 
Whay latt me zee.  There wor Squire Maunder,' here John
assumed his full historical key, 'him wi' the pot to
his vittle-place; and Sir Richard Blewitt shaking over
the zaddle, and Squaire Sandford of Lee, him wi' the
long nose and one eye, and Sir Gronus Batchildor over
to Ninehead Court, and ever so many more on 'em,
tulling up how they was arl gooin' to be promoted, for
kitching of Tom Faggus.

'"Hope to God," says I to myzell, "poor Tom wun't coom
here to-day: arl up with her, if 'a doeth: and who be
there to suckzade 'un?"  Mark me now, all these charps
was good to shutt 'un, as her coom crass the watter;
the watter be waide enow there and stony, but no deeper
than my knee-place.

'"Thee cas'n goo no vurder," Bill Blacksmith saith to
me: "nawbody 'lowed to crass the vord, until such time
as Faggus coom; plaise God us may mak sure of 'un."

'"Amen, zo be it," says I; "God knoweth I be never in
any hurry, and would zooner stop nor goo on most
taimes."

'Wi' that I pulled my vittles out, and zat a
horsebarck, atin' of 'em, and oncommon good they was. 
"Won't us have 'un this taime just," saith Tim Potter,
as keepeth the bull there; "and yet I be zorry for 'un. 
But a man must kape the law, her must; zo be her can
only learn it.  And now poor Tom will swing as high as
the tops of they girt hashes there."

'"Just thee kitch 'un virst," says I; "maisure rope,
wi' the body to maisure by."

'"Hurrah! here be another now," saith Bill Blacksmith,
grinning; "another coom to help us.  What a grave
gentleman! A warship of the pace, at laste!"

'For a gentleman, on a cue-ball horse, was coming
slowly down the hill on tother zide of watter, looking
at us in a friendly way, and with a long papper
standing forth the lining of his coat laike.  Horse
stapped to drink in the watter, and gentleman spak to
'un kindly, and then they coom raight on to ussen, and
the gentleman's face wor so long and so grave, us
veared 'a wor gooin' to prache to us.

'"Coort o' King's Bench," saith one man; "Checker and
Plays," saith another; "Spishal Commission, I doubt,"
saith Bill Blacksmith; "backed by the Mayor of
Taunton."

'"Any Justice of the King's Peace, good people, to be
found near here?" said the gentleman, lifting his hat
to us, and very gracious in his manner.

'"Your honour," saith Bill, with his hat off his head;
"there be sax or zeven warships here: arl on 'em very
wise 'uns.  Squaire Maunder there be the zinnyer."

'So the gentleman rode up to Squire Maunder, and raised
his cocked hat in a manner that took the Squire out of
countenance, for he could not do the like of it.

'"Sir," said he, "good and worshipful sir, I am here to
claim your good advice and valour; for purposes of
justice.  I hold His Majesty's commission, to make to
cease a notorious rogue, whose name is Thomas Faggus."
With that he offered his commission; but Squire Maunder
told the truth, that he could not rade even words in
print, much less written karakters.* Then the other
magistrates rode up, and put their heads together, how
to meet the London gentleman without loss of
importance.  There wor one of 'em as could rade purty
vair, and her made out King's mark upon it: and he
bowed upon his horse to the gentleman, and he laid his
hand on his heart and said, "Worshipful sir, we, as has
the honour of His Gracious Majesty's commission, are
entirely at your service, and crave instructions from
you."

* Lest I seem to under-rate the erudition of Devonshire
magistrates, I venture to offer copy of a letter from a
Justice of the Peace to his bookseller, circa 1810
A.D., now in my possession:--

 'Sur.
  'plez to zen me the aks relatting to A-GUSTUS-PAKS,'
  --Ed. of L. D.


'Then a waving of hats began, and a bowing, and making
of legs to wan anather, sich as nayver wor zeed afore;
but none of 'em arl, for air and brading, cud coom
anaigh the gentleman with the long grave face.

'"Your warships have posted the men right well," saith
he with anather bow all round; "surely that big rogue
will have no chance left among so many valiant
musketeers.  Ha! what see I there, my friend?  Rust in
the pan of your gun! That gun would never go off, sure
as I am the King's Commissioner.  And I see another
just as bad; and lo, there the third! Pardon me,
gentlemen, I have been so used to His Majesty's
Ordnance-yards.  But I fear that bold rogue would ride
through all of you, and laugh at your worship's beards,
by George."

'"But what shall us do?" Squire Maunder axed; "I vear
there be no oil here."

'"Discharge your pieces, gentlemen, and let the men do
the same; or at least let us try to discharge them, and
load again with fresh powder.  It is the fog of the
morning hath spoiled the priming.  That rogue is not in
sight yet: but God knows we must not be asleep with
him, or what will His Majesty say to me, if we let him
slip once more?"

'"Excellent, wondrous well said, good sir," Squire
Maunder answered him; "I never should have thought of
that now.  Bill Blacksmith, tell all the men to be
ready to shoot up into the air, directly I give the
word.  Now, are you ready there, Bill?"

'"All ready, your worship," saith Bill, saluting like a
soldier.

'"Then, one, two, dree, and shutt!" cries Squire
Maunder, standing up in the irons of his stirrups.

'Thereupon they all blazed out, and the noise of it
went all round the hills; with a girt thick cloud
arising, and all the air smelling of powder.  Before
the cloud was gone so much as ten yards on the wind,
the gentleman on the cue-bald horse shuts up his face
like a pair of nut-cracks, as wide as it was long
before, and out he pulls two girt pistols longside of
zaddle, and clap'th one to Squire Maunder's head, and
tother to Sir Richard Blewitt's.

'"Hand forth your money and all your warrants," he
saith like a clap of thunder; "gentlemen, have you now
the wit to apprehend Tom Faggus?"

'Squire Maunder swore so that he ought to he fined; but
he pulled out his purse none the slower for that, and
so did Sir Richard Blewitt.

'"First man I see go to load a gun, I'll gi'e 'un the
bullet to do it with," said Tom; for you see it was him
and no other, looking quietly round upon all of them. 
Then he robbed all the rest of their warships, as
pleasant as might be; and he saith, "Now, gentlemen, do
your duty: serve your warrants afore you imprison me";
with that he made them give up all the warrants, and he
stuck them in the band of his hat, and then he made a
bow with it.

'"Good morning to your warships now, and a merry
Christmas all of you! And the merrier both for rich and
poor, when gentlemen see their almsgiving.  Lest you
deny yourselves the pleasure, I will aid your warships. 
And to save you the trouble of following me, when your
guns be loaded--this is my strawberry mare, gentlemen,
only with a little cream on her.  Gentlemen all, in the
name of the King, I thank you."

'All this while he was casting their money among the
poor folk by the handful; and then he spak kaindly to
the red mare, and wor over the back of the hill in two
zeconds, and best part of two maile away, I reckon,
afore ever a gun wor loaded.'*

* The truth of this story is well established by
first-rate tradition.



CHAPTER XL

TWO FOOLS TOGETHER

That story of John Fry's, instead of causing any
amusement, gave us great disquietude; not only because
it showed that Tom Faggus could not resist sudden
temptation and the delight of wildness, but also that
we greatly feared lest the King's pardon might be
annulled, and all his kindness cancelled, by a reckless
deed of that sort.  It was true (as Annie insisted
continually, even with tears, to wear in her arguments)
that Tom had not brought away anything, except the
warrants, which were of no use at all, after receipt of
the pardon; neither had he used any violence, except
just to frighten people; but could it be established,
even towards Christmas-time, that Tom had a right to
give alms, right and left, out of other people's money?

Dear Annie appeared to believe that it could; saying
that if the rich continually chose to forget the poor,
a man who forced them to remember, and so to do good to
themselves and to others, was a public benefactor, and
entitled to every blessing.  But I knew, and so Lizzie
knew--John Fry being now out of hearing--that this was
not sound argument.  For, if it came to that, any man
might take the King by the throat, and make him cast
away among the poor the money which he wanted sadly for
Her Grace the Duchess, and the beautiful Countess, of
this, and of that.  Lizzie, of course, knew nothing
about His Majesty's diversions, which were not fit for
a young maid's thoughts; but I now put the form of the
argument as it occurred to me.

Therefore I said, once for all (and both my sisters
always listened when I used the deep voice from my
chest):

'Tom Faggus hath done wrong herein; wrong to himself,
and to our Annie.  All he need have done was to show
his pardon, and the magistrates would have rejoiced
with him.  He might have led a most godly life, and
have been respected by everybody; and knowing how brave
Tom is, I thought that he would have done as much.  Now
if I were in love with a maid'--I put it thus for the
sake of poor Lizzie--'never would I so imperil my life,
and her fortune in life along with me, for the sake of
a poor diversion.  A man's first duty is to the women,
who are forced to hang upon him'--

'Oh, John, not that horrible word,' cried Annie, to my
great surprise, and serious interruption; 'oh, John,
any word but that!'  And she burst forth crying
terribly.

'What word, Lizzie?  What does the wench mean?' I
asked, in the saddest vexation; seeing no good to ask
Annie at all, for she carried on most dreadfully.

'Don't you know, you stupid lout?' said Lizzie,
completing my wonderment, by the scorn of her quicker
intelligence; 'if you don't know, axe about?'

And with that, I was forced to be content; for Lizzie
took Annie in such a manner (on purpose to vex me, as I
could see) with her head drooping down, and her hair
coming over, and tears and sobs rising and falling, to
boot, without either order or reason, that seeing no
good for a man to do (since neither of them was Lorna),
I even went out into the courtyard, and smoked a pipe,
and wondered what on earth is the meaning of women.

Now in this I was wrong and unreasonable (as all women
will acknowledge); but sometimes a man is so put out,
by the way they take on about nothing, that he really
cannot help thinking, for at least a minute, that women
are a mistake for ever, and hence are for ever
mistaken.  Nevertheless I could not see that any of
these great thoughts and ideas applied at all to my
Lorna; but that she was a different being; not woman
enough to do anything bad, yet enough of a woman for
man to adore.

And now a thing came to pass which tested my adoration
pretty sharply, inasmuch as I would far liefer faced
Carver Doone and his father, nay, even the roaring lion
himself with his hoofs and flaming nostrils, than have
met, in cold blood, Sir Ensor Doone, the founder of all
the colony, and the fear of the very fiercest.

But that I was forced to do at this time, and in the
manner following.  When I went up one morning to look
for my seven rooks' nests, behold there were but six to
be seen; for the topmost of them all was gone, and the
most conspicuous.  I looked, and looked, and rubbed my
eyes, and turned to try them by other sights; and then
I looked again; yes, there could be no doubt about it;
the signal was made for me to come, because my love was
in danger.  For me to enter the valley now, during the
broad daylight, could have brought no comfort, but only
harm to the maiden, and certain death to myself.  Yet
it was more than I could do to keep altogether at
distance; therefore I ran to the nearest place where I
could remain unseen, and watched the glen from the
wooded height, for hours and hours, impatiently.

However, no impatience of mine made any difference in
the scene upon which I was gazing.  In the part of the
valley which I could see, there was nothing moving,
except the water, and a few stolen cows, going sadly
along, as if knowing that they had no honest right
there.  It sank very heavily into my heart, with all
the beds of dead leaves around it, and there was
nothing I cared to do, except blow on my fingers, and
long for more wit.

For a frost was beginning, which made a great
difference to Lorna and to myself, I trow; as well as
to all the five million people who dwell in this island
of England; such a frost as never I saw before,*
neither hope ever to see again; a time when it was
impossible to milk a cow for icicles, or for a man to
shave some of his beard (as I liked to do for Lorna's
sake, because she was so smooth) without blunting his
razor on hard gray ice.  No man could 'keep yatt' (as
we say), even though he abandoned his work altogether,
and thumped himself, all on the chest and the front,
till his frozen hands would have been bleeding except
for the cold that kept still all his veins.

* If John Ridd lived until the year 1740 (as so strong
a man was bound to do), he must have seen almost a
harder frost; and perhaps it put an end to him; for
then he would be some fourscore years old.  But
tradition makes him 'keep yatt,' as he says, up to
fivescore years.--ED.


However, at present there was no frost, although for a
fortnight threatening; and I was too young to know the
meaning of the way the dead leaves hung, and the
worm-casts prickling like women's combs, and the leaden
tone upon everything, and the dead weight of the sky. 
Will Watcombe, the old man at Lynmouth, who had been
half over the world almost, and who talked so much of
the Gulf-stream, had (as I afterwards called to mind)
foretold a very bitter winter this year.  But no one
would listen to him because there were not so many hips
and haws as usual; whereas we have all learned from our
grandfathers that Providence never sends very hard
winters, without having furnished a large supply of
berries for the birds to feed upon.

It was lucky for me, while I waited here, that our very
best sheep-dog, old Watch, had chosen to accompany me
that day.  For otherwise I must have had no dinner,
being unpersuaded, even by that, to quit my survey of
the valley.  However, by aid of poor Watch, I contrived
to obtain a supply of food; for I sent him home with a
note to Annie fastened upon his chest; and in less than
an hour back he came, proud enough to wag his tail off,
with his tongue hanging out from the speed of his
journey, and a large lump of bread and of bacon
fastened in a napkin around his neck.  I had not told
my sister, of course, what was toward; for why should I
make her anxious?

When it grew towards dark, I was just beginning to
prepare for my circuit around the hills; but suddenly
Watch gave a long low growl; I kept myself close as
possible, and ordered the dog to be silent, and
presently saw a short figure approaching from a
thickly-wooded hollow on the left side of my
hiding-place.  It was the same figure I had seen once
before in the moonlight, at Plover's Barrows; and
proved, to my great delight, to be the little maid
Gwenny Carfax.  She started a moment, at seeing me, but
more with surprise than fear; and then she laid both
her hands upon mine, as if she had known me for twenty
years.

'Young man,' she said, 'you must come with me.  I was
gwain' all the way to fetch thee.  Old man be dying;
and her can't die, or at least her won't, without first
considering thee.'

'Considering me!' I cried; 'what can Sir Ensor Doone
want with considering me?  Has Mistress Lorna told
him?'

'All concerning thee, and thy doings; when she knowed
old man were so near his end.  That vexed he was about
thy low blood, a' thought her would come to life again,
on purpose for to bate 'ee.  But after all, there
can't be scarcely such bad luck as that.  Now, if her
strook thee, thou must take it; there be no denaying of
un.  Fire I have seen afore, hot and red, and raging;
but I never seen cold fire afore, and it maketh me burn
and shiver.'

And in truth, it made me both burn and shiver, to know
that I must either go straight to the presence of Sir
Ensor Doone, or give up Lorna, once for all, and
rightly be despised by her.  For the first time of my
life, I thought that she had not acted fairly.  Why
not leave the old man in peace, without vexing him
about my affair?  But presently I saw again that in
this matter she was right; that she could not receive
the old man's blessing (supposing that he had one to
give, which even a worse man might suppose), while she
deceived him about herself, and the life she had
undertaken.

Therefore, with great misgiving of myself, but no ill
thought of my darling, I sent Watch home, and followed
Gwenny; who led me along very rapidly, with her short
broad form gliding down the hollow, from which she had
first appeared.  Here at the bottom, she entered a
thicket of gray ash stubs and black holly, with rocks
around it gnarled with roots, and hung with masks of
ivy.  Here in a dark and lonely corner, with a pixie
ring before it, she came to a narrow door, very brown
and solid, looking like a trunk of wood at a little
distance.  This she opened, without a key, by stooping
down and pressing it, where the threshold met the jamb;
and then she ran in very nimbly, but I was forced to be
bent in two, and even so without comfort.  The passage
was close and difficult, and as dark as any black
pitch; but it was not long (be it as it might), and in
that there was some comfort.  We came out soon at the
other end, and were at the top of Doone valley.  In the
chilly dusk air, it looked most untempting, especially
during that state of mind under which I was labouring. 
As we crossed towards the Captain's house, we met a
couple of great Doones lounging by the waterside. 
Gwenny said something to them, and although they stared
very hard at me, they let me pass without hindrance. 
It is not too much to say that when the little maid
opened Sir Ensor's door, my heart thumped, quite as
much with terror as with hope of Lorna's presence.

But in a moment the fear was gone, for Lorna was
trembling in my arms, and my courage rose to comfort
her.  The darling feared, beyond all things else, lest
I should be offended with her for what she had said to
her grandfather, and for dragging me into his presence;
but I told her almost a falsehood (the first, and the
last, that ever I did tell her), to wit, that I cared
not that much--and showed her the tip of my thumb as I
said it--for old Sir Ensor, and all his wrath, so long
as I had his granddaughter's love.

Now I tried to think this as I said it, so as to save
it from being a lie; but somehow or other it did not
answer, and I was vexed with myself both ways.  But
Lorna took me by the hand as bravely as she could, and
led me into a little passage where I could hear the
river moaning and the branches rustling.

Here I passed as long a minute as fear ever cheated
time of, saying to myself continually that there was
nothing to be frightened at, yet growing more and more
afraid by reason of so reasoning.  At last my Lorna
came back very pale, as I saw by the candle she
carried, and whispered, 'Now be patient, dearest.  
Never mind what he says to you; neither attempt to
answer him.  Look at him gently and steadfastly, and,
if you can, with some show of reverence; but above all
things, no compassion; it drives him almost mad.  Now
come; walk very quietly.'

She led me into a cold, dark room, rough and very
gloomy, although with two candles burning.  I took
little heed of the things in it, though I marked that
the window was open.  That which I heeded was an old
man, very stern and comely, with death upon his
countenance; yet not lying in his bed, but set upright
in a chair, with a loose red cloak thrown over him. 
Upon this his white hair fell, and his pallid fingers
lay in a ghastly fashion without a sign of life or
movement or of the power that kept him up; all rigid,
calm, and relentless.  Only in his great black eyes,
fixed upon me solemnly, all the power of his body
dwelt, all the life of his soul was burning.

I could not look at him very nicely, being afeared of
the death in his face, and most afeared to show it. 
And to tell the truth, my poor blue eyes fell away from
the blackness of his, as if it had been my
coffin-plate.  Therefore I made a low obeisance, and
tried not to shiver.  Only I groaned that Lorna thought
it good manners to leave us two together.

'Ah,' said the old man, and his voice seemed to come
from a cavern of skeletons; 'are you that great John
Ridd?'

'John Ridd is my name, your honour,' was all that I
could answer; 'and I hope your worship is better.'

'Child, have you sense enough to know what you have
been doing?'

'Yes, I knew right well,' I answered, 'that I have set
mine eyes far above my rank.'

'Are you ignorant that Lorna Doone is born of the
oldest families remaining in North Europe?'

'I was ignorant of that, your worship; yet I knew of
her high descent from the Doones of Bagworthy.'

The old man's eyes, like fire, probed me whether I was
jesting; then perceiving how grave I was, and thinking
that I could not laugh (as many people suppose of me),
he took on himself to make good the deficiency with a
very bitter smile.

'And know you of your own low descent from the Ridds of
Oare?'

'Sir,' I answered, being as yet unaccustomed to this
style of speech, 'the Ridds, of Oare, have been honest
men twice as long as the Doones have been rogues.'

'I would not answer for that, John,' Sir Ensor replied,
very quietly, when I expected fury.  'If it be so, thy
family is the very oldest in Europe.  Now hearken to
me, boy, or clown, or honest fool, or whatever thou
art; hearken to an old man's words, who has not many
hours to live.  There is nothing in this world to fear,
nothing to revere or trust, nothing even to hope for;
least of all, is there aught to love.'

'I hope your worship is not quite right,' I answered,
with great misgivings; 'else it is a sad mistake for
anybody to live, sir.'

'Therefore,' he continued, as if I had never spoken,
'though it may seem hard for a week or two, like the
loss of any other toy, I deprive you of nothing, but
add to your comfort, and (if there be such a thing) to
your happiness, when I forbid you ever to see that
foolish child again.  All marriage is a wretched farce,
even when man and wife belong to the same rank of life,
have temper well assorted, similar likes and dislikes,
and about the same pittance of mind.  But when they are
not so matched, the farce would become a long, dull
tragedy, if anything were worth lamenting.  There, I
have reasoned enough with you; I am not in the habit of
reasoning.  Though I have little confidence in man's
honour, I have some reliance in woman's pride.  You
will pledge your word in Lorna's presence never to see
or to seek her again; never even to think of her more. 
Now call her, for I am weary.'

He kept his great eyes fixed upon me with their icy
fire (as if he scorned both life and death), and on his
haughty lips some slight amusement at my trouble; and
then he raised one hand (as if I were a poor dumb
creature), and pointed to the door.  Although my heart
rebelled and kindled at his proud disdain, I could not
disobey him freely; but made a low salute, and went
straightway in search of Lorna.

I found my love (or not my love; according as now she
should behave; for I was very desperate, being put upon
so sadly); Lorna Doone was crying softly at a little
window, and listening to the river's grief.  I laid my
heavy arm around her, not with any air of claiming or
of forcing her thoughts to me, but only just to comfort
her, and ask what she was thinking of.  To my arm she
made no answer, neither to my seeking eyes; but to my
heart, once for all, she spoke with her own upon it. 
Not a word, nor sound between us; not even a kiss was
interchanged; but man, or maid, who has ever loved hath
learned our understanding.

Therefore it came to pass, that we saw fit to enter Sir
Ensor's room in the following manner.  Lorna, with her
right hand swallowed entirely by the palm of mine, and
her waist retired from view by means of my left arm. 
All one side of her hair came down, in a way to be
remembered, upon the left and fairest part of my
favourite otter-skin waistcoat; and her head as well
would have lain there doubtless, but for the danger of
walking so.  I, for my part, was too far gone to lag
behind in the matter; but carried my love bravely,
fearing neither death nor hell, while she abode beside
me.

Old Sir Ensor looked much astonished.  For forty years
he had been obeyed and feared by all around him; and he
knew that I had feared him vastly, before I got hold of
Lorna.  And indeed I was still afraid of him; only for
loving Lorna so, and having to protect her.

Then I made him a bow, to the very best of all I had
learned both at Tiverton and in London; after that I
waited for him to begin, as became his age and rank in
life.

'Ye two fools!' he said at last, with a depth of
contempt which no words may express; 'ye two fools!'

'May it please your worship,' I answered softly; 'maybe
we are not such fools as we look.  But though we be, we
are well content, so long as we may be two fools
together.'

'Why, John,' said the old man, with a spark, as of
smiling in his eyes; 'thou art not altogether the
clumsy yokel, and the clod, I took thee for.'

'Oh, no, grandfather; oh, dear grandfather,' cried
Lorna, with such zeal and flashing, that her hands went
forward; 'nobody knows what John Ridd is, because he is
so modest.  I mean, nobody except me, dear.'  And here
she turned to me again, and rose upon tiptoe, and
kissed me.

'I have seen a little o' the world,' said the old man,
while I was half ashamed, although so proud of Lorna;
'but this is beyond all I have seen, and nearly all I
have heard of.  It is more fit for southern climates
than for the fogs of Exmoor.'

'It is fit for all the world, your worship; with your
honour's good leave, and will,' I answered in humility,
being still ashamed of it; 'when it happens so to
people, there is nothing that can stop it, sir.'

Now Sir Ensor Doone was leaning back upon his brown
chair-rail, which was built like a triangle, as in old
farmhouses (from one of which it had come, no doubt,
free from expense or gratitude); and as I spoke he
coughed a little; and he sighed a good deal more; and
perhaps his dying heart desired to open time again,
with such a lift of warmth and hope as he descried in
our eyes, and arms.  I could not understand him then;
any more than a baby playing with his grandfather's
spectacles; nevertheless I wondered whether, at his
time of life, or rather on the brink of death, he was
thinking of his youth and pride.

'Fools you are; be fools for ever,' said Sir Ensor
Doone, at last; while we feared to break his thoughts,
but let each other know our own, with little ways of
pressure; 'it is the best thing I can wish you; boy and
girl, be boy and girl, until you have grandchildren.'

Partly in bitterness he spoke, and partly in pure
weariness, and then he turned so as not to see us; and
his white hair fell, like a shroud, around him.



CHAPTER XLI

COLD COMFORT

All things being full of flaw, all things being full
of holes, the strength of all things is in shortness. 
If Sir Ensor Doone had dwelled for half an hour upon
himself, and an hour perhaps upon Lorna and me, we must
both have wearied of him, and required change of air. 
But now I longed to see and know a great deal more
about him, and hoped that he might not go to Heaven for
at least a week or more.  However, he was too good for
this world (as we say of all people who leave it); and
I verily believe his heart was not a bad one, after
all.

Evil he had done, no doubt, as evil had been done to
him; yet how many have done evil, while receiving only
good! Be that as it may; and not vexing a question
(settled for ever without our votes), let us own that
he was, at least, a brave and courteous gentleman.

And his loss aroused great lamentation, not among the
Doones alone, and the women they had carried off, but
also of the general public, and many even of the
magistrates, for several miles round Exmoor.  And this,
not only from fear lest one more wicked might succeed
him (as appeared indeed too probable), but from true
admiration of his strong will, and sympathy with his
misfortunes.

I will not deceive any one, by saying that Sir Ensor
Doone gave (in so many words) his consent to my resolve
about Lorna.  This he never did, except by his speech
last written down; from which as he mentioned
grandchildren, a lawyer perhaps might have argued it.  
Not but what he may have meant to bestow on us his
blessing; only that he died next day, without taking
the trouble to do it.

He called indeed for his box of snuff, which was a very
high thing to take; and which he never took without
being in very good humour, at least for him.  And
though it would not go up his nostrils, through the
failure of his breath, he was pleased to have it there,
and not to think of dying.

'Will your honour have it wiped?' I asked him very
softly, for the brown appearance of it spoiled (to my
idea) his white mostacchio; but he seemed to shake his
head; and I thought it kept his spirits up.  I had
never before seen any one do, what all of us have to do
some day; and it greatly kept my spirits down, although
it did not so very much frighten me.

For it takes a man but a little while, his instinct
being of death perhaps, at least as much as of life
(which accounts for his slaying his fellow men so, and
every other creature), it does not take a man very long
to enter into another man's death, and bring his own
mood to suit it.  He knows that his own is sure to
come; and nature is fond of the practice.  Hence it
came to pass that I, after easing my mother's fears,
and seeing a little to business, returned (as if drawn
by a polar needle) to the death-bed of Sir Ensor.

There was some little confusion, people wanting to get
away, and people trying to come in, from downright
curiosity (of all things the most hateful), and others
making great to-do, and talking of their own time to
come, telling their own age, and so on.  But every one
seemed to think, or feel, that I had a right to be
there; because the women took that view of it.  As for
Carver and Counsellor, they were minding their own
affairs, so as to win the succession; and never found
it in their business (at least so long as I was there)
to come near the dying man.

He, for his part, never asked for any one to come near
him, not even a priest, nor a monk or friar; but seemed
to be going his own way, peaceful, and well contented. 
Only the chief of the women said that from his face she
believed and knew that he liked to have me at one side
of his bed, and Lorna upon the other.  An hour or two
ere the old man died, when only we two were with him,
he looked at us both very dimly and softly, as if he
wished to do something for us, but had left it now too
late.  Lorna hoped that he wanted to bless us; but he
only frowned at that, and let his hand drop downward,
and crooked one knotted finger.

'He wants something out of the bed, dear,' Lorna
whispered to me; 'see what it is, upon your side,
there.'

I followed the bent of his poor shrunken hand, and
sought among the pilings; and there I felt something
hard and sharp, and drew it forth and gave it to him. 
It flashed, like the spray of a fountain upon us, in
the dark winter of the room.  He could not take it in
his hand, but let it hang, as daisies do; only making
Lorna see that he meant her to have it.

'Why, it is my glass necklace!' Lorna cried, in great
surprise; 'my necklace he always promised me; and from
which you have got the ring, John.  But grandfather
kept it, because the children wanted to pull it from my
neck.  May I have it now, dear grandfather?  Not unless
you wish, dear.'

Darling Lorna wept again, because the old man could not
tell her (except by one very feeble nod) that she was
doing what he wished.  Then she gave to me the
trinket, for the sake of safety; and I stowed it in my
breast.  He seemed to me to follow this, and to be well
content with it.

Before Sir Ensor Doone was buried, the greatest frost
of the century had set in, with its iron hand, and step
of stone, on everything.  How it came is not my
business, nor can I explain it; because I never have
watched the skies; as people now begin to do, when the
ground is not to their liking.  Though of all this I
know nothing, and less than nothing I may say (because
I ought to know something); I can hear what people tell
me; and I can see before my eyes.

The strong men broke three good pickaxes, ere they got
through the hard brown sod, streaked with little maps
of gray where old Sir Ensor was to lie, upon his back,
awaiting the darkness of the Judgment-day.  It was in
the little chapel-yard; I will not tell the name of it;
because we are now such Protestants, that I might do it
an evil turn; only it was the little place where
Lorna's Aunt Sabina lay.

Here was I, remaining long, with a little curiosity;
because some people told me plainly that I must be
damned for ever by a Papist funeral; and here came
Lorna, scarcely breathing through the thick of stuff
around her, yet with all her little breath steaming on
the air, like frost.

I stood apart from the ceremony, in which of course I
was not entitled, either by birth or religion, to bear
any portion; and indeed it would have been wiser in me
to have kept away altogether; for now there was no one
to protect me among those wild and lawless men; and
both Carver and the Counsellor had vowed a fearful
vengeance on me, as I heard from Gwenny.  They had not
dared to meddle with me while the chief lay dying; nor
was it in their policy, for a short time after that, to
endanger their succession by an open breach with Lorna,
whose tender age and beauty held so many of the youths
in thrall.

The ancient outlaw's funeral was a grand and moving
sight; more perhaps from the sense of contrast than
from that of fitness.  To see those dark and mighty
men, inured to all of sin and crime, reckless both of
man and God, yet now with heads devoutly bent, clasped
hands, and downcast eyes, following the long black
coffin of their common ancestor, to the place where
they must join him when their sum of ill was done; and
to see the feeble priest chanting, over the dead form,
words the living would have laughed at, sprinkling with
his little broom drops that could not purify; while the
children, robed in white, swung their smoking censers
slowly over the cold and twilight grave; and after
seeing all, to ask, with a shudder unexpressed, 'Is
this the end that God intended for a man so proud and
strong?'

Not a tear was shed upon him, except from the sweetest
of all sweet eyes; not a sigh pursued him home.  Except
in hot anger, his life had been cold, and bitter, and
distant; and now a week had exhausted all the sorrow of
those around him, a grief flowing less from affection
than fear.  Aged men will show his tombstone; mothers
haste with their infants by it; children shrink from
the name upon it, until in time his history shall lapse
and be forgotten by all except the great Judge and God.

After all was over, I strode across the moors very
sadly; trying to keep the cold away by virtue of quick
movement.  Not a flake of snow had fallen yet; all the
earth was caked and hard, with a dry brown crust upon
it; all the sky was banked with darkness, hard,
austere, and frowning.  The fog of the last three weeks
was gone, neither did any rime remain; but all things
had a look of sameness, and a kind of furzy colour.  It
was freezing hard and sharp, with a piercing wind to
back it; and I had observed that the holy water froze
upon Sir Ensor's coffin.

One thing struck me with some surprise, as I made off
for our fireside (with a strong determination to heave
an ash-tree up the chimney-place), and that was how the
birds were going, rather than flying as they used to
fly.  All the birds were set in one direction, steadily
journeying westward, not with any heat of speed,
neither flying far at once; but all (as if on business
bound), partly running, partly flying, partly
fluttering along; silently, and without a voice,
neither pricking head nor tail.  This movement of the
birds went on, even for a week or more; every kind of
thrushes passed us, every kind of wild fowl, even
plovers went away, and crows, and snipes and
wood-cocks.  And before half the frost was over, all we
had in the snowy ditches were hares so tame that we
could pat them; partridges that came to hand, with a
dry noise in their crops; heath-poults, making cups of
snow; and a few poor hopping redwings, flipping in and
out the hedge, having lost the power to fly.  And all
the time their great black eyes, set with gold around
them, seemed to look at any man, for mercy and for
comfort.

Annie took a many of them, all that she could find
herself, and all the boys would bring her; and she made
a great hutch near the fire, in the back-kitchen
chimney-place.  Here, in spite of our old Betty (who
sadly wanted to roast them), Annie kept some fifty
birds, with bread and milk, and raw chopped meat, and
all the seed she could think of, and lumps of rotten
apples, placed to tempt them, in the corners.  Some got
on, and some died off; and Annie cried for all that
died, and buried them under the woodrick; but, I do
assure you, it was a pretty thing to see, when she went
to them in the morning.  There was not a bird but knew
her well, after one day of comforting; and some would
come to her hand, and sit, and shut one eye, and look
at her.  Then she used to stroke their heads, and feel
their breasts, and talk to them; and not a bird of them
all was there but liked to have it done to him.  And I
do believe they would eat from her hand things
unnatural to them, lest she should he grieved and hurt
by not knowing what to do for them.  One of them was a
noble bird, such as I never had seen before, of very
fine bright plumage, and larger than a missel-thrush. 
He was the hardest of all to please: and yet he tried
to do his best.  I have heard since then, from a man
who knows all about birds, and beasts, and fishes, that
he must have been a Norwegian bird, called in this
country a Roller, who never comes to England but in the
most tremendous winters.

Another little bird there was, whom I longed to welcome
home, and protect from enemies, a little bird no native
to us, but than any native dearer.  But lo, in the very
night which followed old Sir Ensor's funeral, such a
storm of snow began as never have I heard nor read of,
neither could have dreamed it.  At what time of night
it first began is more than I can say, at least from my
own knowledge, for we all went to bed soon after
supper, being cold and not inclined to talk.  At that
time the wind was moaning sadly, and the sky as dark as
a wood, and the straw in the yard swirling round and
round, and the cows huddling into the great cowhouse,
with their chins upon one another.  But we, being
blinder than they, I suppose, and not having had a
great snow for years, made no preparation against the
storm, except that the lambing ewes were in shelter.

It struck me, as I lay in bed, that we were acting
foolishly; for an ancient shepherd had dropped in and
taken supper with us, and foretold a heavy fall and
great disaster to live stock.  He said that he had
known a frost beginning, just as this had done, with a
black east wind, after days of raw cold fog, and then
on the third night of the frost, at this very time of
year (to wit on the 15th of December) such a snow set
in as killed half of the sheep and many even of the red
deer and the forest ponies.  It was three-score years
agone,* he said; and cause he had to remember it,
inasmuch as two of his toes had been lost by frost-nip,
while he dug out his sheep on the other side of the
Dunkery.  Hereupon mother nodded at him, having heard
from her father about it, and how three men had been
frozen to death, and how badly their stockings came off
from them.

* The frost of 1625.


Remembering how the old man looked, and his manner of
listening to the wind and shaking his head very
ominously (when Annie gave him a glass of schnapps), I
grew quite uneasy in my bed, as the room got colder and
colder; and I made up my mind, if it only pleased God
not to send the snow till the morning, that every
sheep, and horse, and cow, ay, and even the poultry,
should be brought in snug, and with plenty to eat, and
fodder enough to roast them.

Alas what use of man's resolves, when they come a day
too late; even if they may avail a little, when they
are most punctual!

In the bitter morning I arose, to follow out my
purpose, knowing the time from the force of habit,
although the room was so dark and gray.  An odd white
light was on the rafters, such as I never had seen
before; while all the length of the room was grisly,
like the heart of a mouldy oat-rick.  I went to the
window at once, of course; and at first I could not
understand what was doing outside of it.  It faced due
east (as I may have said), with the walnut-tree partly
sheltering it; and generally I could see the yard, and
the woodrick, and even the church beyond.

But now, half the lattice was quite blocked up, as if
plastered with gray lime; and little fringes, like
ferns, came through, where the joining of the lead was;
and in the only undarkened part, countless dots came
swarming, clustering, beating with a soft, low sound,
then gliding down in a slippery manner, not as drops of
rain do, but each distinct from his neighbour.  Inside
the iron frame (which fitted, not to say too
comfortably, and went along the stonework), at least a
peck of snow had entered, following its own bend and
fancy; light as any cobweb.

With some trouble, and great care, lest the ancient
frame should yield, I spread the lattice open; and saw
at once that not a moment must he lost, to save our
stock.  All the earth was flat with snow, all the air
was thick with snow; more than this no man could see,
for all the world was snowing.

I shut the window and dressed in haste; and when I
entered the kitchen, not even Betty, the earliest of
all early birds, was there.  I raked the ashes together
a little, just to see a spark of warmth; and then set
forth to find John Fry, Jem Slocombe, and Bill Dadds. 
But this was easier thought than done; for when I
opened the courtyard door, I was taken up to my knees
at once, and the power of the drifting cloud prevented
sight of anything.  However, I found my way to the
woodrick, and there got hold of a fine ash-stake, cut
by myself not long ago.  With this I ploughed along
pretty well, and thundered so hard at John Fry's door,
that he thought it was the Doones at least, and cocked
his blunderbuss out of the window.

John was very loth to come down, when he saw the
meaning of it; for he valued his life more than
anything else; though he tried to make out that his
wife was to blame.  But I settled his doubts by telling
him, that I would have him on my shoulder naked, unless
he came in five minutes; not that he could do much
good, but because the other men would be sure to skulk,
if he set them the example.  With spades, and shovels,
and pitch-forks, and a round of roping, we four set
forth to dig out the sheep; and the poor things knew
that it was high time.



CHAPTER XLII

THE GREAT WINTER

It must have snowed most wonderfully to have made that
depth of covering in about eight hours.  For one of
Master Stickles' men, who had been out all the night,
said that no snow began to fall until nearly midnight. 
And here it was, blocking up the doors, stopping the
ways, and the water courses, and making it very much
worse to walk than in a saw-pit newly used.  However,
we trudged along in a line; I first, and the other men
after me; trying to keep my track, but finding legs and
strength not up to it.  Most of all, John Fry was
groaning; certain that his time was come, and sending
messages to his wife, and blessings to his children. 
For all this time it was snowing harder than it ever
had snowed before, so far as a man might guess at it;
and the leaden depth of the sky came down, like a mine
turned upside down on us.  Not that the flakes were so
very large; for I have seen much larger flakes in a
shower of March, while sowing peas; but that there was
no room between them, neither any relaxing, nor any
change of direction.

Watch, like a good and faithful dog, followed us very
cheerfully, leaping out of the depth, which took him
over his back and ears already, even in the level
places; while in the drifts he might have sunk to any
distance out of sight, and never found his way up
again.  However, we helped him now and then, especially
through the gaps and gateways; and so after a deal of
floundering, some laughter, and a little swearing, we
came all safe to the lower meadow, where most of our
flock was hurdled.

But behold, there was no flock at all!  None, I mean, to
be seen anywhere; only at one corner of the field, by
the eastern end, where the snow drove in, a great white
billow, as high as a barn, and as broad as a house. 
This great drift was rolling and curling beneath the
violent blast, tufting and combing with rustling
swirls, and carved (as in patterns of cornice) where
the grooving chisel of the wind swept round.  Ever and
again the tempest snatched little whiffs from the
channelled edges, twirled them round and made them
dance over the chime of the monster pile, then let them
lie like herring-bones, or the seams of sand where the
tide has been.  And all the while from the smothering
sky, more and more fiercely at every blast, came the
pelting, pitiless arrows, winged with murky white, and
pointed with the barbs of frost.

But although for people who had no sheep, the sight was
a very fine one (so far at least as the weather
permitted any sight at all); yet for us, with our flock
beneath it, this great mount had but little charm. 
Watch began to scratch at once, and to howl along the
sides of it; he knew that his charge was buried there,
and his business taken from him.  But we four men set
to in earnest, digging with all our might and main,
shovelling away at the great white pile, and fetching
it into the meadow.  Each man made for himself a cave,
scooping at the soft, cold flux, which slid upon him at
every stroke, and throwing it out behind him, in piles
of castled fancy.  At last we drove our tunnels in (for
we worked indeed for the lives of us), and all
converging towards the middle, held our tools and
listened.

The other men heard nothing at all; or declared that
they heard nothing, being anxious now to abandon the
matter, because of the chill in their feet and knees. 
But I said, 'Go, if you choose all of you.  I will work
it out by myself, you pie-crusts,' and upon that they
gripped their shovels, being more or less of
Englishmen; and the least drop of English blood is
worth the best of any other when it comes to lasting
out.

But before we began again, I laid my head well into the
chamber; and there I hears a faint 'ma-a-ah,' coming
through some ells of snow, like a plaintive, buried
hope, or a last appeal.  I shouted aloud to cheer him
up, for I knew what sheep it was, to wit, the most
valiant of all the wethers, who had met me when I came
home from London, and been so glad to see me.  And then
we all fell to again; and very soon we hauled him out. 
Watch took charge of him at once, with an air of the
noblest patronage, lying on his frozen fleece, and
licking all his face and feet, to restore his warmth to
him.  Then fighting Tom jumped up at once, and made a
little butt at Watch, as if nothing had ever ailed him,
and then set off to a shallow place, and looked for
something to nibble at.

Further in, and close under the bank, where they had
huddled themselves for warmth, we found all the rest of
the poor sheep packed, as closely as if they were in a
great pie.  It was strange to observe how their vapour
and breath, and the moisture exuding from their wool
had scooped, as it were, a coved room for them, lined
with a ribbing of deep yellow snow.  Also the churned
snow beneath their feet was as yellow as gamboge.  Two
or three of the weaklier hoggets were dead, from want
of air, and from pressure; but more than three-score
were as lively as ever; though cramped and stiff for a
little while.

'However shall us get 'em home?' John Fry asked in
great dismay, when we had cleared about a dozen of
them; which we were forced to do very carefully, so as
not to fetch the roof down.  'No manner of maning to
draive 'un, drough all they girt driftnesses.'

'You see to this place, John,' I replied, as we leaned
on our shovels a moment, and the sheep came rubbing
round us; 'let no more of them out for the present;
they are better where they be.  Watch, here boy, keep
them!'

Watch came, with his little scut of a tail cocked as
sharp as duty, and I set him at the narrow mouth of the
great snow antre.  All the sheep sidled away, and got
closer, that the other sheep might be bitten first, as
the foolish things imagine; whereas no good sheep-dog
even so much as lips a sheep to turn it.

Then of the outer sheep (all now snowed and frizzled
like a lawyer's wig) I took the two finest and
heaviest, and with one beneath my right arm, and the
other beneath my left, I went straight home to the
upper sheppey, and set them inside and fastened them. 
Sixty and six I took home in that way, two at a time on
each joumey; and the work grew harder and harder each
time, as the drifts of the snow were deepening.  No
other man should meddle with them; I was resolved to
try my strength against the strength of the elements;
and try it I did, ay, and proved it.  A certain fierce
delight burned in me, as the struggle grew harder; but
rather would I die than yield; and at last I finished
it.  People talk of it to this day; but none can tell
what the labour was, who have not felt that snow and
wind.

Of the sheep upon the mountain, and the sheep upon the
western farm, and the cattle on the upper barrows,
scarcely one in ten was saved; do what we would for
them, and this was not through any neglect (now that
our wits were sharpened), but from the pure
impossibility of finding them at all.  That great snow
never ceased a moment for three days and nights; and
then when all the earth was filled, and the topmost
hedges were unseen, and the trees broke down with
weight (wherever the wind had not lightened them), a
brilliant sun broke forth and showed the loss of all
our customs.

All our house was quite snowed up, except where we had
purged a way, by dint of constant shovellings.  The
kitchen was as dark and darker than the cider-cellar,
and long lines of furrowed scollops ran even up to the
chimney-stacks.  Several windows fell right inwards,
through the weight of the snow against them; and the
few that stood, bulged in, and bent like an old bruised
lanthorn.  We were obliged to cook by candle-light; we
were forced to read by candle-light; as for baking, we
could not do it, because the oven was too chill; and a
load of faggots only brought a little wet down the
sides of it.

For when the sun burst forth at last upon that world of
white, what he brought was neither warmth, nor cheer,
nor hope of softening; only a clearer shaft of cold,
from the violet depths of sky.  Long-drawn alleys of
white haze seemed to lead towards him, yet such as he
could not come down, with any warmth remaining.  Broad
white curtains of the frost-fog looped around the lower
sky, on the verge of hill and valley, and above the
laden trees.  Only round the sun himself, and the spot
of heaven he claimed, clustered a bright purple-blue,
clear, and calm, and deep.

That night such a frost ensued as we had never dreamed
of, neither read in ancient books, or histories of
Frobisher.  The kettle by the fire froze, and the crock
upon the hearth-cheeks; many men were killed, and
cattle rigid in their head-ropes.  Then I heard that
fearful sound, which never I had heard before, neither
since have heard (except during that same winter), the
sharp yet solemn sound of trees burst open by the
frost-blow.  Our great walnut lost three branches, and
has been dying ever since; though growing meanwhile, as
the soul does.  And the ancient oak at the cross was
rent, and many score of ash trees.  But why should I
tell all this?  the people who have not seen it (as I
have) will only make faces, and disbelieve; till such
another frost comes; which perhaps may never be.

This terrible weather kept Tom Faggus from coming near
our house for weeks; at which indeed I was not vexed a
quarter so much as Annie was; for I had never half
approved of him, as a husband for my sister; in spite
of his purchase from Squire Bassett, and the grant of
the Royal pardon.  It may be, however, that Annie took
the same view of my love for Lorna, and could not augur
well of it; but if so, she held her peace, though I was
not so sparing.  For many things contributed to make
me less good-humoured now than my real nature was; and
the very least of all these things would have been
enough to make some people cross, and rude, and
fractious.  I mean the red and painful chapping of my
face and hands, from working in the snow all day, and
lying in the frost all night.  For being of a fair
complexion, and a ruddy nature, and pretty plump
withal, and fed on plenty of hot victuals, and always
forced by my mother to sit nearer the fire than I
wished, it was wonderful to see how the cold ran revel
on my cheeks and knuckles.  And I feared that Lorna (if
it should ever please God to stop the snowing) might
take this for a proof of low and rustic blood and
breeding.

And this I say was the smallest thing; for it was far
more serious that we were losing half our stock, do all
we would to shelter them.  Even the horses in the
stables (mustered all together for the sake of breath
and steaming) had long icicles from their muzzles,
almost every morning.  But of all things the very
gravest, to my apprehension, was the impossibility of
hearing, or having any token of or from my loved one. 
Not that those three days alone of snow (tremendous as
it was) could have blocked the country so; but that the
sky had never ceased, for more than two days at a time,
for full three weeks thereafter, to pour fresh piles of
fleecy mantle; neither had the wind relaxed a single
day from shaking them.  As a rule, it snowed all day,
cleared up at night, and froze intensely, with the
stars as bright as jewels, earth spread out in lustrous
twilight, and the sounds in the air as sharp and
crackling as artillery; then in the morning, snow
again; before the sun could come to help.

It mattered not what way the wind was.  Often and often
the vanes went round, and we hoped for change of
weather; the only change was that it seemed (if
possible) to grow colder.  Indeed, after a week or so,
the wind would regularly box the compass (as the
sailors call it) in the course of every day, following
where the sun should be, as if to make a mock of him. 
And this of course immensely added to the peril of the
drifts; because they shifted every day; and no skill or
care might learn them.

I believe it was on Epiphany morning, or somewhere
about that period, when Lizzie ran into the kitchen to
me, where I was thawing my goose-grease, with the dogs
among the ashes--the live dogs, I mean, not the iron
ones, for them we had given up long ago,--and having
caught me, by way of wonder (for generally I was out
shoveling long before my 'young lady' had her nightcap
off), she positively kissed me, for the sake of warming
her lips perhaps, or because she had something proud to
say.

'You great fool, John,' said my lady, as Annie and I
used to call her, on account of her airs and graces;
'what a pity you never read, John!'

'Much use, I should think, in reading!' I answered,
though pleased with her condescension; 'read, I
suppose, with roof coming in, and only this chimney
left sticking out of the snow!'

'The very time to read, John,' said Lizzie, looking
grander; 'our worst troubles are the need, whence
knowledge can deliver us.'

'Amen,' I cried out; 'are you parson or clerk? 
Whichever you are, good-morning.'

Thereupon I was bent on my usual round (a very small
one nowadays), but Eliza took me with both hands, and I
stopped of course; for I could not bear to shake the
child, even in play, for a moment, because her back was
tender.  Then she looked up at me with her beautiful
eyes, so large, unhealthy and delicate, and strangely
shadowing outward, as if to spread their meaning; and
she said,--

'Now, John, this is no time to joke.  I was almost
frozen in bed last night; and Annie like an icicle. 
Feel how cold my hands are.  Now, will you listen to
what I have read about climates ten times worse than
this; and where none but clever men can live?'

'Impossible for me to listen now, I have hundreds of
things to see to; but I will listen after breakfast to
your foreign climates, child.  Now attend to mother's
hot coffee.'

She looked a little disappointed, but she knew what I
had to do; and after all she was not so utterly
unreasonable; although she did read books.  And when I
had done my morning's work, I listened to her
patiently; and it was out of my power to think that all
she said was foolish.

For I knew common sense pretty well, by this time,
whether it happened to be my own, or any other
person's, if clearly laid before me.  And Lizzie had a
particular way of setting forth very clearly whatever
she wished to express and enforce.  But the queerest
part of it all was this, that if she could but have
dreamed for a moment what would be the first
application made me by of her lesson, she would rather
have bitten her tongue off than help me to my purpose.

She told me that in the Arctic Regions, as they call
some places, a long way north, where the Great Bear
lies all across the heavens, and no sun is up, for
whole months at a time, and yet where people will go
exploring, out of pure contradiction, and for the sake
of novelty, and love of being frozen--that here they
always had such winters as we were having now.  It
never ceased to freeze, she said; and it never ceased
to snow; except when it was too cold; and then all the
air was choked with glittering spikes; and a man's skin
might come off of him, before he could ask the reason. 
Nevertheless the people there (although the snow was
fifty feet deep, and all their breath fell behind them
frozen, like a log of wood dropped from their
shoulders), yet they managed to get along, and make the
time of the year to each other, by a little cleverness. 
For seeing how the snow was spread, lightly over
everything, covering up the hills and valleys, and the
foreskin of the sea, they contrived a way to crown it,
and to glide like a flake along.  Through the sparkle
of the whiteness, and the wreaths of windy tossings,
and the ups and downs of cold, any man might get along
with a boat on either foot, to prevent his sinking.

She told me how these boats were made; very strong and
very light, of ribs with skin across them; five feet
long, and one foot wide; and turned up at each end,
even as a canoe is.  But she did not tell me, nor did I
give it a moment's thought myself, how hard it was to
walk upon them without early practice.  Then she told
me another thing equally useful to me; although I would
not let her see how much I thought about it.  And this
concerned the use of sledges, and their power of
gliding, and the lightness of their following; all of
which I could see at once, through knowledge of our own
farm-sleds; which we employ in lieu of wheels, used in
flatter districts.  When I had heard all this from her,
a mere chit of a girl as she was, unfit to make a
snowball even, or to fry snow pancakes, I looked down
on her with amazement, and began to wish a little that
I had given more time to books.

But God shapes all our fitness, and gives each man his
meaning, even as he guides the wavering lines of snow
descending.  Our Eliza was meant for books; our dear
Annie for loving and cooking; I, John Ridd, for sheep,
and wrestling, and the thought of Lorna; and mother to
love all three of us, and to make the best of her
children.  And now, if I must tell the truth, as at
every page I try to do (though God knows it is hard
enough), I had felt through all this weather, though my
life was Lorna's, something of a satisfaction in so
doing duty to my kindest and best of mothers, and to
none but her.  For (if you come to think of it) a man's
young love is very pleasant, very sweet, and tickling;
and takes him through the core of heart; without his
knowing how or why.  Then he dwells upon it sideways,
without people looking, and builds up all sorts of
fancies, growing hot with working so at his own
imaginings.  So his love is a crystal Goddess, set upon
an obelisk; and whoever will not bow the knee (yet
without glancing at her), the lover makes it a sacred
rite either to kick or to stick him.  I am not speaking
of me and Lorna, but of common people.

Then (if you come to think again) lo!--or I will not
say lo! for no one can behold it--only feel, or but
remember, what a real mother is.  Ever loving, ever
soft, ever turning sin to goodness, vices into virtues;
blind to all nine-tenths of wrong; through a telescope
beholding (though herself so nigh to them) faintest
decimal of promise, even in her vilest child.  Ready to
thank God again, as when her babe was born to her;
leaping (as at kingdom-come) at a wandering syllable
of Gospel for her lost one.

All this our mother was to us, and even more than all
of this; and hence I felt a pride and joy in doing my
sacred duty towards her, now that the weather compelled
me.  And she was as grateful and delighted as if she
had no more claim upon me than a stranger's sheep might
have.  Yet from time to time I groaned within myself
and by myself, at thinking of my sad debarment from the
sight of Lorna, and of all that might have happened to
her, now she had no protection.

Therefore, I fell to at once, upon that hint from
Lizzie, and being used to thatching-work, and the
making of traps, and so on, before very long I built
myself a pair of strong and light snow-shoes, framed
with ash and ribbed of withy, with half-tanned calf-
skin stretched across, and an inner sole to support my
feet.  At first I could not walk at all, but floundered
about most piteously, catching one shoe in the other,
and both of them in the snow-drifts, to the great
amusement of the girls, who were come to look at me. 
But after a while I grew more expert, discovering what
my errors were, and altering the inclination of the
shoes themselves, according to a print which Lizzie
found in a book of adventures.  And this made such a
difference, that I crossed the farmyard and came back
again (though turning was the worst thing of all)
without so much as falling once, or getting my staff
entangled.

But oh, the aching of my ankles, when I went to bed
that night; I was forced to help myself upstairs with a
couple of mopsticks! and I rubbed the joints with
neatsfoot oil, which comforted them greatly.  And
likely enough I would have abandoned any further trial,
but for Lizzie's ridicule, and pretended sympathy;
asking if the strong John Ridd would have old Betty to
lean upon.  Therefore I set to again, with a fixed
resolve not to notice pain or stiffness, but to warm
them out of me.  And sure enough, before dark that day,
I could get along pretty freely; especially improving
every time, after leaving off and resting.  The
astonishment of poor John Fry, Bill Dadds, and Jem
Slocombe, when they saw me coming down the hill upon
them, in the twilight, where they were clearing the
furze rick and trussing it for cattle, was more than I
can tell you; because they did not let me see it, but
ran away with one accord, and floundered into a
snowdrift.  They believed, and so did every one else
(especially when I grew able to glide along pretty
rapidly), that I had stolen Mother Melldrum's sieves,
on which she was said to fly over the foreland at
midnight every Saturday.

Upon the following day, I held some council with my
mother; not liking to go without her permission, yet
scarcely daring to ask for it.  But here she
disappointed me, on the right side of disappointment;
saying that she had seen my pining (which she never
could have done; because I had been too hard at work),
and rather than watch me grieving so, for somebody or
other, who now was all in all to me, I might go upon my
course, and God's protection go with me!  At this I was
amazed, because it was not at all like mother; and
knowing how well I had behaved, ever since the time of
our snowing up, I was a little moved to tell her that
she could not understand me.  However my sense of duty
kept me, and my knowledge of the catechism, from saying
such a thing as that, or even thinking twice of it. 
And so I took her at her word, which she was not
prepared for; and telling her how proud I was of her
trust in Providence, and how I could run in my new
snow-shoes, I took a short pipe in my mouth, and
started forth accordingly.



CHAPTER XLIII

NOT TOO SOON

When I started on my road across the hills and valleys
(which now were pretty much alike), the utmost I could
hope to do was to gain the crest of hills, and look
into the Doone Glen.  Hence I might at least descry
whether Lorna still was safe, by the six nests still
remaining, and the view of the Captain's house.  When I
was come to the open country, far beyond the sheltered
homestead, and in the full brunt of the wind, the keen
blast of the cold broke on me, and the mighty breadth
of snow.  Moor and highland, field and common, cliff
and vale, and watercourse, over all the rolling folds
of misty white were flung.  There was nothing square or
jagged left, there was nothing perpendicular; all the
rugged lines were eased, and all the breaches smoothly
filled.  Curves, and mounds, and rounded heavings, took
the place of rock and stump; and all the country looked
as if a woman's hand had been on it.

Through the sparkling breadth of white, which seemed to
glance my eyes away, and outside the humps of laden
trees, bowing their backs like a woodman, I contrived
to get along, half-sliding and half-walking, in places
where a plain-shodden man must have sunk, and waited
freezing till the thaw should come to him.  For
although there had been such violent frost, every
night, upon the snow, the snow itself, having never
thawed, even for an hour, had never coated over.  Hence
it was as soft and light as if all had fallen
yesterday.  In places where no drift had been, but
rather off than on to them, three feet was the least of
depth; but where the wind had chased it round, or any
draught led like a funnel, or anything opposed it;
there you might very safely say that it ran up to
twenty feet, or thirty, or even fifty, and I believe
some times a hundred.

At last I got to my spy-hill (as I had begun to call
it), although I never should have known it but for what
it looked on.  And even to know this last again
required all the eyes of love, soever sharp and
vigilant.  For all the beautiful Glen Doone (shaped
from out the mountains, as if on purpose for the
Doones, and looking in the summer-time like a sharp cut
vase of green) now was besnowed half up the sides, and
at either end so, that it was more like the white
basins wherein we boil plum-puddings.  Not a patch of
grass was there, not a black branch of a tree; all was
white; and the little river flowed beneath an arch of
snow; if it managed to flow at all.

Now this was a great surprise to me; not only because I
believed Glen Doone to be a place outside all frost,
but also because I thought perhaps that it was quite
impossible to be cold near Lorna.  And now it struck me
all at once that perhaps her ewer was frozen (as mine
had been for the last three weeks, requiring embers
around it), and perhaps her window would not shut, any
more than mine would; and perhaps she wanted blankets. 
This idea worked me up to such a chill of sympathy,
that seeing no Doones now about, and doubting if any
guns would go off, in this state of the weather, and
knowing that no man could catch me up (except with
shoes like mine), I even resolved to slide the cliffs,
and bravely go to Lorna.

It helped me much in this resolve, that the snow came
on again, thick enough to blind a man who had not spent
his time among it, as I had done now for days and days. 
Therefore I took my neatsfoot oil, which now was
clogged like honey, and rubbed it hard into my
leg-joints, so far as I could reach them.  And then I
set my back and elbows well against a snowdrift,
hanging far adown the cliff, and saying some of the
Lord's Prayer, threw myself on Providence.  Before
there was time to think or dream, I landed very
beautifully upon a ridge of run-up snow in a quiet
corner.  My good shoes, or boots, preserved me from
going far beneath it; though one of them was sadly
strained, where a grub had gnawed the ash, in the early
summer-time.  Having set myself aright, and being in
good spirits, I made boldly across the valley (where
the snow was furrowed hard), being now afraid of
nobody.

If Lorna had looked out of the window she would not
have known me, with those boots upon my feet, and a
well-cleaned sheepskin over me, bearing my own (J.R.)
in red, just between my shoulders, but covered now in
snow-flakes.  The house was partly drifted up, though
not so much as ours was; and I crossed the little
stream almost without knowing that it was under me.  At
first, being pretty safe from interference from the
other huts, by virtue of the blinding snow and the
difficulty of walking, I examined all the windows; but
these were coated so with ice, like ferns and flowers
and dazzling stars, that no one could so much as guess
what might be inside of them.  Moreover I was afraid of
prying narrowly into them, as it was not a proper thing
where a maiden might be; only I wanted to know just
this, whether she were there or not.

Taking nothing by this movement, I was forced, much
against my will, to venture to the door and knock, in a
hesitating manner, not being sure but what my answer
might be the mouth of a carbine.  However it was not
so, for I heard a pattering of feet and a whispering
going on, and then a shrill voice through the keyhole,
asking, 'Who's there?'

'Only me, John Ridd,' I answered; upon which I heard a
little laughter, and a little sobbing, or something
that was like it; and then the door was opened about a
couple of inches, with a bar behind it still; and then
the little voice went on,--

'Put thy finger in, young man, with the old ring on it. 
But mind thee, if it be the wrong one, thou shalt never
draw it back again.'

Laughing at Gwenny's mighty threat, I showed my finger
in the opening; upon which she let me in, and barred
the door again like lightning.

'What is the meaning of all this, Gwenny?' I asked, as
I slipped about on the floor, for I could not stand
there firmly with my great snow-shoes on.

'Maning enough, and bad maning too,' the Cornish girl
made answer.  Us be shut in here, and starving, and
durstn't let anybody in upon us.  I wish thou wer't
good to ate, young man:  I could manage most of thee.'

I was so frightened by her eyes, full of wolfish
hunger, that I could only say 'Good God!' having never
seen the like before.  Then drew I forth a large piece
of bread, which I had brought in case of accidents, and
placed it in her hands.  She leaped at it, as a
starving dog leaps at sight of his supper, and she set
her teeth in it, and then withheld it from her lips,
with something very like an oath at her own vile
greediness; and then away round the corner with it, no
doubt for her young mistress.  I meanwhile was
occupied, to the best of my ability, in taking my
snow-shoes off, yet wondering much within myself why
Lorna did not come to me.

But presently I knew the cause, for Gwenny called me,
and I ran, and found my darling quite unable to say so
much as, 'John, how are you?'  Between the hunger and
the cold, and the excitement of my coming, she had
fainted away, and lay back on a chair, as white as the
snow around us.  In betwixt her delicate lips, Gwenny
was thrusting with all her strength the hard brown
crust of the rye-bread, which she had snatched from me
so.

'Get water, or get snow,' I said; 'don't you know what
fainting is, you very stupid child?'

'Never heerd on it, in Cornwall,' she answered,
trusting still to the bread; 'be un the same as
bleeding?'

'It will be directly, if you go on squeezing away with
that crust so.  Eat a piece: I have got some more. 
Leave my darling now to me.'

Hearing that I had some more, the starving girl could
resist no longer, but tore it in two, and had swallowed
half before I had coaxed my Lorna back to sense, and
hope, and joy, and love.

'I never expected to see you again.  I had made up my
mind to die, John; and to die without your knowing it.'

As I repelled this fearful thought in a manner highly
fortifying, the tender hue flowed back again into her
famished cheeks and lips, and a softer brilliance
glistened from the depth of her dark eyes.  She gave me
one little shrunken hand, and I could not help a tear
for it.

'After all, Mistress Lorna,' I said, pretending to be
gay, for a smile might do her good; 'you do not love me
as Gwenny does; for she even wanted to eat me.'

'And shall, afore I have done, young man,' Gwenny
answered laughing; 'you come in here with they red
chakes, and make us think o' sirloin.'

'Eat up your bit of brown bread, Gwenny.  It is not
good enough for your mistress.  Bless her heart, I have
something here such as she never tasted the like of,
being in such appetite.  Look here, Lorna; smell it
first.  I have had it ever since Twelfth Day, and kept
it all the time for you.  Annie made it.  That is
enough to warrant it good cooking.'

And then I showed my great mince-pie in a bag of tissue
paper, and I told them how the mince-meat was made of
golden pippins finely shred, with the undercut of the
sirloin, and spice and fruit accordingly and far beyond
my knowledge.  But Lorna would not touch a morsel until
she had thanked God for it, and given me the kindest
kiss, and put a piece in Gwenny's mouth.

I have eaten many things myself, with very great
enjoyment, and keen perception of their merits, and
some thanks to God for them.  But I never did enjoy a
thing, that had found its way between my own lips,
half, or even a quarter as much as I now enjoyed
beholding Lorna, sitting proudly upwards (to show that
she was faint no more) entering into that mince-pie,
and moving all her pearls of teeth (inside her little
mouth-place) exactly as I told her.  For I was afraid
lest she should be too fast in going through it, and
cause herself more damage so, than she got of
nourishment.  But I had no need to fear at all, and
Lorna could not help laughing at me for thinking that
she had no self-control.

Some creatures require a deal of food (I myself among
the number), and some can do with a very little;
making, no doubt, the best of it.  And I have often
noticed that the plumpest and most perfect women never
eat so hard and fast as the skinny and three-cornered
ones.  These last be often ashamed of it, and eat most
when the men be absent.  Hence it came to pass that
Lorna, being the loveliest of all maidens, had as much
as she could do to finish her own half of pie; whereas
Gwenny Carfax (though generous more than greedy), ate
up hers without winking, after finishing the brown
loaf; and then I begged to know the meaning of this
state of things.

'The meaning is sad enough,' said Lorna; 'and I see no
way out of it.  We are both to be starved until I let
them do what they like with me.

'That is to say until you choose to marry Carver Doone,
and be slowly killed by him?'

'Slowly!  No, John, quickly.  I hate him so intensely,
that less than a week would kill me.'

'Not a doubt of that,' said Gwenny; 'oh, she hates him
nicely then; but not half so much as I do.'

I told them that this state of things could be endured
no longer, on which point they agreed with me, but saw
no means to help it.  For even if Lorna could make up
her mind to come away with me and live at Plover's
Barrows farm, under my good mother's care, as I had
urged so often, behold the snow was all around us,
heaped as high as mountains, and how could any delicate
maiden ever get across it?

Then I spoke with a strange tingle upon both sides of
my heart, knowing that this undertaking was a serious
one for all, and might burn our farm down,--

'If I warrant to take you safe, and without much fright
or hardship, Lorna, will you come with me?'

'To be sure I will, dear,' said my beauty, with a smile
and a glance to follow it; 'I have small alternative,
to starve, or go with you, John.'

'Gwenny, have you courage for it?  Will you come with
your young mistress?'

'Will I stay behind?' cried Gwenny, in a voice that
settled it.  And so we began to arrange about it; and
I was much excited.  It was useless now to leave it
longer; if it could be done at all, it could not be too
quickly done.  It was the Counsellor who had ordered,
after all other schemes had failed, that his niece
should have no food until she would obey him.  He had
strictly watched the house, taking turns with Carver,
to ensure that none came nigh it bearing food or
comfort.  But this evening, they had thought it
needless to remain on guard; and it would have been
impossible, because themselves were busy offering high
festival to all the valley, in right of their own
commandership.  And Gwenny said that nothing made her
so nearly mad with appetite as the account she received
from a woman of all the dishes preparing.  Nevertheless
she had answered bravely,--

'Go and tell the Counsellor, and go and tell the
Carver, who sent you to spy upon us, that we shall have
a finer dish than any set before them.'  And so in truth
they did, although so little dreaming it; for no Doone
that was ever born, however much of a Carver, might vie
with our Annie for mince-meat.

Now while we sat reflecting much, and talking a good
deal more, in spite of all the cold--for I never was in
a hurry to go, when I had Lorna with me--she said, in
her silvery voice, which always led me so along, as if
I were a slave to a beautiful bell,--

'Now, John, we are wasting time, dear.  You have
praised my hair, till it curls with pride, and my eyes
till you cannot see them, even if they are brown
diamonds which I have heard for the fiftieth time at
least; though I never saw such a jewel.  Don't you
think it is high time to put on your snow-shoes, John?'

'Certainly not,' I answered, 'till we have settled
something more.  I was so cold when I came in; and now
I am as warm as a cricket.  And so are you, you lively
soul; though you are not upon my hearth yet.'

'Remember, John,' said Lorna, nestling for a moment to
me; 'the severity of the weather makes a great
difference between us.  And you must never take
advantage.'

'I quite understand all that, dear.  And the harder it
freezes the better, while that understanding continues. 
Now do try to be serious.'

'I try to be serious!  And I have been trying fifty
times, and could not bring you to it, John!  Although I
am sure the situation, as the Counsellor says at the
beginning of a speech, the situation, to say the least,
is serious enough for anything.  Come, Gwenny, imitate
him.'

Gwenny was famed for her imitation of the Counsellor
making a speech; and she began to shake her hair, and
mount upon a footstool; but I really could not have
this, though even Lorna ordered it.  The truth was that
my darling maiden was in such wild spirits, at seeing
me so unexpected, and at the prospect of release, and
of what she had never known, quiet life and happiness,
that like all warm and loving natures, she could scarce
control herself.

'Come to this frozen window, John, and see them light
the stack-fire.  They will little know who looks at
them.  Now be very good, John.  You stay in that
corner, dear, and I will stand on this side; and try to
breathe yourself a peep-hole through the lovely spears
and banners.  Oh, you don't know how to do it.  I must
do it for you.  Breathe three times, like that, and
that; and then you rub it with your fingers, before it
has time to freeze again.'

All this she did so beautifully, with her lips put up
like cherries, and her fingers bent half back, as only
girls can bend them, and her little waist thrown out
against the white of the snowed-up window, that I made
her do it three times over; and I stopped her every
time and let it freeze again, that so she might be the
longer.  Now I knew that all her love was mine, every
bit as much as mine was hers; yet I must have her to
show it, dwelling upon every proof, lengthening out all
certainty.  Perhaps the jealous heart is loath to own a
life worth twice its own.  Be that as it may, I know
that we thawed the window nicely.

And then I saw, far down the stream (or rather down the
bed of it, for there was no stream visible), a little
form of fire arising, red, and dark, and flickering. 
Presently it caught on something, and went upward
boldly; and then it struck into many forks, and then it
fell, and rose again.

'Do you know what all that is, John?' asked Lorna,
smiling cleverly at the manner of my staring.

'How on earth should I know?  Papists burn Protestants
in the flesh; and Protestants burn Papists in effigy,
as we mock them.  Lorna, are they going to burn any
one to-night?'

'No, you dear.  I must rid you of these things.  I see
that you are bigoted.  The Doones are firing Dunkery
beacon, to celebrate their new captain.'

'But how could they bring it here through the snow?  If
they have sledges, I can do nothing.'

'They brought it before the snow began.  The moment
poor grandfather was gone, even before his funeral, the
young men, having none to check them, began at once
upon it.  They had always borne a grudge against it;
not that it ever did them harm; but because it seemed
so insolent.  "Can't a gentleman go home, without a
smoke behind him?"  I have often heard them saying.  And
though they have done it no serious harm, since they
threw the firemen on the fire, many, many years ago,
they have often promised to bring it here for their
candle; and now they have done it.  Ah, now look!  The
tar is kindled.'

Though Lorna took it so in joke, I looked upon it very
gravely, knowing that this heavy outrage to the
feelings of the neighbourhood would cause more stir
than a hundred sheep stolen, or a score of houses
sacked.  Not of course that the beacon was of the
smallest use to any one, neither stopped anybody from
stealing, nay, rather it was like the parish knell,
which begins when all is over, and depresses all the
survivors; yet I knew that we valued it, and were
proud, and spoke of it as a mighty institution; and
even more than that, our vestry had voted, within the
last two years, seven shillings and six-pence to pay
for it, in proportion with other parishes.  And one of
the men who attended to it, or at least who was paid
for doing so, was our Jem Slocombe's grandfather.

However, in spite of all my regrets, the fire went up
very merrily, blazing red and white and yellow, as it
leaped on different things.  And the light danced on
the snow-drifts with a misty lilac hue.  I was
astonished at its burning in such mighty depths of
snow; but Gwenny said that the wicked men had been
three days hard at work, clearing, as it were, a
cock-pit, for their fire to have its way.  And now they
had a mighty pile, which must have covered five
land-yards square, heaped up to a goodly height, and
eager to take fire.

In this I saw great obstacle to what I wished to
manage.  For when this pyramid should be kindled
thoroughly, and pouring light and blazes round, would
not all the valley be like a white room full of
candles?  Thinking thus, I was half inclined to abide
my time for another night: and then my second thoughts
convinced me that I would be a fool in this.  For lo,
what an opportunity! All the Doones would be drunk, of
course, in about three hours' time, and getting more
and more in drink as the night went on.  As for the
fire, it must sink in about three hours or more, and
only cast uncertain shadows friendly to my purpose. 
And then the outlaws must cower round it, as the cold
increased on them, helping the weight of the liquor;
and in their jollity any noise would be cheered as a
false alarm.  Most of all, and which decided once for
all my action,--when these wild and reckless villains
should be hot with ardent spirits, what was door, or
wall, to stand betwixt them and my Lorna?

This thought quickened me so much that I touched my
darling reverently, and told her in a few short words
how I hoped to manage it.

'Sweetest, in two hours' time, I shall be again with
you.  Keep the bar up, and have Gwenny ready to answer
any one.  You are safe while they are dining, dear, and
drinking healths, and all that stuff; and before they
have done with that, I shall be again with you.  Have
everything you care to take in a very little compass,
and Gwenny must have no baggage.  I shall knock loud,
and then wait a little; and then knock twice, very
softly.'

With this I folded her in my arms; and she looked
frightened at me; not having perceived her danger; and
then I told Gwenny over again what I had told her
mistress: but she only nodded her head and said, 'Young
man, go and teach thy grandmother.'



CHAPTER XLIV

BROUGHT HOME AT LAST

To my great delight I found that the weather, not
often friendly to lovers, and lately seeming so
hostile, had in the most important matter done me a
signal service.  For when I had promised to take my
love from the power of those wretches, the only way of
escape apparent lay through the main Doone-gate.  For
though I might climb the cliffs myself, especially with
the snow to aid me, I durst not try to fetch Lorna up
them, even if she were not half-starved, as well as
partly frozen; and as for Gwenny's door, as we called
it (that is to say, the little entrance from the wooded
hollow), it was snowed up long ago to the level of the
hills around.  Therefore I was at my wit's end how to
get them out; the passage by the Doone-gate being long,
and dark, and difficult, and leading to such a weary
circuit among the snowy moors and hills.

But now, being homeward-bound by the shortest possible
track, I slipped along between the bonfire and the
boundary cliffs, where I found a caved way of snow
behind a sort of avalanche: so that if the Doones had
been keeping watch (which they were not doing, but
revelling), they could scarcely have discovered me. 
And when I came to my old ascent, where I had often
scaled the cliff and made across the mountains, it
struck me that I would just have a look at my first and
painful entrance, to wit, the water-slide.  I never for
a moment imagined that this could help me now; for I
never had dared to descend it, even in the finest
weather; still I had a curiosity to know what my old
friend was like, with so much snow upon him.  But, to
my very great surprise, there was scarcely any snow
there at all, though plenty curling high overhead from
the cliff, like bolsters over it.  Probably the
sweeping of the north-east wind up the narrow chasm had
kept the showers from blocking it, although the water
had no power under the bitter grip of frost.  All my
water-slide was now less a slide than path of ice;
furrowed where the waters ran over fluted ridges;
seamed where wind had tossed and combed them, even
while congealing; and crossed with little steps
wherever the freezing torrent lingered.  And here and
there the ice was fibred with the trail of sludge-
weed, slanting from the side, and matted, so as to make
resting-place.

Lo it was easy track and channel, as if for the very
purpose made, down which I could guide my sledge with
Lorna sitting in it.  There were only two things to be
feared; one lest the rolls of snow above should fall in
and bury us; the other lest we should rush too fast,
and so be carried headlong into the black whirlpool at
the bottom, the middle of which was still unfrozen, and
looking more horrible by the contrast.  Against this
danger I made provision, by fixing a stout bar across;
but of the other we must take our chance, and trust
ourselves to Providence.

I hastened home at my utmost speed, and told my mother
for God's sake to keep the house up till my return, and
to have plenty of fire blazing, and plenty of water
boiling, and food enough hot for a dozen people, and
the best bed aired with the warming-pan.  Dear mother
smiled softly at my excitement, though her own was not
much less, I am sure, and enhanced by sore anxiety. 
Then I gave very strict directions to Annie, and
praised her a little, and kissed her; and I even
endeavoured to flatter Eliza, lest she should be
disagreeable.

After this I took some brandy, both within and about
me; the former, because I had sharp work to do; and the
latter in fear of whatever might happen, in such great
cold, to my comrades.  Also I carried some other
provisions, grieving much at their coldness: and then I
went to the upper linhay, and took our new light pony-
sledd, which had been made almost as much for pleasure
as for business; though God only knows how our girls
could have found any pleasure in bumping along so.  On
the snow, however, it ran as sweetly as if it had been
made for it; yet I durst not take the pony with it; in
the first place, because his hoofs would break through
the ever-shifting surface of the light and piling snow;
and secondly, because these ponies, coming from the
forest, have a dreadful trick of neighing, and most of
all in frosty weather.

Therefore I girded my own body with a dozen turns of
hay-rope, twisting both the ends in under at the bottom
of my breast, and winding the hay on the skew a little,
that the hempen thong might not slip between, and so
cut me in the drawing.  I put a good piece of spare
rope in the sledd, and the cross-seat with the back to
it, which was stuffed with our own wool, as well as two
or three fur coats; and then, just as I was starting,
out came Annie, in spite of the cold, panting for fear
of missing me, and with nothing on her head, but a
lanthorn in one hand.

'Oh, John, here is the most wonderful thing!  Mother has
never shown it before; and I can't think how she could
make up her mind.  She had gotten it in a great well
of a cupboard, with camphor, and spirits, and lavender. 
Lizzie says it is a most magnificent sealskin cloak,
worth fifty pounds, or a farthing.'

'At any rate it is soft and warm,' said I, very calmly
flinging it into the bottom of the sledd.  'Tell mother
I will put it over Lorna's feet.'

'Lorna's feet! Oh, you great fool,' cried Annie, for
the first time reviling me; 'over her shoulders; and be
proud, you very stupid John.'

'It is not good enough for her feet,' I answered, with
strong emphasis; 'but don't tell mother I said so,
Annie.  Only thank her very kindly.'

With that I drew my traces hard, and set my ashen staff
into the snow, and struck out with my best foot
foremost (the best one at snow-shoes, I mean), and the
sledd came after me as lightly as a dog might follow;
and Annie, with the lanthorn, seemed to be left behind
and waiting like a pretty lamp-post.

The full moon rose as bright behind me as a paten of
pure silver, casting on the snow long shadows of the
few things left above, burdened rock, and shaggy
foreland, and the labouring trees.  In the great white
desolation, distance was a mocking vision; hills looked
nigh, and valleys far; when hills were far and valleys
nigh.  And the misty breath of frost, piercing through
the ribs of rock, striking to the pith of trees,
creeping to the heart of man, lay along the hollow
places, like a serpent sloughing.  Even as my own gaunt
shadow (travestied as if I were the moonlight's daddy-
longlegs), went before me down the slope; even I, the
shadow's master, who had tried in vain to cough, when
coughing brought good liquorice, felt a pressure on my
bosom, and a husking in my throat.

However, I went on quietly, and at a very tidy speed;
being only too thankful that the snow had ceased, and
no wind as yet arisen.  And from the ring of low white
vapour girding all the verge of sky, and from the rosy
blue above, and the shafts of starlight set upon a
quivering bow, as well as from the moon itself and the
light behind it, having learned the signs of frost from
its bitter twinges, I knew that we should have a night
as keen as ever England felt.  Nevertheless, I had work
enough to keep me warm if I managed it.  The question
was, could I contrive to save my darling from it?

Daring not to risk my sledd by any fall from the
valley-cliffs, I dragged it very carefully up the steep
incline of ice, through the narrow chasm, and so to the
very brink and verge where first I had seen my Lorna,
in the fishing days of boyhood.  As I then had a
trident fork, for sticking of the loaches, so I now had
a strong ash stake, to lay across from rock to rock,
and break the speed of descending.  With this I moored
the sledd quite safe, at the very lip of the chasm,
where all was now substantial ice, green and black in
the moonlight; and then I set off up the valley,
skirting along one side of it.

The stack-fire still was burning strongly, but with
more of heat than blaze; and many of the younger Doones
were playing on the verge of it, the children making
rings of fire, and their mothers watching them.  All
the grave and reverend warriors having heard of
rheumatism, were inside of log and stone, in the two
lowest houses, with enough of candles burning to make
our list of sheep come short.

All these I passed, without the smallest risk or
difficulty, walking up the channel of drift which I
spoke of once before.  And then I crossed, with more of
care, and to the door of Lorna's house, and made the
sign, and listened, after taking my snow-shoes off.

But no one came, as I expected, neither could I espy a
light.  And I seemed to hear a faint low sound, like
the moaning of the snow-wind.  Then I knocked again
more loudly, with a knocking at my heart: and receiving
no answer, set all my power at once against the door. 
In a moment it flew inwards, and I glided along the
passage with my feet still slippery.  There in Lorna's
room I saw, by the moonlight flowing in, a sight which
drove me beyond sense.

Lorna was behind a chair, crouching in the corner, with
her hands up, and a crucifix, or something that looked
like it.  In the middle of the room lay Gwenny Carfax,
stupid, yet with one hand clutching the ankle of a
struggling man.  Another man stood above my Lorna,
trying to draw the chair away.  In a moment I had him
round the waist, and he went out of the window with a
mighty crash of glass; luckily for him that window had
no bars like some of them.  Then I took the other man
by the neck; and he could not plead for mercy.  I bore
him out of the house as lightly as I would bear a baby,
yet squeezing his throat a little more than I fain
would do to an infant.  By the bright moonlight I saw
that I carried Marwood de Whichehalse.  For his
father's sake I spared him, and because he had been my
schoolfellow; but with every muscle of my body strung
with indignation, I cast him, like a skittle, from me
into a snowdrift, which closed over him.  Then I looked
for the other fellow, tossed through Lorna's window,
and found him lying stunned and bleeding, neither able
to groan yet.  Charleworth Doone, if his gushing blood
did not much mislead me.

It was no time to linger now; I fastened my shoes in a
moment, and caught up my own darling with her head upon
my shoulder, where she whispered faintly; and telling
Gwenny to follow me, or else I would come back for her,
if she could not walk the snow, I ran the whole
distance to my sledd, caring not who might follow me. 
Then by the time I had set up Lorna, beautiful and
smiling, with the seal-skin cloak all over her, sturdy
Gwenny came along, having trudged in the track of my
snow-shoes, although with two bags on her back.  I set
her in beside her mistress, to support her, and keep
warm; and then with one look back at the glen, which
had been so long my home of heart, I hung behind the
sledd, and launched it down the steep and dangerous
way.

Though the cliffs were black above us, and the road
unseen in front, and a great white grave of snow might
at a single word come down, Lorna was as calm and happy
as an infant in its bed.  She knew that I was with her;
and when I told her not to speak, she touched my hand
in silence.  Gwenny was in a much greater fright,
having never seen such a thing before, neither knowing
what it is to yield to pure love's confidence.  I could
hardly keep her quiet, without making a noise myself. 
With my staff from rock to rock, and my weight thrown
backward, I broke the sledd's too rapid way, and
brought my grown love safely out, by the selfsame road
which first had led me to her girlish fancy, and my
boyish slavery.

Unpursued, yet looking back as if some one must be
after us, we skirted round the black whirling pool, and
gained the meadows beyond it.  Here there was hard
collar work, the track being all uphill and rough; and
Gwenny wanted to jump out, to lighten the sledd and to
push behind.  But I would not hear of it; because it
was now so deadly cold, and I feared that Lorna might
get frozen, without having Gwenny to keep her warm. 
And after all, it was the sweetest labour I had ever
known in all my life, to be sure that I was pulling
Lorna, and pulling her to our own farmhouse.

Gwenny's nose was touched with frost, before we had
gone much farther, because she would not keep it quiet
and snug beneath the sealskin.  And here I had to stop
in the moonlight (which was very dangerous) and rub it
with a clove of snow, as Eliza had taught me; and
Gwenny scolding all the time, as if myself had frozen
it.  Lorna was now so far oppressed with all the
troubles of the evening, and the joy that followed
them, as well as by the piercing cold and difficulty of
breathing, that she lay quite motionless, like fairest
wax in the moonlight--when we stole a glance at her,
beneath the dark folds of the cloak; and I thought that
she was falling into the heavy snow-sleep, whence there
is no awaking.

Therefore, I drew my traces tight, and set my whole
strength to the business; and we slipped along at a
merry pace, although with many joltings, which must
have sent my darling out into the cold snowdrifts but
for the short strong arm of Gwenny.  And so in about an
hour's time, in spite of many hindrances, we came home
to the old courtyard, and all the dogs saluted us.  My
heart was quivering, and my cheeks as hot as the
Doones' bonfire, with wondering both what Lorna would
think of our farm-yard, and what my mother would think
of her.  Upon the former subject my anxiety was wasted,
for Lorna neither saw a thing, nor even opened her
heavy eyes.  And as to what mother would think of her,
she was certain not to think at all, until she had
cried over her.

And so indeed it came to pass.  Even at this length of
time, I can hardly tell it, although so bright before
my mind, because it moves my heart so.  The sledd was
at the open door, with only Lorna in it; for Gwenny
Carfax had jumped out, and hung back in the clearing,
giving any reason rather than the only true one--that
she would not be intruding.  At the door were all our
people; first, of course, Betty Muxworthy, teaching me
how to draw the sledd, as if she had been born in it,
and flourishing with a great broom, wherever a speck of
snow lay.  Then dear Annie, and old Molly (who was very
quiet, and counted almost for nobody), and behind them,
mother, looking as if she wanted to come first, but
doubted how the manners lay.  In the distance Lizzie
stood, fearful of encouraging, but unable to keep out
of it.

Betty was going to poke her broom right in under the
sealskin cloak, where Lorna lay unconscious, and where
her precious breath hung frozen, like a silver cobweb;
but I caught up Betty's broom, and flung it clean away
over the corn chamber; and then I put the others by,
and fetched my mother forward.

'You shall see her first,' I said: 'is she not your
daughter?  Hold the light there, Annie.'

Dear mother's hands were quick and trembling, as she
opened the shining folds; and there she saw my Lorna
sleeping, with her black hair all dishevelled, and she
bent and kissed her forehead, and only said, 'God bless
her, John!'  And then she was taken with violent
weeping, and I was forced to hold her.

'Us may tich of her now, I rackon,' said Betty in her
most jealous way; 'Annie, tak her by the head, and I'll
tak her by the toesen.  No taime to stand here like
girt gawks.  Don'ee tak on zo, missus.  Ther be vainer
vish in the zea--Lor, but, her be a booty!'

With this, they carried her into the house, Betty
chattering all the while, and going on now about
Lorna's hands, and the others crowding round her, so
that I thought I was not wanted among so many women,
and should only get the worst of it, and perhaps do
harm to my darling.  Therefore I went and brought
Gwenny in, and gave her a potful of bacon and peas, and
an iron spoon to eat it with, which she did right
heartily.

Then I asked her how she could have been such a fool as
to let those two vile fellows enter the house where
Lorna was; and she accounted for it so naturally, that
I could only blame myself.  For my agreement had been
to give one loud knock (if you happen to remember) and
after that two little knocks.  Well these two drunken
rogues had come; and one, being very drunk indeed, had
given a great thump; and then nothing more to do with
it; and the other, being three-quarters drunk, had
followed his leader (as one might say) but feebly, and
making two of it.  Whereupon up jumped Lorna, and
declared that her John was there.

All this Gwenny told me shortly, between the whiles of
eating, and even while she licked the spoon; and then
there came a message for me that my love was sensible,
and was seeking all around for me.  Then I told Gwenny
to hold her tongue (whatever she did among us), and not
to trust to women's words; and she told me they all
were liars, as she had found out long ago; and the only
thing to believe in was an honest man, when found. 
Thereupon I could have kissed her as a sort of tribute,
liking to be appreciated; yet the peas upon her lips
made me think about it; and thought is fatal to action. 
So I went to see my dear.

That sight I shall not forget; till my dying head falls
back, and my breast can lift no more.  I know not
whether I were then more blessed, or harrowed by it. 
For in the settle was my Lorna, propped with pillows
round her, and her clear hands spread sometimes to the
blazing fireplace.  In her eyes no knowledge was of
anything around her, neither in her neck the sense of
leaning towards anything.  Only both her lovely hands
were entreating something, to spare her, or to love
her; and the lines of supplication quivered in her sad
white face.

'All go away, except my mother,' I said very quietly,
but so that I would be obeyed; and everybody knew it. 
Then mother came to me alone; and she said, 'The frost
is in her brain; I have heard of this before, John.'
'Mother, I will have it out,' was all that I could
answer her; 'leave her to me altogether; only you sit
there and watch.'  For I felt that Lorna knew me, and no
other soul but me; and that if not interfered with, she
would soon come home to me.  Therefore I sat gently by
her, leaving nature, as it were, to her own good time
and will.  And presently the glance that watched me, as
at distance and in doubt, began to flutter and to
brighten, and to deepen into kindness, then to beam
with trust and love, and then with gathering tears to
falter, and in shame to turn away.  But the small
entreating hands found their way, as if by instinct, to
my great projecting palms; and trembled there, and
rested there.

For a little while we lingered thus, neither wishing to
move away, neither caring to look beyond the presence
of the other; both alike so full of hope, and comfort,
and true happiness; if only the world would let us be. 
And then a little sob disturbed us, and mother tried to
make believe that she was only coughing.  But Lorna,
guessing who she was, jumped up so very rashly that she
almost set her frock on fire from the great ash log;
and away she ran to the old oak chair, where mother was
by the clock-case pretending to be knitting, and she
took the work from mother's hands, and laid them both
upon her head, kneeling humbly, and looking up.

'God bless you, my fair mistress!' said mother, bending
nearer, and then as Lorna's gaze prevailed, 'God bless
you, my sweet child!'

And so she went to mother's heart by the very nearest
road, even as she had come to mine; I mean the road of
pity, smoothed by grace, and youth, and gentleness.



CHAPTER XLV

A CHANGE LONG NEEDED

Jeremy Stickles was gone south, ere ever the frost set
in, for the purpose of mustering forces to attack the
Doone Glen.  But, of course, this weather had put a
stop to every kind of movement; for even if men could
have borne the cold, they could scarcely be brought to
face the perils of the snow-drifts.  And to tell the
truth I cared not how long this weather lasted, so long
as we had enough to eat, and could keep ourselves from
freezing.  Not only that I did not want Master Stickles
back again, to make more disturbances; but also that
the Doones could not come prowling after Lorna while
the snow lay piled between us, with the surface soft
and dry.  Of course they would very soon discover where
their lawful queen was, although the track of sledd and
snow-shoes had been quite obliterated by another
shower, before the revellers could have grown half as
drunk as they intended.  But Marwood de Whichehalse,
who had been snowed up among them (as Gwenny said),
after helping to strip the beacon, that young Squire
was almost certain to have recognised me, and to have
told the vile Carver.  And it gave me no little
pleasure to think how mad that Carver must be with me,
for robbing him of the lovely bride whom he was
starving into matrimony.  However, I was not pleased at
all with the prospect of the consequences; but set all
hands on to thresh the corn, ere the Doones could come
and burn the ricks.  For I knew that they could not
come yet, inasmuch as even a forest pony could not
traverse the country, much less the heavy horses needed
to carry such men as they were.  And hundreds of the
forest ponies died in this hard weather, some being
buried in the snow, and more of them starved for want
of grass.

Going through this state of things, and laying down the
law about it (subject to correction), I very soon
persuaded Lorna that for the present she was safe, and
(which made her still more happy) that she was not only
welcome, but as gladdening to our eyes as the flowers
of May.  Of course, so far as regarded myself, this was
not a hundredth part of the real truth; and even as
regarded others, I might have said it ten times over. 
For Lorna had so won them all, by her kind and gentle
ways, and her mode of hearkening to everybody's
trouble, and replying without words, as well as by her
beauty, and simple grace of all things, that I could
almost wish sometimes the rest would leave her more to
me.  But mother could not do enough; and Annie almost
worshipped her; and even Lizzie could not keep her
bitterness towards her; especially when she found that
Lorna knew as much of books as need be.

As for John Fry, and Betty, and Molly, they were a
perfect plague when Lorna came into the kitchen.  For
betwixt their curiosity to see a live Doone in the
flesh (when certain not to eat them), and their high
respect for birth (with or without honesty), and their
intense desire to know all about Master John's
sweetheart (dropped, as they said, from the
snow-clouds), and most of all their admiration of a
beauty such as never even their angels could have
seen--betwixt and between all this, I say, there was no
getting the dinner cooked, with Lorna in the kitchen.

And the worst of it was that Lorna took the strangest
of all strange fancies for this very kitchen; and it
was hard to keep her out of it.  Not that she had any
special bent for cooking, as our Annie had; rather
indeed the contrary, for she liked to have her food
ready cooked; but that she loved the look of the place,
and the cheerful fire burning, and the racks of bacon
to be seen, and the richness, and the homeliness, and
the pleasant smell of everything.  And who knows but
what she may have liked (as the very best of maidens
do) to be admired, now and then, between the times of
business?

Therefore if you wanted Lorna (as I was always sure to
do, God knows how many times a day), the very surest
place to find her was our own old kitchen.  Not
gossiping, I mean, nor loitering, neither seeking into
things, but seeming to be quite at home, as if she had
known it from a child, and seeming (to my eyes at
least) to light it up, and make life and colour out of
all the dullness; as I have seen the breaking sun do
among brown shocks of wheat.

But any one who wished to learn whether girls can
change or not, as the things around them change (while
yet their hearts are steadfast, and for ever anchored),
he should just have seen my Lorna, after a fortnight of
our life, and freedom from anxiety.  It is possible
that my company--although I am accounted stupid by folk
who do not know my way--may have had something to do
with it; but upon this I will not say much, lest I lose
my character.  And indeed, as regards company, I had
all the threshing to see to, and more than half to do
myself (though any one would have thought that even
John Fry must work hard this weather), else I could not
hope at all to get our corn into such compass that a
good gun might protect it.

But to come back to Lorna again (which I always longed
to do, and must long for ever), all the change between
night and day, all the shifts of cloud and sun, all the
difference between black death and brightsome
liveliness, scarcely may suggest or equal Lorna's
transformation.  Quick she had always been and 'peart'
(as we say on Exmoor) and gifted with a leap of thought
too swift for me to follow; and hence you may find
fault with much, when I report her sayings.  But
through the whole had always run, as a black string
goes through pearls, something dark and touched with
shadow, coloured as with an early end.

But, now, behold! there was none of this!  There was no
getting her, for a moment, even to be serious.  All her
bright young wit was flashing, like a newly-awakened
flame, and all her high young spirits leaped, as if
dancing to its fire.  And yet she never spoke a word
which gave more pain than pleasure.

And even in her outward look there was much of
difference.  Whether it was our warmth, and freedom,
and our harmless love of God, and trust in one another;
or whether it were our air, and water, and the pea-fed
bacon; anyhow my Lorna grew richer and more lovely,
more perfect and more firm of figure, and more light
and buoyant, with every passing day that laid its
tribute on her cheeks and lips.  I was allowed one kiss
a day; only one for manners' sake, because she was our
visitor; and I might have it before breakfast, or else
when I came to say 'good-night!' according as I
decided.  And I decided every night, not to take it in
the morning, but put it off till the evening time, and
have the pleasure to think about, through all the day
of working.  But when my darling came up to me in the
early daylight, fresher than the daystar, and with no
one looking; only her bright eyes smiling, and sweet
lips quite ready, was it likely I could wait, and think
all day about it?  For she wore a frock of Annie's,
nicely made to fit her, taken in at the waist and
curved--I never could explain it, not being a
mantua-maker; but I know how her figure looked in it,
and how it came towards me.

But this is neither here nor there; and I must on with
my story.  Those days are very sacred to me, and if I
speak lightly of them, trust me, 'tis with lip alone;
while from heart reproach peeps sadly at the flippant
tricks of mind.

Although it was the longest winter ever known in our
parts (never having ceased to freeze for a single
night, and scarcely for a single day, from the middle
of December till the second week in March), to me it
was the very shortest and the most delicious; and
verily I do believe it was the same to Lorna.  But when
the Ides of March were come (of which I do remember
something dim from school, and something clear from my
favourite writer) lo, there were increasing signals of
a change of weather.

One leading feature of that long cold, and a thing
remarked by every one (however unobservant) had been
the hollow moaning sound ever present in the air,
morning, noon, and night-time, and especially at night,
whether any wind were stirring, or whether it were a
perfect calm.  Our people said that it was a witch
cursing all the country from the caverns by the sea,
and that frost and snow would last until we could catch
and drown her.  But the land, being thoroughly blocked
with snow, and the inshore parts of the sea with ice
(floating in great fields along), Mother Melldrum (if
she it were) had the caverns all to herself, for there
was no getting at her.  And speaking of the sea reminds
me of a thing reported to us, and on good authority;
though people might be found hereafter who would not
believe it, unless I told them that from what I myself
beheld of the channel I place perfect faith in it: and
this is, that a dozen sailors at the beginning of March
crossed the ice, with the aid of poles from Clevedon to
Penarth, or where the Holm rocks barred the flotage.

But now, about the tenth of March, that miserable
moaning noise, which had both foregone and accompanied
the rigour, died away from out the air; and we, being
now so used to it, thought at first that we must be
deaf.  And then the fog, which had hung about (even in
full sunshine) vanished, and the shrouded hills shone
forth with brightness manifold.  And now the sky at
length began to come to its true manner, which we had
not seen for months, a mixture (if I so may speak) of
various expressions.  Whereas till now from
Allhallows-tide, six weeks ere the great frost set in,
the heavens had worn one heavy mask of ashen gray when
clouded, or else one amethystine tinge with a hazy rim,
when cloudless.  So it was pleasant to behold, after
that monotony, the fickle sky which suits our England,
though abused by foreign folk.

And soon the dappled softening sky gave some earnest of
its mood; for a brisk south wind arose, and the blessed
rain came driving, cold indeed, yet most refreshing to
the skin, all parched with snow, and the eyeballs so
long dazzled.  Neither was the heart more sluggish in
its thankfulness to God.  People had begun to think,
and somebody had prophesied, that we should have no
spring this year, no seed-time, and no harvest; for
that the Lord had sent a judgment on this country of
England, and the nation dwelling in it, because of the
wickedness of the Court, and the encouragement shown to
Papists.  And this was proved, they said, by what had
happened in the town of London; where, for more than a
fortnight, such a chill of darkness lay that no man
might behold his neighbour, even across the narrowest
street; and where the ice upon the Thames was more than
four feet thick, and crushing London Bridge in twain. 
Now to these prophets I paid no heed, believing not
that Providence would freeze us for other people's
sins; neither seeing how England could for many
generations have enjoyed good sunshine, if Popery meant
frost and fogs.  Besides, why could not Providence
settle the business once for all by freezing the Pope
himself; even though (according to our view) he were
destined to extremes of heat, together with all who
followed him?

Not to meddle with that subject, being beyond my
judgment, let me tell the things I saw, and then you
must believe me.  The wind, of course, I could not see,
not having the powers of a pig; but I could see the
laden branches of the great oaks moving, hoping to
shake off the load packed and saddled on them.  And
hereby I may note a thing which some one may explain
perhaps in the after ages, when people come to look at
things.  This is that in desperate cold all the trees
were pulled awry, even though the wind had scattered
the snow burden from them.  Of some sorts the branches
bended downwards, like an archway; of other sorts the
boughs curved upwards, like a red deer's frontlet. 
This I know no reason* for; but am ready to swear that
I saw it.

* The reason is very simple, as all nature's reasons
are; though the subject has not yet been investigated
thoroughly.  In some trees the vascular tissue is more
open on the upper side, in others on the under side, of
the spreading branches; according to the form of
growth, and habit of the sap.  Hence in very severe
cold, when the vessels (comparatively empty) are
constricted, some have more power of contraction on the
upper side, and some upon the under.


Now when the first of the rain began, and the old
familiar softness spread upon the window glass, and ran
a little way in channels (though from the coldness of
the glass it froze before reaching the bottom), knowing
at once the difference from the short sharp thud of
snow, we all ran out, and filled our eyes and filled
our hearts with gazing.  True, the snow was piled up
now all in mountains round us; true, the air was still
so cold that our breath froze on the doorway, and the
rain was turned to ice wherever it struck anything;
nevertheless that it was rain there was no denying, as
we watched it across black doorways, and could see no
sign of white.  Mother, who had made up her mind that
the farm was not worth having after all those
prophesies, and that all of us must starve, and holes
be scratched in the snow for us, and no use to put up a
tombstone (for our church had been shut up long ago)
mother fell upon my breast, and sobbed that I was the
cleverest fellow ever born of woman.  And this because
I had condemned the prophets for a pack of fools; not
seeing how business could go on, if people stopped to
hearken to them.

Then Lorna came and glorified me, for I had predicted a
change of weather, more to keep their spirits up, than
with real hope of it; and then came Annie blushing
shyly, as I looked at her, and said that Winnie would
soon have four legs now.  This referred to some stupid
joke made by John Fry or somebody, that in this weather
a man had no legs, and a horse had only two.

But as the rain came down upon us from the southwest
wind, and we could not have enough of it, even putting
our tongues to catch it, as little children might do,
and beginning to talk of primroses; the very noblest
thing of all was to hear and see the gratitude of the
poor beasts yet remaining and the few surviving birds. 
From the cowhouse lowing came, more than of fifty
milking times; moo and moo, and a turn-up noise at the
end of every bellow, as if from the very heart of kine. 
Then the horses in the stables, packed as closely as
they could stick, at the risk of kicking, to keep the
warmth in one another, and their spirits up by
discoursing; these began with one accord to lift up
their voices, snorting, snaffling, whinnying, and
neighing, and trotting to the door to know when they
should have work again.  To whom, as if in answer, came
the feeble bleating of the sheep, what few, by dint of
greatest care, had kept their fleeces on their backs,
and their four legs under them.

Neither was it a trifling thing, let whoso will say the
contrary, to behold the ducks and geese marching forth
in handsome order from their beds of fern and straw. 
What a goodly noise they kept, what a flapping of their
wings, and a jerking of their tails, as they stood
right up and tried with a whistling in their throats to
imitate a cockscrow!  And then how daintily they took
the wet upon their dusty plumes, and ducked their
shoulders to it, and began to dress themselves, and
laid their grooved bills on the snow, and dabbled for
more ooziness!

Lorna had never seen, I dare say, anything like this
before, and it was all that we could do to keep her
from rushing forth with only little lambswool shoes on,
and kissing every one of them.  'Oh, the dear things,
oh, the dear things!' she kept saying continually, 'how
wonderfully clever they are!  Only look at that one with
his foot up, giving orders to the others, John!'

'And I must give orders to you, my darling,' I
answered, gazing on her face, so brilliant with
excitement; 'and that is, that you come in at once,
with that worrisome cough of yours; and sit by the
fire, and warm yourself.'

'Oh, no, John!  Not for a minute, if you please, good
John.  I want to see the snow go away, and the green
meadows coming forth.  And here comes our favourite
robin, who has lived in the oven so long, and sang us a
song every morning.  I must see what he thinks of it!'

'You will do nothing of the sort,' I answered very
shortly, being only too glad of a cause for having her
in my arms again.  So I caught her up, and carried her
in; and she looked and smiled so sweetly at me instead
of pouting (as I had feared) that I found myself unable
to go very fast along the passage.  And I set her there
in her favourite place, by the sweet-scented wood-fire;
and she paid me porterage without my even asking her;
and for all the beauty of the rain, I was fain to stay
with her; until our Annie came to say that my advice
was wanted.

Now my advice was never much, as everybody knew quite
well; but that was the way they always put it, when
they wanted me to work for them.  And in truth it was
time for me to work; not for others, but myself, and
(as I always thought) for Lorna.  For the rain was now
coming down in earnest; and the top of the snow being
frozen at last, and glazed as hard as a china cup, by
means of the sun and frost afterwards, all the rain ran
right away from the steep inclines, and all the outlets
being blocked with ice set up like tables, it
threatened to flood everything.  Already it was ponding
up, like a tide advancing at the threshold of the door
from which we had watched the duck-birds; both because
great piles of snow trended in that direction, in spite
of all our scraping, and also that the gulley hole,
where the water of the shoot went out (I mean when it
was water) now was choked with lumps of ice, as big as
a man's body.  For the 'shoot,' as we called our little
runnel of everlasting water, never known to freeze
before, and always ready for any man either to wash his
hands, or drink, where it spouted from a trough of
bark, set among white flint-stones; this at last had
given in, and its music ceased to lull us, as we lay in
bed.

It was not long before I managed to drain off this
threatening flood, by opening the old sluice-hole; but
I had much harder work to keep the stables, and the
cow-house, and the other sheds, from flooding.  For we
have a sapient practice (and I never saw the contrary
round about our parts, I mean), of keeping all rooms
underground, so that you step down to them.  We say
that thus we keep them warmer, both for cattle and for
men, in the time of winter, and cooler in the
summer-time.  This I will not contradict, though having
my own opinion; but it seems to me to be a relic of the
time when people in the western countries lived in
caves beneath the ground, and blocked the mouths with
neat-skins.

Let that question still abide, for men who study
ancient times to inform me, if they will; all I know
is, that now we had no blessings for the system.  If
after all their cold and starving, our weak cattle now
should have to stand up to their knees in water, it
would be certain death to them; and we had lost enough
already to make us poor for a long time; not to speak
of our kind love for them.  And I do assure you, I
loved some horses, and even some cows for that matter,
as if they had been my blood-relations; knowing as I did
their virtues.  And some of these were lost to us; and
I could not bear to think of them.  Therefore I worked
hard all night to try and save the rest of them.



CHAPTER XLVI

SQUIRE FAGGUS MAKES SOME LUCKY HITS

Through that season of bitter frost the red deer of
the forest, having nothing to feed upon, and no shelter
to rest in, had grown accustomed to our ricks of corn,
and hay, and clover.  There we might see a hundred of
them almost any morning, come for warmth, and food, and
comfort, and scarce willing to move away.  And many of
them were so tame, that they quietly presented
themselves at our back door, and stood there with their
coats quite stiff, and their flanks drawn in and
panting, and icicles sometimes on their chins, and
their great eyes fastened wistfully upon any merciful
person; craving for a bit of food, and a drink of
water; I suppose that they had not sense enough to chew
the snow and melt it; at any rate, all the springs
being frozen, and rivers hidden out of sight, these
poor things suffered even more from thirst than they
did from hunger.

But now there was no fear of thirst, and more chance
indeed of drowning; for a heavy gale of wind arose,
with violent rain from the south-west, which lasted
almost without a pause for three nights and two days. 
At first the rain made no impression on the bulk of
snow, but ran from every sloping surface and froze on
every flat one, through the coldness of the earth; and
so it became impossible for any man to keep his legs
without the help of a shodden staff.  After a good
while, however, the air growing very much warmer, this
state of things began to change, and a worse one to
succeed it; for now the snow came thundering down from
roof, and rock, and ivied tree, and floods began to
roar and foam in every trough and gulley.  The drifts
that had been so white and fair, looked yellow, and
smirched, and muddy, and lost their graceful curves,
and moulded lines, and airiness.  But the strangest
sight of all to me was in the bed of streams, and
brooks, and especially of the Lynn river.  It was worth
going miles to behold such a thing, for a man might
never have the chance again.

Vast drifts of snow had filled the valley, and piled
above the river-course, fifty feet high in many places,
and in some as much as a hundred.  These had frozen
over the top, and glanced the rain away from them, and
being sustained by rock and tree, spanned the water
mightily.  But meanwhile the waxing flood, swollen from
every moorland hollow and from every spouting crag, had
dashed away all icy fetters, and was rolling
gloriously.  Under white fantastic arches, and long
tunnels freaked and fretted, and between pellucid
pillars jagged with nodding architraves, the red
impetuous torrent rushed, and the brown foam whirled
and flashed.  I was half inclined to jump in and swim
through such glorious scenery; for nothing used to
please me more than swimming in a flooded river.  But I
thought of the rocks, and I thought of the cramp, and
more than all, of Lorna; and so, between one thing and
another, I let it roll on without me.

It was now high time to work very hard; both to make up
for the farm-work lost during the months of frost and
snow, and also to be ready for a great and vicious
attack from the Doones, who would burn us in our beds
at the earliest opportunity.  Of farm-work there was
little yet for even the most zealous man to begin to
lay his hand to; because when the ground appeared
through the crust of bubbled snow (as at last it did,
though not as my Lorna had expected, at the first few
drops of rain) it was all so soaked and sodden, and as
we call it, 'mucksy,' that to meddle with it in any way
was to do more harm than good.  Nevertheless, there was
yard work, and house work, and tendence of stock,
enough to save any man from idleness.

As for Lorna, she would come out.  There was no keeping
her in the house.  She had taken up some peculiar
notion that we were doing more for her than she had any
right to, and that she must earn her living by the hard
work of her hands.  It was quite in vain to tell her
that she was expected to do nothing, and far worse than
vain (for it made her cry sadly) if any one assured her
that she could do no good at all.  She even began upon
mother's garden before the snow was clean gone from it,
and sowed a beautiful row of peas, every one of which
the mice ate.

But though it was very pretty to watch her working for
her very life, as if the maintenance of the household
hung upon her labours, yet I was grieved for many
reasons, and so was mother also.  In the first place,
she was too fair and dainty for this rough, rude work;
and though it made her cheeks so bright, it surely must
be bad for her to get her little feet so wet.  
Moreover, we could not bear the idea that she should
labour for her keep; and again (which was the worst of
all things) mother's garden lay exposed to a dark
deceitful coppice, where a man might lurk and watch all
the fair gardener's doings.  It was true that none
could get at her thence, while the brook which ran
between poured so great a torrent.  Still the distance
was but little for a gun to carry, if any one could be
brutal enough to point a gun at Lorna.  I thought that
none could be found to do it; but mother, having more
experience, was not so certain of mankind.

Now in spite of the floods, and the sloughs being out,
and the state of the roads most perilous, Squire Faggus
came at last, riding his famous strawberry mare.  There
was a great ado between him and Annie, as you may well
suppose, after some four months of parting.  And so we
left them alone awhile, to coddle over their raptures. 
But when they were tired of that, or at least had time
enough to do so, mother and I went in to know what news
Tom had brought with him.  Though he did not seem to
want us yet, he made himself agreeable; and so we sent
Annie to cook the dinner while her sweetheart should
tell us everything.

Tom Faggus had very good news to tell, and he told it
with such force of expression as made us laugh very
heartily.  He had taken up his purchase from old Sir
Roger Bassett of a nice bit of land, to the south of
the moors, and in the parish of Molland.  When the
lawyers knew thoroughly who he was, and how he had made
his money, they behaved uncommonly well to him, and
showed great sympathy with his pursuits.  He put them
up to a thing or two; and they poked him in the ribs,
and laughed, and said that he was quite a boy; but of
the right sort, none the less.  And so they made old
Squire Bassett pay the bill for both sides; and all he
got for three hundred acres was a hundred and twenty
pounds; though Tom had paid five hundred.  But lawyers
know that this must be so, in spite of all their
endeavours; and the old gentleman, who now expected to
find a bill for him to pay, almost thought himself a
rogue, for getting anything out of them.

It is true that the land was poor and wild, and the
soil exceeding shallow; lying on the slope of rock, and
burned up in hot summers.  But with us, hot summers
are things known by tradition only (as this great
winter may be); we generally have more moisture,
especially in July, than we well know what to do with. 
I have known a fog for a fortnight at the summer
solstice, and farmers talking in church about it when
they ought to be praying.  But it always contrives to
come right in the end, as other visitations do, if we
take them as true visits, and receive them kindly.

Now this farm of Squire Faggus (as he truly now had a
right to be called) was of the very finest pasture,
when it got good store of rain.  And Tom, who had
ridden the Devonshire roads with many a reeking jacket,
knew right well that he might trust the climate for
that matter.  The herbage was of the very sweetest, and
the shortest, and the closest, having perhaps from ten
to eighteen inches of wholesome soil between it and the
solid rock.  Tom saw at once what it was fit for--the
breeding of fine cattle.

Being such a hand as he was at making the most of
everything, both his own and other people's (although
so free in scattering, when the humour lay upon him) he
had actually turned to his own advantage that
extraordinary weather which had so impoverished every
one around him.  For he taught his Winnie (who knew his
meaning as well as any child could, and obeyed not only
his word of mouth, but every glance be gave her) to go
forth in the snowy evenings when horses are seeking
everywhere (be they wild or tame) for fodder and for
shelter; and to whinny to the forest ponies, miles away
from home perhaps, and lead them all with rare
appetites and promise of abundance, to her master's
homestead.  He shod good Winnie in such a manner that
she could not sink in the snow; and he clad her over
the loins with a sheep-skin dyed to her own colour,
which the wild horses were never tired of coming up and
sniffing at; taking it for an especial gift, and proof
of inspiration.  And Winnie never came home at night
without at least a score of ponies trotting shyly after
her, tossing their heads and their tails in turn, and
making believe to be very wild, although hard pinched
by famine.  Of course Tom would get them all into his
pound in about five minutes, for he himself could neigh
in a manner which went to the heart of the wildest
horse.  And then he fed them well, and turned them into
his great cattle pen, to abide their time for breaking,
when the snow and frost should be over.

He had gotten more than three hundred now, in this
sagacious manner; and he said it was the finest sight
to see their mode of carrying on, how they would snort,
and stamp, and fume, and prick their ears, and rush
backwards, and lash themselves with their long rough
tails, and shake their jagged manes, and scream, and
fall upon one another, if a strange man came anigh
them.  But as for feeding time, Tom said it was better
than fifty plays to watch them, and the tricks they
were up to, to cheat their feeders, and one another.  I
asked him how on earth he had managed to get fodder, in
such impassable weather, for such a herd of horses; but
he said that they lived upon straw and sawdust; and he
knew that I did not believe him, any more than about
his star-shavings.  And this was just the thing he
loved--to mystify honest people, and be a great deal
too knowing.  However, I may judge him harshly, because
I myself tell everything.

I asked him what he meant to do with all that enormous
lot of horses, and why he had not exerted his wits to
catch the red deer as well.  He said that the latter
would have been against the laws of venery, and might
have brought him into trouble, but as for disposing of
his stud, it would give him little difficulty.  He
would break them, when the spring weather came on, and
deal with them as they required, and keep the
handsomest for breeding.  The rest he would despatch to
London, where he knew plenty of horse-dealers; and he
doubted not that they would fetch him as much as ten
pounds apiece all round, being now in great demand.  I
told him I wished that he might get it; but as it
proved afterwards, he did.

Then he pressed us both on another point, the time for
his marriage to Annie; and mother looked at me to say
when, and I looked back at mother.  However, knowing
something of the world, and unable to make any further
objection, by reason of his prosperity, I said that we
must even do as the fashionable people did, and allow
the maid herself to settle, when she would leave home
and all.  And this I spoke with a very bad grace, being
perhaps of an ancient cast, and over fond of honesty--I
mean, of course, among lower people.

But Tom paid little heed to this, knowing the world a
great deal better than ever I could pretend to do; and
being ready to take a thing, upon which he had set his
mind, whether it came with a good grace, or whether it
came with a bad one.  And seeing that it would be
awkward to provoke my anger, he left the room, before
more words, to submit himself to Annie.

Upon this I went in search of Lorna, to tell her of our
cousin's arrival, and to ask whether she would think
fit to see him, or to dine by herself that day; for she
should do exactly as it pleased her in everything,
while remaining still our guest.  But I rather wished
that she might choose not to sit in Tom's company,
though she might be introduced to him.  Not but what he
could behave quite as well as could, and much better,
as regarded elegance and assurance, only that his
honesty had not been as one might desire.  But Lorna
had some curiosity to know what this famous man was
like, and declared that she would by all means have the
pleasure of dining with him, if he did not object to
her company on the ground of the Doones' dishonesty;
moreover, she said that it would seem a most foolish
air on her part, and one which would cause the greatest
pain to Annie, who had been so good to her, if she
should refuse to sit at table with a man who held the
King's pardon, and was now a pattern of honesty.

Against this I had not a word to say; and could not
help acknowledging in my heart that she was right, as
well as wise, in her decision.  And afterwards I
discovered that mother would have been much displeased,
if she had decided otherwise.

Accordingly she turned away, with one of her very
sweetest smiles (whose beauty none can describe) saying
that she must not meet a man of such fashion and
renown, in her common gardening frock; but must try to
look as nice as she could, if only in honour of dear
Annie.  And truth to tell, when she came to dinner,
everything about her was the neatest and prettiest that
can possibly be imagined.  She contrived to match the
colours so, to suit one another and her own, and yet
with a certain delicate harmony of contrast, and the
shape of everything was so nice, so that when she came
into the room, with a crown of winning modesty upon the
consciousness of beauty, I was quite as proud as if the
Queen of England entered.

My mother could not help remarking, though she knew
that it was not mannerly, how like a princess Lorna
looked, now she had her best things on; but two things
caught Squire Faggus's eyes, after he had made a most
gallant bow, and received a most graceful courtesy; and
he kept his bright bold gaze upon them, first on one,
and then on the other, until my darling was hot with
blushes, and I was ready to knock him down if he had
not been our visitor.  But here again I should have
been wrong, as I was apt to be in those days; for Tom
intended no harm whatever, and his gaze was of pure
curiosity; though Annie herself was vexed with it.  The
two objects of his close regard, were first, and most
worthily, Lorna's face, and secondly, the ancient
necklace restored to her by Sir Ensor Doone.

Now wishing to save my darling's comfort, and to keep
things quiet, I shouted out that dinner was ready, so
that half the parish could hear me; upon which my
mother laughed, and chid me, and despatched her guests
before her.  And a very good dinner we made, I
remember, and a very happy one; attending to the women
first, as now is the manner of eating; except among the
workmen.  With them, of course, it is needful that the
man (who has his hours fixed) should be served first,
and make the utmost of his time for feeding, while the
women may go on, as much as ever they please,
afterwards.  But with us, who are not bound to time,
there is no such reason to be quoted; and the women
being the weaker vessels, should be the first to begin
to fill.  And so we always arranged it.

Now, though our Annie was a graceful maid, and Lizzie a
very learned one, you should have seen how differently
Lorna managed her dining; she never took more than
about a quarter of a mouthful at a time, and she never
appeared to be chewing that, although she must have
done so.  Indeed, she appeared to dine as if it were a
matter of no consequence, and as if she could think of
other things more than of her business.  All this, and
her own manner of eating, I described to Eliza once,
when I wanted to vex her for something very spiteful
that she had said; and I never succeeded so well
before, for the girl was quite outrageous, having her
own perception of it, which made my observation ten
times as bitter to her.  And I am not sure but what she
ceased to like poor Lorna from that day; and if so, I
was quite paid out, as I well deserved, for my bit of
satire.

For it strikes me that of all human dealings, satire is
the very lowest, and most mean and common.  It is the
equivalent in words of what bullying is in deeds; and
no more bespeaks a clever man, than the other does a
brave one.  These two wretched tricks exalt a fool in
his own low esteem, but never in his neighbour's; for
the deep common sense of our nature tells that no man
of a genial heart, or of any spread of mind, can take
pride in either.  And though a good man may commit the
one fault or the other, now and then, by way of outlet,
he is sure to have compunctions soon, and to scorn
himself more than the sufferer.

Now when the young maidens were gone--for we had quite
a high dinner of fashion that day, with Betty Muxworthy
waiting, and Gwenny Carfax at the gravy--and only
mother, and Tom, and I remained at the white deal
table, with brandy, and schnapps, and hot water jugs;
Squire Faggus said quite suddenly, and perhaps on
purpose to take us aback, in case of our hiding
anything,--'What do you know of the history of that
beautiful maiden, good mother?'

'Not half so much as my son does,' mother answered,
with a soft smile at me; 'and when John does not choose
to tell a thing, wild horses will not pull it out of
him.'

'That is not at all like me, mother,' I replied rather
sadly; 'you know almost every word about Lorna, quite
as well as I do.'

'Almost every word, I believe, John; for you never tell
a falsehood.  But the few unknown may be of all the
most important to me.'

To this I made no answer, for fear of going beyond the
truth, or else of making mischief.  Not that I had, or
wished to have, any mystery with mother; neither was
there in purest truth, any mystery in the matter; to
the utmost of my knowledge.  And the only things that I
had kept back, solely for mother's comfort, were the
death of poor Lord Alan Brandir (if indeed he were
dead) and the connection of Marwood de Whichehalse with
the dealings of the Doones, and the threats of Carver
Doone against my own prosperity; and, may be, one or
two little things harrowing more than edifying.

'Come, come,' said Master Faggus, smiling very
pleasantly, 'you two understand each other, if any two
on earth do.  Ah, if I had only had a mother, how
different I might have been!'  And with that he sighed,
in the tone which always overcame mother upon that
subject, and had something to do with his getting
Annie; and then he produced his pretty box, full of
rolled tobacco, and offered me one, as I now had joined
the goodly company of smokers.  So I took it, and
watched what he did with his own, lest I might go wrong
about mine.

But when our cylinders were both lighted, and I
enjoying mine wonderfully, and astonishing mother by my
skill, Tom Faggus told us that he was sure he had seen
my Lorna's face before, many and many years ago, when
she was quite a little child, but he could not remember
where it was, or anything more about it at present;
though he would try to do so afterwards.  He could not
be mistaken, he said, for he had noticed her eyes
especially; and had never seen such eyes before,
neither again, until this day.  I asked him if he had
ever ventured into the Doone-valley; but he shook his
head, and replied that he valued his life a deal too
much for that.  Then we put it to him, whether anything
might assist his memory; but he said that he knew not
of aught to do so, unless it were another glass of
schnapps.

This being provided, he grew very wise, and told us
clearly and candidly that we were both very foolish. 
For he said that we were keeping Lorna, at the risk not
only of our stock, and the house above our heads, but
also of our precious lives; and after all was she worth
it, although so very beautiful?  Upon which I told him,
with indignation, that her beauty was the least part of
her goodness, and that I would thank him for his
opinion when I had requested it.

'Bravo, our John Ridd!' he answered; 'fools will be
fools till the end of the chapter; and I might be as
big a one, if I were in thy shoes, John.  Nevertheless,
in the name of God, don't let that helpless child go
about with a thing worth half the county on her.'

'She is worth all the county herself,' said I, 'and all
England put together; but she has nothing worth half a
rick of hay upon her; for the ring I gave her cost
only,'--and here I stopped, for mother was looking, and
I never would tell her how much it had cost me; though
she had tried fifty times to find out.

'Tush, the ring!' Tom Faggus cried, with a contempt
that moved me: 'I would never have stopped a man for
that.  But the necklace, you great oaf, the necklace is
worth all your farm put together, and your Uncle Ben's
fortune to the back of it; ay, and all the town of
Dulverton.'

'What,' said I, 'that common glass thing, which she has
had from her childhood!'

'Glass indeed!  They are the finest brilliants ever I
set eyes on; and I have handled a good many.'

'Surely,' cried mother, now flushing as red as Tom's
own cheeks with excitement, 'you must be wrong, or the
young mistress would herself have known it.'

I was greatly pleased with my mother, for calling Lorna
'the young mistress'; it was not done for the sake of
her diamonds, whether they were glass or not; but
because she felt as I had done, that Tom Faggus, a man
of no birth whatever, was speaking beyond his mark, in
calling a lady like Lorna a helpless child; as well as
in his general tone, which displayed no deference.  He
might have been used to the quality, in the way of
stopping their coaches, or roystering at hotels with
them; but he never had met a high lady before, in
equality, and upon virtue; and we both felt that he
ought to have known it, and to have thanked us for the
opportunity, in a word, to have behaved a great deal
more humbly than he had even tried to do.

'Trust me,' answered Tom, in his loftiest manner, which
Annie said was 'so noble,' but which seemed to me
rather flashy, 'trust me, good mother, and simple John,
for knowing brilliants, when I see them.  I would have
stopped an eight-horse coach, with four carabined
out-riders, for such a booty as that.  But alas, those
days are over; those were days worth living in.  Ah, I
never shall know the like again.  How fine it was by
moonlight!'

'Master Faggus,' began my mother, with a manner of some
dignity, such as she could sometimes use, by right of
her integrity, and thorough kindness to every one,
'this is not the tone in which you have hitherto spoken
to me about your former pursuits and life, I fear that
the spirits'--but here she stopped, because the spirits
were her own, and Tom was our visitor,--'what I mean,
Master Faggus, is this:  you have won my daughter's
heart somehow; and you won my consent to the matter
through your honest sorrow, and manly undertaking to
lead a different life, and touch no property but your
own.  Annie is my eldest daughter, and the child of a
most upright man.  I love her best of all on earth,
next to my boy John here'--here mother gave me a mighty
squeeze, to be sure that she would have me at
least--'and I will not risk my Annie's life with a man
who yearns for the highway.'

Having made this very long speech (for her), mother
came home upon my shoulder, and wept so that (but for
heeding her) I would have taken Tom by the nose, and
thrown him, and Winnie after him, over our farm-yard
gate.  For I am violent when roused; and freely hereby
acknowledge it; though even my enemies will own that it
takes a great deal to rouse me.  But I do consider the
grief and tears (when justly caused) of my dearest
friends, to be a great deal to rouse me.



CHAPTER XLVII

JEREMY IN DANGER

Nothing very long abides, as the greatest of all
writers (in whose extent I am for ever lost in raptured
wonder, and yet for ever quite at home, as if his heart
were mine, although his brains so different), in a word
as Mr. William Shakespeare, in every one of his works
insists, with a humoured melancholy.  And if my journey
to London led to nothing else of advancement, it took
me a hundred years in front of what I might else have
been, by the most simple accident.

Two women were scolding one another across the road,
very violently, both from upstair windows; and I in my
hurry for quiet life, and not knowing what might come
down upon me, quickened my step for the nearest corner. 
But suddenly something fell on my head; and at first I
was afraid to look, especially as it weighed heavily. 
But hearing no breakage of ware, and only the other
scold laughing heartily, I turned me about and espied a
book, which one had cast at the other, hoping to break
her window.  So I took the book, and tendered it at the
door of the house from which it had fallen; but the
watchman came along just then, and the man at the door
declared that it never came from their house, and
begged me to say no more.  This I promised readily,
never wishing to make mischief; and I said, 'Good sir,
now take the book; I will go on to my business.'  But he
answered that he would do no such thing; for the book
alone, being hurled so hard, would convict his people
of a lewd assault; and he begged me, if I would do a
good turn, to put the book under my coat and go.  And
so I did: in part at least.  For I did not put the book
under my coat, but went along with it openly, looking
for any to challenge it.  Now this book, so acquired,
has been not only the joy of my younger days, and main
delight of my manhood, but also the comfort, and even
the hope, of my now declining years.  In a word, it is
next to my Bible to me, and written in equal English;
and if you espy any goodness whatever in my own loose
style of writing, you must not thank me, John Ridd, for
it, but the writer who holds the champion's belt in
wit, as I once did in wrestling.

Now, as nothing very long abides, it cannot be expected
that a woman's anger should last very long, if she be
at all of the proper sort.  And my mother, being one of
the very best, could not long retain her wrath against
the Squire Faggus especially when she came to reflect,
upon Annie's suggestion, how natural, and one might
say, how inevitable it was that a young man fond of
adventure and change and winning good profits by
jeopardy, should not settle down without some regrets
to a fixed abode and a life of sameness, however safe
and respectable.  And even as Annie put the case, Tom
deserved the greater credit for vanquishing so nobly
these yearnings of his nature; and it seemed very hard
to upbraid him, considering how good his motives were;
neither could Annie understand how mother could
reconcile it with her knowledge of the Bible, and the
one sheep that was lost, and the hundredth piece of
silver, and the man that went down to Jericho.

Whether Annie's logic was good and sound, I am sure I
cannot tell; but it seemed to me that she ought to have
let the Jericho traveller alone, inasmuch as he rather
fell among Tom Fagusses, than resembled them.  However,
her reasoning was too much for mother to hold out
against; and Tom was replaced, and more than that,
being regarded now as an injured man.  But how my
mother contrived to know, that because she had been too
hard upon Tom, he must be right about the necklace, is
a point which I never could clearly perceive, though no
doubt she could explain it.

To prove herself right in the conclusion, she went
herself to fetch Lorna, that the trinket might be
examined, before the day grew dark.  My darling came
in, with a very quick glance and smile at my cigarro
(for I was having the third by this time, to keep
things in amity); and I waved it towards her, as much
as to say, 'you see that I can do it.'  And then mother
led her up to the light, for Tom to examine her
necklace.

On the shapely curve of her neck it hung, like dewdrops
upon a white hyacinth; and I was vexed that Tom should
have the chance to see it there.  But even if she had
read my thoughts, or outrun them with her own, Lorna
turned away, and softly took the jewels from the place
which so much adorned them.  And as she turned away,
they sparkled through the rich dark waves of hair. 
Then she laid the glittering circlet in my mother's
hands; and Tom Faggus took it eagerly, and bore it to
the window.

'Don't you go out of sight,' I said; 'you cannot resist
such things as those, if they be what you think them.'

'Jack, I shall have to trounce thee yet.  I am now a
man of honour, and entitled to the duello.  What will
you take for it, Mistress Lorna?  At a hazard, say
now.'

'I am not accustomed to sell things, sir,' replied
Lorna, who did not like him much, else she would have
answered sportively, 'What is it worth, in your
opinion?'

'Do you think it is worth five pounds, now?'

'Oh, no! I never had so much money as that in all my
life.  It is very bright, and very pretty; but it
cannot be worth five pounds, I am sure.'

'What a chance for a bargain!  Oh, if it were not for
Annie, I could make my fortune.'

'But, sir, I would not sell it to you, not for twenty
times five pounds.  My grandfather was so kind about
it; and I think it belonged to my mother.'

'There are twenty-five rose diamonds in it, and
twenty-five large brilliants that cannot be matched in
London.  How say you, Mistress Lorna, to a hundred
thousand pounds?'

My darling's eyes so flashed at this, brighter than any
diamonds, that I said to myself, 'Well, all have
faults; and now I have found out Lorna's--she is fond
of money!'  And then I sighed rather heavily; for of all
faults this seems to me one of the worst in a woman. 
But even before my sigh was finished, I had cause to
condemn myself.  For Lorna took the necklace very
quietly from the hands of Squire Faggus, who had not
half done with admiring it, and she went up to my
mother with the sweetest smile I ever saw.

'Dear kind mother, I am so glad,' she said in a
whisper, coaxing mother out of sight of all but me;
'now you will have it, won't you, dear?  And I shall be
so happy; for a thousandth part of your kindness to me
no jewels in the world can match.'

I cannot lay before you the grace with which she did
it, all the air of seeking favour, rather than
conferring it, and the high-bred fear of giving
offence, which is of all fears the noblest.  Mother
knew not what to say.  Of course she would never dream
of taking such a gift as that; and yet she saw how
sadly Lorna would be disappointed.  Therefore, mother
did, from habit, what she almost always did, she called
me to help her.  But knowing that my eyes were
full--for anything noble moves me so, quite as rashly
as things pitiful--I pretended not to hear my mother,
but to see a wild cat in the dairy.

Therefore I cannot tell what mother said in reply to
Lorna; for when I came back, quite eager to let my love
know how I worshipped her, and how deeply I was ashamed
of myself, for meanly wronging her in my heart, behold
Tom Faggus had gotten again the necklace which had such
charms for him, and was delivering all around (but
especially to Annie, who was wondering at his learning)
a dissertation on precious stones, and his sentiments
about those in his hand.  He said that the work was
very ancient, but undoubtedly very good; the cutting of
every line was true, and every angle was in its place. 
And this he said, made all the difference in the lustre
of the stone, and therefore in its value.  For if the
facets were ill-matched, and the points of light so
ever little out of perfect harmony, all the lustre of
the jewel would be loose and wavering, and the central
fire dulled; instead of answering, as it should, to all
possibilities of gaze, and overpowering any eye intent
on its deeper mysteries.  We laughed at the Squire's
dissertation; for how should he know all these things,
being nothing better, and indeed much worse than a mere
Northmolton blacksmith?  He took our laughter with much
good nature; having Annie to squeeze his hand and
convey her grief at our ignorance: but he said that of
one thing he was quite certain, and therein I believed
him.  To wit, that a trinket of this kind never could
have belonged to any ignoble family, but to one of the
very highest and most wealthy in England.  And looking
at Lorna, I felt that she must have come from a higher
source than the very best of diamonds.

Tom Faggus said that the necklace was made, he would
answer for it, in Amsterdam, two or three hundred years
ago, long before London jewellers had begun to meddle
with diamonds; and on the gold clasp he found some
letters, done in some inverted way, the meaning of
which was beyond him; also a bearing of some kind,
which he believed was a mountain-cat.  And thereupon he
declared that now he had earned another glass of
schnapps, and would Mistress Lorna mix it for him?

I was amazed at his impudence; and Annie, who thought
this her business, did not look best pleased; and I
hoped that Lorna would tell him at once to go and do it
for himself.  But instead of that she rose to do it
with a soft humility, which went direct to the heart of
Tom; and he leaped up with a curse at himself, and took
the hot water from her, and would not allow her to do
anything except to put the sugar in; and then he bowed
to her grandly.  I knew what Lorna was thinking of; she
was thinking all the time that her necklace had been
taken by the Doones with violence upon some great
robbery; and that Squire Faggus knew it, though he
would not show his knowledge; and that this was perhaps
the reason why mother had refused it so.

We said no more about the necklace for a long time
afterwards; neither did my darling wear it, now that
she knew its value, but did not know its history.  She
came to me the very next day, trying to look cheerful,
and begged me if I loved her (never mind how little) to
take charge of it again, as I once had done before, and
not even to let her know in what place I stored it.  I
told her that this last request I could not comply
with; for having been round her neck so often, it was
now a sacred thing, more than a million pounds could
be.  Therefore it should dwell for the present in the
neighbourhood of my heart; and so could not be far from
her.  At this she smiled her own sweet smile, and
touched my forehead with her lips.  and wished that she
could only learn how to deserve such love as mine.

Tom Faggus took his good departure, which was a kind
farewell to me, on the very day I am speaking of, the
day after his arrival.  Tom was a thoroughly upright
man, according to his own standard; and you might rely
upon him always, up to a certain point I mean, to be
there or thereabouts.  But sometimes things were too
many for Tom, especially with ardent spirits, and then
he judged, perhaps too much, with only himself for the
jury.  At any rate, I would trust him fully, for
candour and for honesty, in almost every case in which
he himself could have no interest.  And so we got on
very well together; and he thought me a fool; and I
tried my best not to think anything worse of him.

Scarcely was Tom clean out of sight, and Annie's tears
not dry yet (for she always made a point of crying upon
his departure), when in came Master Jeremy Stickles,
splashed with mud from head to foot, and not in the
very best of humours, though happy to get back again.

'Curse those fellows!' he cried, with a stamp which
sent the water hissing from his boot upon the embers;
'a pretty plight you may call this, for His Majesty's
Commissioner to return to his headquarters in!  Annie,
my dear,' for he was always very affable with Annie,
'will you help me off with my overalls, and then turn
your pretty hand to the gridiron?  Not a blessed morsel
have I touched for more than twenty-four hours.'

'Surely then you must be quite starving, sir,' my
sister replied with the greatest zeal; for she did love
a man with an appetite; 'how glad I am that the fire is
clear!'  But Lizzie, who happened to be there, said with
her peculiar smile,--

'Master Stickles must be used to it; for he never comes
back without telling us that.'

'Hush!' cried Annie, quite shocked with her; 'how would
you like to be used to it?  Now, Betty, be quick with
the things for me.  Pork, or mutton, or deer's meat,
sir?  We have some cured since the autumn.'

'Oh, deer's meat, by all means,' Jeremy Stickles
answered; 'I have tasted none since I left you, though
dreaming of it often.  Well, this is better than being
chased over the moors for one's life, John.  All the
way from Landacre Bridge, I have ridden a race for my
precious life, at the peril of my limbs and neck. 
Three great Doones galloping after me, and a good job
for me that they were so big, or they must have
overtaken me.  Just go and see to my horse, John,
that's an excellent lad.  He deserves a good turn this
day, from me; and I will render it to him.'

However he left me to do it, while he made himself
comfortable: and in truth the horse required care; he
was blown so that he could hardly stand, and plastered
with mud, and steaming so that the stable was quite
full with it.  By the time I had put the poor fellow to
rights, his master had finished dinner, and was in a
more pleasant humour, having even offered to kiss
Annie, out of pure gratitude, as he said; but Annie
answered with spirit that gratitude must not be shown
by increasing the obligation.  Jeremy made reply to
this that his only way to be grateful then was to tell
us his story:  and so he did, at greater length than I
can here repeat it; for it does not bear particularly
upon Lorna's fortunes.

It appears that as he was riding towards us from the
town of Southmolton in Devonshire, he found the roads
very soft and heavy, and the floods out in all
directions; but met with no other difficulty until he
came to Landacre Bridge.  He had only a single trooper
with him, a man not of the militia but of the King's
army, whom Jeremy had brought from Exeter.  As these
two descended towards the bridge they observed that
both the Kensford water and the River Barle were
pouring down in mighty floods from the melting of the
snow.  So great indeed was the torrent, after they
united, that only the parapets of the bridge could be
seen above the water, the road across either bank being
covered and very deep on the hither side.  The trooper
did not like the look of it, and proposed to ride back
again, and round by way of Simonsbath, where the stream
is smaller.  But Stickles would not have it so, and
dashing into the river, swam his horse for the bridge,
and gained it with some little trouble; and there he
found the water not more than up to his horse's knees
perhaps.  On the crown of the bridge he turned his
horse to watch the trooper's passage, and to help him
with directions; when suddenly he saw him fall headlong
into the torrent, and heard the report of a gun from
behind, and felt a shock to his own body, such as
lifted him out of the saddle.  Turning round he beheld
three men, risen up from behind the hedge on one side
of his onward road, two of them ready to load again,
and one with his gun unfired, waiting to get good aim
at him.  Then Jeremy did a gallant thing, for which I
doubt whether I should have had the presence of mind in
danger.  He saw that to swim his horse back again would
be almost certain death; as affording such a target,
where even a wound must be fatal.  Therefore he struck
the spurs into the nag, and rode through the water
straight at the man who was pointing the long gun at
him.  If the horse had been carried off his legs,
there must have been an end of Jeremy; for the other
men were getting ready to have another shot at him. 
But luckily the horse galloped right on without any
need for swimming, being himself excited, no doubt, by
all he had seen and heard of it.  And Jeremy lay almost
flat on his neck, so as to give little space for good
aim, with the mane tossing wildly in front of him.  Now
if that young fellow with the gun had his brains as
ready as his flint was, he would have shot the horse at
once, and then had Stickles at his mercy; but instead
of that he let fly at the man, and missed him
altogether, being scared perhaps by the pistol which
Jeremy showed him the mouth of.  And galloping by at
full speed, Master Stickles tried to leave his mark
behind him, for he changed the aim of his pistol to the
biggest man, who was loading his gun and cursing like
ten cannons.  But the pistol missed fire, no doubt
from the flood which had gurgled in over the holsters;
and Jeremy seeing three horses tethered at a gate just
up the hill, knew that he had not yet escaped, but had
more of danger behind him.  He tried his other great
pistol at one of the horses tethered there, so as to
lessen (if possible) the number of his pursuers.  But
the powder again failed him; and he durst not stop to
cut the bridles, bearing the men coming up the hill. 
So he even made the most of his start, thanking God
that his weight was light, compared at least to what
theirs was.

And another thing he had noticed which gave him some
hope of escaping, to wit that the horses of the Doones,
although very handsome animals, were suffering still
from the bitter effects of the late long frost, and the
scarcity of fodder.  'If they do not catch me up, or
shoot me, in the course of the first two miles, I may
see my home again'; this was what he said to himself as
he turned to mark what they were about, from the brow
of the steep hill.  He saw the flooded valley shining
with the breadth of water, and the trooper's horse on
the other side, shaking his drenched flanks and
neighing; and half-way down the hill he saw the three
Doones mounting hastily.  And then he knew that his
only chance lay in the stoutness of his steed.

The horse was in pretty good condition; and the rider
knew him thoroughly, and how to make the most of him;
and though they had travelled some miles that day
through very heavy ground, the bath in the river had
washed the mud off, and been some refreshment.  
Therefore Stickles encouraged his nag, and put him into
a good hard gallop, heading away towards Withycombe. 
At first he had thought of turning to the right, and
making off for Withypool, a mile or so down the valley;
but his good sense told him that no one there would
dare to protect him against the Doones, so he resolved
to go on his way; yet faster than he had intended.

The three villains came after him, with all the speed
they could muster, making sure from the badness of the
road that he must stick fast ere long, and so be at
their mercy.  And this was Jeremy's chiefest fear, for
the ground being soft and thoroughly rotten, after so
much frost and snow, the poor horse had terrible work
of it, with no time to pick the way; and even more good
luck than skill was needed to keep him from foundering. 
How Jeremy prayed for an Exmoor fog (such as he had
often sworn at), that he might turn aside and lurk,
while his pursuers went past him! But no fog came, nor
even a storm to damp the priming of their guns; neither
was wood or coppice nigh, nor any place to hide in;
only hills, and moor, and valleys; with flying shadows
over them, and great banks of snow in the corners.  At
one time poor Stickles was quite in despair; for after
leaping a little brook which crosses the track at
Newland, be stuck fast in a 'dancing bog,' as we call
them upon Exmoor.  The horse had broken through the
crust of moss and sedge and marishweed, and could do
nothing but wallow and sink, with the black water
spirting over him.  And Jeremy, struggling with all his
might, saw the three villains now topping the crest,
less than a furlong behind him; and heard them shout in
their savage delight.  With the calmness of despair, he
yet resolved to have one more try for it; and
scrambling over the horse's head, gained firm land, and
tugged at the bridle.  The poor nag replied with all
his power to the call upon his courage, and reared his
forefeet out of the slough, and with straining eyeballs
gazed at him.  'Now,' said Jeremy, 'now, my fine
fellow!' lifting him with the bridle, and the brave
beast gathered the roll of his loins, and sprang from
his quagmired haunches.  One more spring, and he was on
earth again, instead of being under it; and Jeremy
leaped on his back, and stooped, for he knew that they
would fire.  Two bullets whistled over him, as the
horse, mad with fright, dashed forward; and in five
minutes more he had come to the Exe, and the pursuers
had fallen behind him.  The Exe, though a much smaller
stream than the Barle, now ran in a foaming torrent,
unbridged, and too wide for leaping.  But Jeremy's
horse took the water well; and both he and his rider
were lightened, as well as comforted by it.  And as
they passed towards Lucott hill, and struck upon the
founts of Lynn, the horses of the three pursuers began
to tire under them.  Then Jeremy Stickles knew that if
he could only escape the sloughs, he was safe for the
present; and so he stood up in his stirrups, and gave
them a loud halloo, as if they had been so many foxes.

Their only answer was to fire the remaining charge at
him; but the distance was too great for any aim from
horseback; and the dropping bullet idly ploughed the
sod upon one side of him.  He acknowledged it with a
wave of his hat, and laid one thumb to his nose, in the
manner fashionable in London for expression of
contempt.  However, they followed him yet farther;
hoping to make him pay out dearly, if he should only
miss the track, or fall upon morasses.  But the
neighbourhood of our Lynn stream is not so very boggy;
and the King's messenger now knew his way as well as
any of his pursuers did; and so he arrived at Plover's
Barrows, thankful, and in rare appetite.

'But was the poor soldier drowned?' asked Annie; 'and
you never went to look for him!  Oh, how very dreadful!'

'Shot, or drowned; I know not which.  Thank God it was
only a trooper.  But they shall pay for it, as dearly
as if it had been a captain.'

'And how was it you were struck by a bullet, and only
shaken in your saddle?  Had you a coat of mail on, or
of Milanese chain-armour?  Now, Master Stickles, had
you?'

'No, Mistress Lizzie; we do not wear things of that
kind nowadays.  You are apt, I perceive, at romances. 
But I happened to have a little flat bottle of the best
stoneware slung beneath my saddle-cloak, and filled
with the very best eau de vie, from the George Hotel,
at Southmolton.  The brand of it now is upon my back. 
Oh, the murderous scoundrels, what a brave spirit they
have spilled!'

'You had better set to and thank God,' said I, 'that
they have not spilled a braver one.'

 

CHAPTER XLVIII

EVERY MAN MUST DEFEND HIMSELF

It was only right in Jeremy Stickles, and of the
simplest common sense, that he would not tell, before
our girls, what the result of his journey was.  But he
led me aside in the course of the evening, and told me
all about it; saying that I knew, as well as he did,
that it was not woman's business.  This I took, as it
was meant, for a gentle caution that Lorna (whom he had
not seen as yet) must not he informed of any of his
doings.  Herein I quite agreed with him; not only for
his furtherance, but because I always think that women,
of whatever mind, are best when least they meddle with
the things that appertain to men.

Master Stickles complained that the weather had been
against him bitterly, closing all the roads around him;
even as it had done with us.  It had taken him eight
days, he said, to get from Exeter to Plymouth; whither
he found that most of the troops had been drafted off
from Exeter.  When all were told, there was but a
battalion of one of the King's horse regiments, and two
companies of foot soldiers; and their commanders had
orders, later than the date of Jeremy's commission, on
no account to quit the southern coast, and march
inland.  Therefore, although they would gladly have
come for a brush with the celebrated Doones, it was
more than they durst attempt, in the face of their
instructions.  However, they spared him a single
trooper, as a companion of the road, and to prove to
the justices of the county, and the lord lieutenant,
that he had their approval.

To these authorities Master Stickles now was forced to
address himself, although he would rather have had one
trooper than a score from the very best trained bands. 
For these trained bands had afforded very good
soldiers, in the time of the civil wars, and for some
years afterwards; but now their discipline was gone;
and the younger generation had seen no real fighting. 
Each would have his own opinion, and would want to
argue it; and if he were not allowed, he went about his
duty in such a temper as to prove that his own way was
the best.

Neither was this the worst of it; for Jeremy made no
doubt but what (if he could only get the militia to
turn out in force) he might manage, with the help of
his own men, to force the stronghold of the enemy; but
the truth was that the officers, knowing how hard it
would be to collect their men at that time of the year,
and in that state of the weather, began with one accord
to make every possible excuse.  And especially they
pressed this point, that Bagworthy was not in their
county; the Devonshire people affirming vehemently that
it lay in the shire of Somerset, and the Somersetshire
folk averring, even with imprecations, that it lay in
Devonshire.  Now I believe the truth to be that the
boundary of the two counties, as well as of Oare and
Brendon parishes, is defined by the Bagworthy river; so
that the disputants on both sides were both right and
wrong.

Upon this, Master Stickles suggested, and as I thought
very sensibly, that the two counties should unite, and
equally contribute to the extirpation of this pest,
which shamed and injured them both alike.  But hence
arose another difficulty; for the men of Devon said
they would march when Somerset had taken the field; and
the sons of Somerset replied that indeed they were
quite ready, but what were their cousins of Devonshire
doing?  And so it came to pass that the King's
Commissioner returned without any army whatever; but
with promise of two hundred men when the roads should
be more passable.  And meanwhile, what were we to do,
abandoned as we were to the mercies of the Doones, with
only our own hands to help us?  And herein I grieved at
my own folly, in having let Tom Faggus go, whose wit
and courage would have been worth at least half a dozen
men to us.  Upon this matter I held long council with
my good friend Stickles; telling him all about Lorna's
presence, and what I knew of her history.  He agreed
with me that we could not hope to escape an attack from
the outlaws, and the more especially now that they knew
himself to be returned to us.  Also he praised me for
my forethought in having threshed out all our corn, and
hidden the produce in such a manner that they were not
likely to find it.  Furthermore, he recommended that
all the entrances to the house should at once be
strengthened, and a watch must be maintained at night;
and he thought it wiser that I should go (late as it
was) to Lynmouth, if a horse could pass the valley, and
fetch every one of his mounted troopers, who might now
be quartered there.  Also if any men of courage, though
capable only of handling a pitchfork, could be found in
the neighbourhood, I was to try to summon them.  But
our district is so thinly peopled, that I had little
faith in this; however my errand was given me, and I
set forth upon it; for John Fry was afraid of the
waters.

Knowing how fiercely the floods were out, I resolved to
travel the higher road, by Cosgate and through
Countisbury; therefore I swam my horse through the
Lynn, at the ford below our house (where sometimes you
may step across), and thence galloped up and along the
hills.  I could see all the inland valleys ribbon'd
with broad waters; and in every winding crook, the
banks of snow that fed them; while on my right the
turbid sea was flaked with April showers.  But when I
descended the hill towards Lynmouth, I feared that my
journey was all in vain.

For the East Lynn (which is our river) was ramping and
roaring frightfully, lashing whole trunks of trees on
the rocks, and rending them, and grinding them.  And
into it rushed, from the opposite side, a torrent even
madder; upsetting what it came to aid; shattering wave
with boiling billow, and scattering wrath with fury. 
It was certain death to attempt the passage: and the
little wooden footbridge had been carried away long
ago.  And the men I was seeking must be, of course, on
the other side of this deluge, for on my side there was
not a single house.

I followed the bank of the flood to the beach, some two
or three hundred yards below; and there had the luck to
see Will Watcombe on the opposite side, caulking an old
boat.  Though I could not make him hear a word, from
the deafening roar of the torrent, I got him to
understand at last that I wanted to cross over.  Upon
this he fetched another man, and the two of them
launched a boat; and paddling well out to sea, fetched
round the mouth of the frantic river.  The other man
proved to be Stickles's chief mate; and so he went back
and fetched his comrades, bringing their weapons, but
leaving their horses behind.  As it happened there were
but four of them; however, to have even these was a
help; and I started again at full speed for my home;
for the men must follow afoot, and cross our river high
up on the moorland.

This took them a long way round, and the track was
rather bad to find, and the sky already darkening; so
that I arrived at Plover's Barrows more than two hours
before them.  But they had done a sagacious thing,
which was well worth the delay; for by hoisting their
flag upon the hill, they fetched the two watchmen from
the Foreland, and added them to their number.

It was lucky that I came home so soon; for I found the
house in a great commotion, and all the women
trembling.  When I asked what the matter was, Lorna,
who seemed the most self-possessed, answered that it
was all her fault, for she alone had frightened them. 
And this in the following manner.  She had stolen out
to the garden towards dusk, to watch some favourite
hyacinths just pushing up, like a baby's teeth, and
just attracting the fatal notice of a great house-snail
at night-time.  Lorna at last had discovered the
glutton, and was bearing him off in triumph to the
tribunal of the ducks, when she descried two glittering
eyes glaring at her steadfastly, from the elder-bush
beyond the stream.  The elder was smoothing its
wrinkled leaves, being at least two months behind time;
and among them this calm cruel face appeared; and she
knew it was the face of Carver Doone.

The maiden, although so used to terror (as she told me
once before), lost all presence of mind hereat, and
could neither shriek nor fly, but only gaze, as if
bewitched.  Then Carver Doone, with his deadly smile,
gloating upon her horror, lifted his long gun, and
pointed full at Lorna's heart.  In vain she strove to
turn away; fright had stricken her stiff as stone. 
With the inborn love of life, she tried to cover the
vital part wherein the winged death must lodge--for she
knew Carver's certain aim--but her hands hung numbed,
and heavy; in nothing but her eyes was life.

With no sign of pity in his face, no quiver of
relenting, but a well-pleased grin at all the charming
palsy of his victim, Carver Doone lowered, inch by
inch, the muzzle of his gun.  When it pointed to the
ground, between her delicate arched insteps, he pulled
the trigger, and the bullet flung the mould all over
her.  It was a refinement of bullying, for which I
swore to God that night, upon my knees, in secret, that
I would smite down Carver Doone or else he should smite
me down.  Base beast! what largest humanity, or what
dreams of divinity, could make a man put up with this?

My darling (the loveliest, and most harmless, in the
world of maidens), fell away on a bank of grass, and
wept at her own cowardice; and trembled, and wondered
where I was; and what I would think of this.  Good God!
What could I think of it?  She over-rated my slow
nature, to admit the question.

While she leaned there, quite unable yet to save
herself, Carver came to the brink of the flood, which
alone was between them; and then he stroked his
jet-black beard, and waited for Lorna to begin.  Very
likely, be thought that she would thank him for his
kindness to her.  But she was now recovering the power
of her nimble limbs; and ready to be off like hope, and
wonder at her own cowardice.

'I have spared you this time,' he said, in his deep
calm voice, 'only because it suits my plans; and I
never yield to temper.  But unless you come back
to-morrow, pure, and with all you took away, and teach
me to destroy that fool, who has destroyed himself for
you, your death is here, your death is here, where it
has long been waiting.'

Although his gun was empty, he struck the breech of it
with his finger; and then he turned away, not deigning
even once to look back again; and Lorna saw his giant
figure striding across the meadow-land, as if the Ridds
were nobodies, and he the proper owner.  Both mother
and I were greatly hurt at hearing of this insolence:
for we had owned that meadow, from the time of the
great Alfred; and even when that good king lay in the
Isle of Athelney, he had a Ridd along with him.

Now I spoke to Lorna gently, seeing how much she had
been tried; and I praised her for her courage, in not
having run away, when she was so unable; and my darling
was pleased with this, and smiled upon me for saying
it; though she knew right well that, in this matter, my
judgment was not impartial.  But you may take this as a
general rule, that a woman likes praise from the man
whom she loves, and cannot stop always to balance it.

Now expecting a sharp attack that night--when Jeremy
Stickles the more expected, after the words of Carver,
which seemed to be meant to mislead us--we prepared a
great quantity of knuckles of pork, and a ham in full
cut, and a fillet of hung mutton.  For we would almost
surrender rather than keep our garrison hungry.  And
all our men were exceedingly brave; and counted their
rounds of the house in half-pints.

Before the maidens went to bed, Lorna made a remark
which seemed to me a very clever one, and then I
wondered how on earth it had never occurred to me
before.  But first she had done a thing which I could
not in the least approve of:  for she had gone up to my
mother, and thrown herself into her arms, and begged to
be allowed to return to Glen Doone.

'My child, are you unhappy here?' mother asked her,
very gently, for she had begun to regard her now as a
daughter of her own.

'Oh, no!  Too happy, by far too happy, Mrs. Ridd.  I
never knew rest or peace before, or met with real
kindness.  But I cannot be so ungrateful, I cannot be
so wicked, as to bring you all into deadly peril, for
my sake alone.  Let me go: you must not pay this great
price for my happiness.'

'Dear child, we are paying no price at all,' replied my
mother, embracing her; 'we are not threatened for your
sake only.  Ask John, he will tell you.  He knows every
bit about politics, and this is a political matter.'

Dear mother was rather proud in her heart, as well as
terribly frightened, at the importance now accruing to
Plover's Barrows farm; and she often declared that it
would be as famous in history as the Rye House, or the
Meal-tub, or even the great black box, in which she was
a firm believer: and even my knowledge of politics
could not move her upon that matter.  'Such things had
happened before,' she would say, shaking her head with
its wisdom, 'and why might they not happen again? 
Women would be women, and men would be men, to the end
of the chapter; and if she had been in Lucy Water's
place, she would keep it quiet, as she had done'; and
then she would look round, for fear, lest either of her
daughters had heard her; 'but now, can you give me any
reason, why it may not have been so?  You are so
fearfully positive, John: just as men always are.'
'No,' I used to say; 'I can give you no reason, why it
may not have been so, mother.  But the question is, if
it was so, or not; rather than what it might have been. 
And, I think, it is pretty good proof against it, that
what nine men of every ten in England would only too
gladly believe, if true, is nevertheless kept dark from
them.'  'There you are again, John,' mother would reply,
'all about men, and not a single word about women.  If
you had any argument at all, you would own that
marriage is a question upon which women are the best
judges.'  'Oh!' I would groan in my spirit, and go;
leaving my dearest mother quite sure, that now at last
she must have convinced me.  But if mother had known
that Jeremy Stickles was working against the black box,
and its issue, I doubt whether he would have fared so
well, even though he was a visitor.  However, she knew
that something was doing and something of importance;
and she trusted in God for the rest of it.  Only she
used te tell me, very seriously, of an evening, 'The
very least they can give you, dear John, is a coat of
arms.  Be sure you take nothing less, dear; and the
farm can well support it.'

But lo! I have left Lorna ever so long, anxious to
consult me upon political matters.  She came to me, and
her eyes alone asked a hundred questions, which I
rather had answered upon her lips than troubled her
pretty ears with them.  Therefore I told her nothing at
all, save that the attack (if any should be) would not
be made on her account; and that if she should hear, by
any chance, a trifle of a noise in the night, she was
to wrap the clothes around her, and shut her beautiful
eyes again.  On no account, whatever she did, was she
to go to the window.  She liked my expression about her
eyes, and promised to do the very best she could and
then she crept so very close, that I needs must have
her closer; and with her head on my breast she asked,--

'Can't you keep out of this fight, John?'

'My own one,' I answered, gazing through the long black
lashes, at the depths of radiant love; 'I believe there
will be nothing: but what there is I must see out.'

'Shall I tell you what I think, John?  It is only a
fancy of mine, and perhaps it is not worth telling.'

'Let us have it, dear, by all means.  You know so much
about their ways.'

'What I believe is this, John.  You know how high the
rivers are, higher than ever they were before, and
twice as high, you have told me.  I believe that Glen
Doone is flooded, and all the houses under water.'

'You little witch,' I answered; 'what a fool I must be
not to think of it! Of course it is: it must be.  The
torrent from all the Bagworthy forest, and all the
valleys above it, and the great drifts in the glen
itself, never could have outlet down my famous
waterslide.  The valley must be under water twenty feet
at least.  Well, if ever there was a fool, I am he,
for not having thought of it.'

'I remember once before,' said Lorna, reckoning on her
fingers, 'when there was heavy rain, all through the
autumn and winter, five or it may be six years ago, the
river came down with such a rush that the water was two
feet deep in our rooms, and we all had to camp by the
cliff-edge.  But you think that the floods are higher
now, I believe I heard you say, John.'

'I don't think about it, my treasure,' I answered; 'you
may trust me for understanding floods, after our work
at Tiverton.  And I know that the deluge in all our
valleys is such that no living man can remember,
neither will ever behold again.  Consider three months
of snow, snow, snow, and a fortnight of rain on the top
of it, and all to be drained in a few days away!  And
great barricades of ice still in the rivers blocking
them up, and ponding them.  You may take my word for
it, Mistress Lorna, that your pretty bower is six feet
deep.'

'Well, my bower has served its time', said Lorna,
blushing as she remembered all that had happened there;
'and my bower now is here, John.  But I am so sorry to
think of all the poor women flooded out of their houses
and sheltering in the snowdrifts.  However, there is
one good of it:  they cannot send many men against us,
with all this trouble upon them.'

'You are right,' I replied; 'how clever you are! and
that is why there were only three to cut off Master
Stickles.  And now we shall beat them, I make no doubt,
even if they come at all.  And I defy them to fire the
house:  the thatch is too wet for burning.'

We sent all the women to bed quite early, except Gwenny
Carfax and our old Betty.  These two we allowed to stay
up, because they might be useful to us, if they could
keep from quarreling.  For my part, I had little fear,
after what Lorna had told me, as to the result of the
combat.  It was not likely that the Doones could bring
more than eight or ten men against us, while their
homes were in such danger: and to meet these we had
eight good men, including Jeremy, and myself, all well
armed and resolute, besides our three farm-servants,
and the parish-clerk, and the shoemaker.  These five
could not be trusted much for any valiant conduct,
although they spoke very confidently over their cans of
cider.  Neither were their weapons fitted for much
execution, unless it were at close quarters, which they
would be likely to avoid.  Bill Dadds had a sickle, Jem
Slocombe a flail, the cobbler had borrowed the
constable's staff (for the constable would not attend,
because there was no warrant), and the parish clerk had
brought his pitch-pipe, which was enough to break any
man's head.  But John Fry, of course, had his
blunderbuss, loaded with tin-tacks and marbles, and
more likely to kill the man who discharged it than any
other person: but we knew that John had it only for
show, and to describe its qualities.

Now it was my great desire, and my chiefest hope, to
come across Carver Doone that night, and settle the
score between us; not by any shot in the dark, but by a
conflict man to man.  As yet, since I came to
full-grown power, I had never met any one whom I could
not play teetotum with: but now at last I had found a
man whose strength was not to be laughed at.  I could
guess it in his face, I could tell it in his arms, I
could see it in his stride and gait, which more than
all the rest betray the substance of a man.  And being
so well used to wrestling, and to judge antagonists, I
felt that here (if anywhere) I had found my match.

Therefore I was not content to abide within the house,
or go the rounds with the troopers; but betook myself
to the rick yard, knowing that the Doones were likely
to begin their onset there.  For they had a pleasant
custom, when they visited farm-houses, of lighting
themselves towards picking up anything they wanted, or
stabbing the inhabitants, by first creating a blaze in
the rick yard.  And though our ricks were all now of
mere straw (except indeed two of prime clover-hay), and
although on the top they were so wet that no firebrands
might hurt them; I was both unwilling to have them
burned, and fearful that they might kindle, if well
roused up with fire upon the windward side.

By the bye, these Doones had got the worst of this
pleasant trick one time.  For happening to fire the
ricks of a lonely farm called Yeanworthy, not far above
Glenthorne, they approached the house to get people's
goods, and to enjoy their terror.  The master of the
farm was lately dead, and had left, inside the
clock-case, loaded, the great long gun, wherewith he
had used to sport at the ducks and the geese on the
shore.  Now Widow Fisher took out this gun, and not
caring much what became of her (for she had loved her
husband dearly), she laid it upon the window-sill,
which looked upon the rick-yard; and she backed up the
butt with a chest of oak drawers, and she opened the
window a little back, and let the muzzle out on the
slope.  Presently five or six fine young Doones came
dancing a reel (as their manner was) betwixt her and
the flaming rick.  Upon which she pulled the trigger
with all the force of her thumb, and a quarter of a
pound of duck-shot went out with a blaze on the
dancers.  You may suppose what their dancing was, and
their reeling how changed to staggering, and their
music none of the sweetest.  One of them fell into the
rick, and was burned, and buried in a ditch next day;
but the others were set upon their horses, and carried
home on a path of blood.  And strange to say, they
never avenged this very dreadful injury; but having
heard that a woman had fired this desperate shot among
them, they said that she ought to be a Doone, and
inquired how old she was.

Now I had not been so very long waiting in our
mow-yard, with my best gun ready, and a big club by me,
before a heaviness of sleep began to creep upon me. 
The flow of water was in my ears, and in my eyes a hazy
spreading, and upon my brain a closure, as a cobbler
sews a vamp up.  So I leaned back in the clover-rick,
and the dust of the seed and the smell came round me,
without any trouble; and I dozed about Lorna, just once
or twice, and what she had said about new-mown hay; and
then back went my head, and my chin went up; and if
ever a man was blest with slumber, down it came upon
me, and away went I into it.

Now this was very vile of me, and against all good
resolutions, even such as I would have sworn to an hour
ago or less.  But if you had been in the water as I
had, ay, and had long fight with it, after a good day's
work, and then great anxiety afterwards, and brain-work
(which is not fair for me), and upon that a stout
supper, mayhap you would not be so hard on my sleep;
though you felt it your duty to wake me.



CHAPTER XLIX

MAIDEN SENTINELS ARE BEST

It was not likely that the outlaws would attack out
premises until some time after the moon was risen;
because it would be too dangerous to cross the flooded
valleys in the darkness of the night.  And but for this
consideration, I must have striven harder against the
stealthy approach of slumber.  But even so, it was very
foolish to abandon watch, especially in such as I, who
sleep like any dormouse.  Moreover, I had chosen the
very worst place in the world for such employment, with
a goodly chance of awakening in a bed of solid fire.

And so it might have been, nay, it must have been, but
for Lorna's vigilance.  Her light hand upon my arm
awoke me, not too readily; and leaping up, I seized my
club, and prepared to knock down somebody.

'Who's that?' I cried; 'stand back, I say, and let me
have fair chance at you.'

'Are you going to knock me down, dear John?' replied
the voice I loved so well; 'I am sure I should never
get up again, after one blow from you, John.'

'My darling, is it you?' I cried; 'and breaking all
your orders?  Come back into the house at once:  and
nothing on your head, dear!'

'How could I sleep, while at any moment you might he
killed beneath my window?  And now is the time of real
danger; for men can see to travel.'

I saw at once the truth of this.  The moon was high and
clearly lighting all the watered valleys.  To sleep any
longer might be death, not only to myself, but all.

'The man on guard at the back of the house is fast
asleep,' she continued; 'Gwenny, who let me out, and
came with me, has heard him snoring for two hours.  I
think the women ought to be the watch, because they
have had no travelling.  Where do you suppose little
Gwenny is?'

'Surely not gone to Glen Doone?'  I was not sure,
however: for I could believe almost anything of the
Cornish maiden's hardihood.

'No,' replied Lorna, 'although she wanted even to do
that.  But of course I would not hear of it, on account
of the swollen waters.  But she is perched on yonder
tree, which commands the Barrow valley.  She says that
they are almost sure to cross the streamlet there; and
now it is so wide and large, that she can trace it in
the moonlight, half a mile beyond her.  If they cross,
she is sure to see them, and in good time to let us
know.'

'What a shame,' I cried, 'that the men should sleep,
and the maidens be the soldiers! I will sit in that
tree myself, and send little Gwenny back to you.  Go to
bed, my best and dearest; I will take good care not to
sleep again.'

'Please not to send me away, dear John,' she answered
very mournfully; 'you and I have been together through
perils worse than this.  I shall only be more timid,
and more miserable, indoors.'

'I cannot let you stay here,' I said; 'it is altogether
impossible.  Do you suppose that I can fight, with you
among the bullets, Lorna?  If this is the way you mean
to take it, we had better go both to the apple-room,
and lock ourselves in, and hide under the tiles, and
let them burn all the rest of the premises.'

At this idea Lorna laughed, as I could see by the
moonlight; and then she said,--

'You are right, John.  I should only do more harm than
good: and of all things I hate fighting most, and
disobedience next to it.  Therefore I will go indoors,
although I cannot go to bed.  But promise me one thing,
dearest John.  You will keep yourself out of the way,
now won't you, as much as you can, for my sake?'

'Of that you may be quite certain, Lorna.  I will shoot
them all through the hay-ricks.'

'That is right, dear,' she answered, never doubting but
what I could do it; 'and then they cannot see you, you
know.  But don't think of climbing that tree, John; it
is a great deal too dangerous.  It is all very well for
Gwenny; she has no bones to break.'

'None worth breaking, you mean, I suppose.  Very well;
I will not climb the tree, for I should defeat my own
purpose, I fear; being such a conspicuous object.  Now
go indoors, darling, without more words.  The more you
linger, the more I shall keep you.'

She laughed her own bright laugh at this, and only
said, 'God keep you, love!' and then away she tripped
across the yard, with the step I loved to watch so. 
And thereupon I shouldered arms, and resolved to tramp
till morning.  For I was vexed at my own neglect, and
that Lorna should have to right it.

But before I had been long on duty, making the round of
the ricks and stables, and hailing Gwenny now and then
from the bottom of her tree, a short wide figure stole
towards me, in and out the shadows, and I saw that it
was no other than the little maid herself, and that she
bore some tidings.

'Ten on 'em crossed the watter down yonner,' said
Gwenny, putting her hand to her mouth, and seeming to
regard it as good news rather than otherwise: 'be arl
craping up by hedgerow now.  I could shutt dree on 'em
from the bar of the gate, if so be I had your goon,
young man.'

'There is no time to lose, Gwenny.  Run to the house
and fetch Master Stickles, and all the men; while I
stay here, and watch the rick-yard.'

Perhaps I was wrong in heeding the ricks at such a time
as that; especially as only the clover was of much
importance.  But it seemed to me like a sort of triumph
that they should be even able to boast of having fired
our mow-yard.  Therefore I stood in a nick of the
clover, whence we had cut some trusses, with my club in
hand, and gun close by.

The robbers rode into our yard as coolly as if they had
been invited, having lifted the gate from the hinges
first on account of its being fastened.  Then they
actually opened our stable-doors, and turned our
honest horses out, and put their own rogues in the
place of them.  At this my breath was quite taken away;
for we think so much of our horses.  By this time I
could see our troopers, waiting in the shadow of the
house, round the corner from where the Doones were, and
expecting the order to fire.  But Jeremy Stickles very
wisely kept them in readiness, until the enemy should
advance upon them.

'Two of you lazy fellows go,' it was the deep voice of
Carver Doone, 'and make us a light, to cut their
throats by.  Only one thing, once again.  If any man
touches Lorna, I will stab him where he stands.  She
belongs to me.  There are two other young damsels here,
whom you may take away if you please.  And the mother,
I hear, is still comely.  Now for our rights.  We have
borne too long the insolence of these yokels.  Kill
every man, and every child, and burn the cursed place
down.'

As he spoke thus blasphemously, I set my gun against
his breast; and by the light buckled from his belt, I
saw the little 'sight' of brass gleaming alike upon
either side, and the sleek round barrel glimmering. 
The aim was sure as death itself.  If I only drew the
trigger (which went very lighily) Carver Doone would
breathe no more.  And yet--will you believe me?--I
could not pull the trigger.  Would to God that I had
done so!

For I never had taken human life, neither done bodily
harm to man; beyond the little bruises, and the
trifling aches and pains, which follow a good and
honest bout in the wrestling ring.  Therefore I dropped
my carbine, and grasped again my club, which seemed a
more straight-forward implement.

Presently two young men came towards me, bearing brands
of resined hemp, kindled from Carver's lamp.  The
foremost of them set his torch to the rick within a
yard of me, and smoke concealing me from him.  I struck
him with a back-handed blow on the elbow, as he bent
it; and I heard the bone of his arm break, as clearly
as ever I heard a twig snap.  With a roar of pain he
fell on the ground, and his torch dropped there, and
singed him.  The other man stood amazed at this, not
having yet gained sight of me; till I caught his
firebrand from his hand, and struck it into his
countenance.  With that he leaped at me; but I caught
him, in a manner learned from early wrestling, and
snapped his collar-bone, as I laid him upon the top of
his comrade.

This little success so encouraged me, that I was half
inclined to advance, and challenge Carver Doone to meet
me; but I bore in mind that he would be apt to shoot me
without ceremony; and what is the utmost of human
strength against the power of powder?  Moreover, I
remembered my promise to sweet Lorna; and who would be
left to defend her, if the rogues got rid of me?

While I was hesitating thus (for I always continue to
hesitate, except in actual conflict), a blaze of fire
lit up the house, and brown smoke hung around it.  Six
of our men had let go at the Doones, by Jeremy
Stickles' order, as the villains came swaggering down
in the moonlight ready for rape or murder.  Two of them
fell, and the rest hung back, to think at their leisure
what this was.  They were not used to this sort of
thing: it was neither just nor courteous.

Being unable any longer to contain myself, as I thought
of Lorna's excitement at all this noise of firing, I
came across the yard, expecting whether they would
shoot at me.  However, no one shot at me; and I went up
to Carver Doone, whom I knew by his size in the
moonlight, and I took him by the beard, and said, 'Do
you call yourself a man?'

For a moment he was so astonished that he could not
answer.  None had ever dared, I suppose, to look at him
in that way; and he saw that he had met his equal, or
perhaps his master.  And then he tried a pistol at me,
but I was too quick for him.

'Now, Carver Doone, take warning,' I said to him, very
soberly; 'you have shown yourself a fool by your
contempt of me.  I may not be your match in craft; but
I am in manhood.  You are a despicable villain.  Lie
low in your native muck.'

And with that word, I laid him flat upon his back in
our straw-yard, by a trick of the inner heel, which he
could not have resisted (though his strength had been
twice as great as mine), unless he were a wrestler. 
Seeing him down the others ran, though one of them made
a shot at me, and some of them got their horses, before
our men came up; and some went away without them.  And
among these last was Captain Carver who arose, while I
was feeling myself (for I had a little wound), and
strode away with a train of curses enough to poison the
light of the moon.

We gained six very good horses, by this attempted
rapine, as well as two young prisoners, whom I had
smitten by the clover-rick.  And two dead Doones were
left behind, whom (as we buried them in the churchyard,
without any service over them), I for my part was most
thankful that I had not killed.  For to have the life
of a fellow-man laid upon one's conscience--deserved he
his death, or deserved it not--is to my sense of right
and wrong the heaviest of all burdens; and the one that
wears most deeply inwards, with the dwelling of the
mind on this view and on that of it.

I was inclined to pursue the enemy and try to capture
more of them; but Jeremy Stickles would not allow it,
for he said that all the advantage would be upon their
side, if we went hurrying after them, with only the
moon to guide us.  And who could tell but what there
might be another band of them, ready to fall upon the
house, and burn it, and seize the women, if we left
them unprotected?  When he put the case thus, I was
glad enough to abide by his decision.  And one thing
was quite certain, that the Doones had never before
received so rude a shock, and so violent a blow to
their supremacy, since first they had built up their
power, and become the Lords of Exmoor.  I knew that
Carver Doone would gnash those mighty teeth of his, and
curse the men around him, for the blunder (which was in
truth his own) of over-confidence and carelessness. 
And at the same time, all the rest would feel that such
a thing had never happened, while old Sir Ensor was
alive; and that it was caused by nothing short of gross
mismanagement.

I scarcely know who made the greatest fuss about my
little wound, mother, or Annie, or Lorna.  I was
heartily ashamed to be so treated like a milksop; but
most unluckily it had been impossible to hide it.  For
the ball had cut along my temple, just above the
eyebrow; and being fired so near at hand, the powder
too had scarred me.  Therefore it seemed a great deal
worse than it really was; and the sponging, and the
plastering, and the sobbing, and the moaning, made me
quite ashamed to look Master Stickles in the face.

However, at last I persuaded them that I had no
intention of giving up the ghost that night; and then
they all fell to, and thanked God with an emphasis
quite unknown in church.  And hereupon Master Stickles
said, in his free and easy manner (for no one courted
his observation), that I was the luckiest of all
mortals in having a mother, and a sister, and a
sweetheart, to make much of me.  For his part, he said,
he was just as well off in not having any to care for
him.  For now he might go and get shot, or stabbed, or
knocked on the head, at his pleasure, without any one
being offended.  I made bold, upon this, to ask him
what was become of his wife; for I had heard him speak
of having one.  He said that he neither knew nor
cared; and perhaps I should be like him some day.  That
Lorna should hear such sentiments was very grievous to
me.  But she looked at me with a smile, which proved
her contempt for all such ideas; and lest anything
still more unfit might be said, I dismissed the
question.

But Master Stickles told me afterwards, when there was
no one with us, to have no faith in any woman, whatever
she might seem to be.  For he assured me that now he
possessed very large experience, for so small a matter;
being thoroughly acquainted with women of every class,
from ladies of the highest blood, to Bonarobas, and
peasants' wives: and that they all might be divided
into three heads and no more; that is to say as
follows.  First, the very hot and passionate, who were
only contemptible; second, the cold and indifferent,
who were simply odious; and third, the mixture of the
other two, who had the bad qualities of both.  As for
reason, none of them had it; it was like a sealed book
to them, which if they ever tried to open, they began
at the back of the cover.

Now I did not like to hear such things; and to me they
appeared to be insolent, as well as narrow-minded.  For
if you came to that, why might not men, as well as
women, be divided into the same three classes, and be
pronounced upon by women, as beings even more devoid
than their gentle judges of reason?  Moreover, I knew,
both from my own sense, and from the greatest of all
great poets, that there are, and always have been,
plenty of women, good, and gentle, warm-hearted,
loving, and lovable; very keen, moreover, at seeing the
right, be it by reason, or otherwise.  And upon the
whole, I prefer them much to the people of my own sex,
as goodness of heart is more important than to show
good reason for having it.  And so I said to Jeremy,--

'You have been ill-treated, perhaps, Master Stickles,
by some woman or other?'

'Ah, that have I,' he replied with an oath; 'and the
last on earth who should serve me so, the woman who was
my wife.  A woman whom I never struck, never wronged in
any way, never even let her know that I like another
better.  And yet when I was at Berwick last, with the
regiment on guard there against those vile
moss-troopers, what does that woman do but fly in the
face of all authority, and of my especial business, by
running away herself with the biggest of all
moss-troopers?  Not that I cared a groat about her; and
I wish the fool well rid of her: but the insolence of
the thing was such that everybody laughed at me; and
back I went to London, losing a far better and safer
job than this; and all through her.  Come, let's have
another onion.'

Master Stickles's view of the matter was so entirely
unromantic, that I scarcely wondered at Mistress
Stickles for having run away from him to an adventurous
moss-trooper.  For nine women out of ten must have some
kind of romance or other, to make their lives
endurable; and when their love has lost this attractive
element, this soft dew-fog (if such it be), the love
itself is apt to languish; unless its bloom be well
replaced by the budding hopes of children.  Now Master
Stickles neither had, nor wished to have, any children.

Without waiting for any warrant, only saying something
about 'captus in flagrante delicto,'--if that be the
way to spell it--Stickles sent our prisoners off,
bound and looking miserable, to the jail at Taunton.  I
was desirous to let them go free, if they would promise
amendment; but although I had taken them, and surely
therefore had every right to let them go again, Master
Stickles said, 'Not so.'  He assured me that it was a
matter of public polity; and of course, not knowing
what he meant, I could not contradict him; but thought
that surely my private rights ought to be respected. 
For if I throw a man in wrestling, I expect to get his
stakes; and if I take a man prisoner--why, he ought, in
common justice, to belong to me, and I have a good
right to let him go, if I think proper to do so. 
However, Master Stickles said that I was quite
benighted, and knew nothing of the Constitution; which
was the very thing I knew, beyond any man in our
parish!

Nevertheless, it was not for me to contradict a
commissioner; and therefore I let my prisoners go, and
wished them a happy deliverance.  Stickles replied,
with a merry grin, that if ever they got it, it would
be a jail deliverance, and the bliss of dancing; and he
laid his hand to his throat in a manner which seemed to
me most uncourteous.  However, his foresight proved too
correct; for both those poor fellows were executed,
soon after the next assizes.  Lorna had done her very
best to earn another chance for them; even going down
on her knees to that common Jeremy, and pleading with
great tears for them.  However, although much moved by
her, he vowed that he durst do nothing else.  To set
them free was more than his own life was worth; for all
the country knew, by this time, that two captive Doones
were roped to the cider-press at Plover's Barrows. 
Annie bound the broken arm of the one whom I had
knocked down with the club, and I myself supported it;
and then she washed and rubbed with lard the face of
the other poor fellow, which the torch had injured; and
I fetched back his collar-bone to the best of my
ability.  For before any surgeon could arrive, they
were off with a well-armed escort.  That day we were
reinforced so strongly from the stations along the
coast, even as far as Minehead, that we not only feared
no further attack, but even talked of assaulting Glen
Doone, without waiting for the train-bands.  However, I
thought that it would be mean to take advantage of the
enemy in the thick of the floods and confusion; and
several of the others thought so too, and did not like
fighting in water.  Therefore it was resolved to wait
and keep a watch upon the valley, and let the floods go
down again.



CHAPTER L

A MERRY MEETING A SAD ONE

Now the business I had most at heart (as every one
knows by this time) was to marry Lorna as soon as might
be, if she had no objection, and then to work the farm
so well, as to nourish all our family.  And herein I
saw no difficulty; for Annie would soon be off our
hands, and somebody might come and take a fancy to
little Lizzie (who was growing up very nicely now,
though not so fine as Annie); moreover, we were almost
sure to have great store of hay and corn after so much
snow, if there be any truth in the old saying,--

"A foot deep of rain
Will kill hay and grain;  
But three feet of snow
Will make them come mo'."

And although it was too true that we had lost a many
cattle, yet even so we had not lost money; for the few
remaining fetched such prices as were never known
before.  And though we grumbled with all our hearts,
and really believed, at one time, that starvation was
upon us, I doubt whether, on the whole, we were not the
fatter, and the richer, and the wiser for that winter. 
And I might have said the happier, except for the
sorrow which we felt at the failures among our
neighbours.  The Snowes lost every sheep they had, and
nine out of ten horned cattle; and poor Jasper Kebby
would have been forced to throw up the lease of his
farm, and perhaps to go to prison, but for the help we
gave him.

However, my dear mother would have it that Lorna was
too young, as yet, to think of being married: and
indeed I myself was compelled to admit that her form
was becoming more perfect and lovely; though I had not
thought it possible.  And another difficulty was, that
as we had all been Protestants from the time of Queen
Elizabeth, the maiden must be converted first, and
taught to hate all Papists.  Now Lorna had not the
smallest idea of ever being converted.  She said that
she loved me truly, but wanted not to convert me; and
if I loved her equally, why should I wish to convert
her?  With this I was tolerably content, not seeing so
very much difference between a creed and a credo, and
believing God to be our Father, in Latin as well as
English.  Moreover, my darling knew but little of the
Popish ways--whether excellent or otherwise--inasmuch
as the Doones, though they stole their houses, or at
least the joiner's work, had never been tempted enough
by the devil to steal either church or chapel.

Lorna came to our little church, when Parson Bowden
reappeared after the snow was over; and she said that
all was very nice, and very like what she had seen in
the time of her Aunt Sabina, when they went far away to
the little chapel, with a shilling in their gloves.  It
made the tears come into her eyes, by the force of
memory, when Parson Bowden did the things, not so
gracefully nor so well, yet with pleasant imitation of
her old Priest's sacred rites.

'He is a worthy man,' she said, being used to talk in
the service time, and my mother was obliged to cough:
'I like him very much indeed:  but I wish he would let
me put his things the right way on his shoulders.'

Everybody in our parish, who could walk at all, or hire
a boy and a wheelbarrow, ay, and half the folk from
Countisbury, Brendon, and even Lynmouth, was and were
to be found that Sunday, in our little church of Oare. 
People who would not come anigh us, when the Doones
were threatening with carbine and with fire-brand,
flocked in their very best clothes, to see a lady Doone
go to church.  Now all this came of that vile John Fry;
I knew it as well as possible; his tongue was worse
than the clacker of a charity-school bell, or the ladle
in the frying-pan, when the bees are swarming.

However, Lorna was not troubled; partly because of her
natural dignity and gentleness; partly because she
never dreamed that the people were come to look at her. 
But when we came to the Psalms of the day, with some
vague sense of being stared at more than ought to be,
she dropped the heavy black lace fringing of the velvet
hat she wore, and concealed from the congregation all
except her bright red lips, and the oval snowdrift of
her chin.  I touched her hand, and she pressed mine;
and we felt that we were close together, and God saw no
harm in it.

As for Parson Bowden (as worthy a man as ever lived,
and one who could shoot flying), he scarcely knew what
he was doing, without the clerk to help him.  He had
borne it very well indeed, when I returned from London;
but to see a live Doone in his church, and a lady
Doone, and a lovely Doone, moreover one engaged to me,
upon whom he almost looked as the Squire of his parish
(although not rightly an Armiger), and to feel that
this lovely Doone was a Papist, and therefore of higher
religion--as all our parsons think--and that she knew
exactly how he ought to do all the service, of which he
himself knew little; I wish to express my firm belief
that all these things together turned Parson Bowden's
head a little, and made him look to me for orders.

My mother, the very best of women, was (as I could well
perceive) a little annoyed and vexed with things.  For
this particular occasion, she had procured from
Dulverton, by special message to Ruth Huckaback
(whereof more anon), a head-dress with a feather never
seen before upon Exmoor, to the best of every one's
knowledge.  It came from a bird called a flaming
something--a flaming oh, or a flaming ah, I will not be
positive--but I can assure you that it did flame; and
dear mother had no other thought, but that all the
congregation would neither see nor think of any other
mortal thing, or immortal even, to the very end of the
sermon.

Herein she was so disappointed, that no sooner did she
get home, but upstairs she went at speed, not even
stopping at the mirror in our little parlour, and flung
the whole thing into a cupboard, as I knew by the bang
of the door, having eased the lock for her lately. 
Lorna saw there was something wrong; and she looked at
Annie and Lizzie (as more likely to understand it) with
her former timid glance; which I knew so well, and
which had first enslaved me.

'I know not what ails mother,' said Annie, who looked
very beautiful, with lilac lute-string ribbons, which I
saw the Snowe girls envying; 'but she has not attended
to one of the prayers, nor said "Amen," all the
morning.  Never fear, darling Lorna, it is nothing
about you.  It is something about our John, I am sure;
for she never worries herself very much about anybody
but him.'  And here Annie made a look at me, such as I
had had five hundred of.

'You keep your opinions to yourself,' I replied;
because I knew the dear, and her little bits of
jealousy; 'it happens that you are quite wrong, this
time.  Lorna, come with me, my darling.'

'Oh yes, Lorna; go with him,' cried Lizzie, dropping
her lip, in a way which you must see to know its
meaning; 'John wants nobody now but you; and none can
find fault with his taste, dear.'

'You little fool, I should think not,' I answered, very
rudely; for, betwixt the lot of them, my Lorna's
eyelashes were quivering; 'now, dearest angel, come
with me; and snap your hands at the whole of them.'

My angel did come, with a sigh, and then with a smile,
when we were alone; but without any unangelic attempt
at snapping her sweet white fingers.

These little things are enough to show that while every
one so admired Lorna, and so kindly took to her, still
there would, just now and then, be petty and paltry
flashes of jealousy concerning her; and perhaps it
could not be otherwise among so many women.  However,
we were always doubly kind to her afterwards; and
although her mind was so sensitive and quick that she
must have suffered, she never allowed us to perceive
it, nor lowered herself by resenting it.

Possibly I may have mentioned that little Ruth
Huckaback had been asked, and had even promised to
spend her Christmas with us; and this was the more
desirable, because she had left us through some
offence, or sorrow, about things said of her.  Now my
dear mother, being the kindest and best-hearted of all
women, could not bear that poor dear Ruth (who would
some day have such a fortune), should be entirely lost
to us.  'It is our duty, my dear children,' she said
more than once about it, 'to forgive and forget, as
freely as we hope to have it done to us.  If dear
little Ruth has not behaved quite as we might have
expected, great allowance should be made for a girl
with so much money.  Designing people get hold of her,
and flatter her, and coax her, to obtain a base
influence over her; so that when she falls among simple
folk, who speak the honest truth of her, no wonder the
poor child is vexed, and gives herself airs, and so on. 
Ruth can be very useful to us in a number of little
ways; and I consider it quite a duty to pardon her
freak of petulance.'

Now one of the little ways in which Ruth had been very
useful, was the purchase of the scarlet feathers of the
flaming bird; and now that the house was quite safe
from attack, and the mark on my forehead was healing, I
was begged, over and over again, to go and see Ruth,
and make all things straight, and pay for the gorgeous
plumage.  This last I was very desirous to do, that I
might know the price of it, having made a small bet on
the subject with Annie; and having held counsel with
myself, whether or not it were possible to get
something of the kind for Lorna, of still more
distinguished appearance.  Of course she could not wear
scarlet as yet, even if I had wished it; but I believed
that people of fashion often wore purple for mourning;
purple too was the royal colour, and Lorna was by right
a queen; therefore I was quite resolved to ransack
Uncle Reuben's stores, in search of some bright purple
bird, if nature had kindly provided one.

All this, however, I kept to myself, intending to trust
Ruth Huckaback, and no one else in the matter.  And so,
one beautiful spring morning, when all the earth was
kissed with scent, and all the air caressed with song,
up the lane I stoutly rode, well armed, and well
provided.

Now though it is part of my life to heed, it is no part
of my tale to tell, how the wheat was coming on.  I
reckon that you, who read this story, after I am dead
and gone (and before that none shall read it), will
say, 'Tush! What is his wheat to us?  We are not wheat:
we are human beings:  and all we care for is human
doings.'  This may be very good argument, and in the
main, I believe that it is so.  Nevertheless, if a man
is to tell only what he thought and did, and not what
came around him, he must not mention his own clothes,
which his father and mother bought for him.  And more
than my own clothes to me, ay, and as much as my own
skin, are the works of nature round about, whereof a
man is the smallest.

And now I will tell you, although most likely only to
be laughed at, because I cannot put it in the style of
Mr. Dryden--whom to compare to Shakespeare! but if once
I begin upon that, you will never hear the last of
me--nevertheless, I will tell you this; not wishing to
be rude, but only just because I know it; the more a
man can fling his arms (so to say) round Nature's neck,
the more he can upon her bosom, like an infant, lie and
suck,--the more that man shall earn the trust and love
of all his fellow men.

In this matter is no jealousy (when the man is dead);
because thereafter all others know how much of the milk
be had; and he can suck no longer; and they value him
accordingly, for the nourishment he is to them.  Even
as when we keep a roaster of the sucking-pigs, we
choose, and praise at table most, the favourite of its
mother.  Fifty times have I seen this, and smiled, and
praised our people's taste, and offered them more of
the vitals.

Now here am I upon Shakespeare (who died, of his own
fruition, at the age of fifty-two, yet lived more than
fifty thousand men, within his little span of life),
when all the while I ought to be riding as hard as I
can to Dulverton.  But, to tell the truth, I could not
ride hard, being held at every turn, and often without
any turn at all, by the beauty of things around me. 
These things grow upon a man if once he stops to notice
them.

It wanted yet two hours to noon, when I came to Master
Huckaback's door, and struck the panels smartly. 
Knowing nothing of their manners, only that people in a
town could not be expected to entertain (as we do in
farm-houses), having, moreover, keen expectation of
Master Huckaback's avarice, I had brought some stuff to
eat, made by Annie, and packed by Lorna, and requiring
no thinking about it.

Ruth herself came and let me in, blushing very
heartily; for which colour I praised her health, and my
praises heightened it.  That little thing had lovely
eyes, and could be trusted thoroughly.  I do like an
obstinate little woman, when she is sure that she is
right.  And indeed if love had never sped me straight
to the heart of Lorna (compared to whom, Ruth was no
more than the thief is to the candle), who knows but
what I might have yielded to the law of nature, that
thorough trimmer of balances, and verified the proverb
that the giant loves the dwarf?

'I take the privilege, Mistress Ruth, of saluting you
according to kinship, and the ordering of the Canons.'
And therewith I bussed her well, and put my arm around
her waist, being so terribly restricted in the matter
of Lorna, and knowing the use of practice.  Not that I
had any warmth--all that was darling Lorna's--only out
of pure gallantry, and my knowledge of London fashions. 
Ruth blushed to such a pitch at this, and looked up at
me with such a gleam; as if I must have my own way;
that all my love of kissing sunk, and I felt that I was
wronging her.  Only my mother had told me, when the
girls were out of the way, to do all I could to please
darling Ruth, and I had gone about it accordingly.

Now Ruth as yet had never heard a word about dear
Lorna; and when she led me into the kitchen (where
everything looked beautiful), and told me not to mind,
for a moment, about the scrubbing of my boots, because
she would only be too glad to clean it all up after me,
and told me how glad she was to see me, blushing more
at every word, and recalling some of them, and stooping
down for pots and pans, when I looked at her too
ruddily--all these things came upon me so, without any
legal notice, that I could only look at Ruth, and think
how very good she was, and how bright her handles were;
and wonder if I had wronged her.  Once or twice, I
began--this I say upon my honour--to endeavour to
explain exactly, how we were at Plover's Barrows; how
we all had been bound to fight, and had defeated the
enemy, keeping their queen amongst us.  But Ruth would
make some great mistake between Lorna and Gwenny
Carfax, and gave me no chance to set her aright, and
cared about nothing much, except some news of Sally
Snowe.

What could I do with this little thing?  All my sense
of modesty, and value for my dinner, were against my
over-pressing all the graceful hints I had given about
Lorna.  Ruth was just a girl of that sort, who will not
believe one word, except from her own seeing; not so
much from any doubt, as from the practice of using eyes
which have been in business.

I asked Cousin Ruth (as we used to call her, though the
cousinship was distant) what was become of Uncle Ben,
and how it was that we never heard anything of or from
him now.  She replied that she hardly knew what to make
of her grandfather's manner of carrying on, for the
last half-year or more.  He was apt to leave his home,
she said, at any hour of the day or night; going none
knew whither, and returning no one might say when.  And
his dress, in her opinion, was enough to frighten a
hodman, of a scavenger of the roads, instead of the
decent suit of kersey, or of Sabbath doeskins, such as
had won the respect and reverence of his fellow-
townsmen.  But the worst of all things was, as she
confessed with tears in her eyes, that the poor old
gentleman had something weighing heavily on his mind.

'It will shorten his days, Cousin Ridd,' she said, for
she never would call me Cousin John; 'he has no
enjoyment of anything that he eats or drinks, nor even
in counting his money, as he used to do all Sunday;
indeed no pleasure in anything, unless it be smoking
his pipe, and thinking and staring at bits of brown
stone, which he pulls, every now and then, out of his
pockets.  And the business he used to take such pride
in is now left almost entirely to the foreman, and to
me.'

'And what will become of you, dear Ruth, if anything
happens to the old man?'

'I am sure I know not,' she answered simply; 'and I
cannot bear to think of it.  It must depend, I suppose,
upon dear grandfather's pleasure about me.'

'It must rather depend,' said I, though having no
business to say it, 'upon your own good pleasure, Ruth;
for all the world will pay court to you.'

'That is the very thing which I never could endure.  I
have begged dear grandfather to leave no chance of
that.  When he has threatened me with poverty, as he
does sometimes, I have always met him truly, with the
answer that I feared one thing a great deal worse than
poverty; namely, to be an heiress.  But I cannot make
him believe it.  Only think how strange, Cousin Ridd, I
cannot make him believe it.'

'It is not strange at all,' I answered; 'considering
how he values money.  Neither would any one else
believe you, except by looking into your true, and very
pretty eyes, dear.'

Now I beg that no one will suspect for a single moment,
either that I did not mean exactly what I said, or
meant a single atom more, or would not have said the
same, if Lorna had been standing by.  What I had always
liked in Ruth, was the calm, straightforward gaze, and
beauty of her large brown eyes.  Indeed I had spoken of
them to Lorna, as the only ones to be compared (though
not for more than a moment) to her own, for truth and
light, but never for depth and softness.  But now the
little maiden dropped them, and turned away, without
reply.

'I will go and see to my horse,' I said; 'the boy that
has taken him seemed surprised at his having no horns
on his forehead.  Perhaps he will lead him into the
shop, and feed him upon broadcloth.'

'Oh, he is such a stupid boy,' Ruth answered with great
sympathy: 'how quick of you to observe that now:  and
you call yourself "Slow John Ridd!"  I never did see
such a stupid boy:  sometimes he spoils my temper.  But
you must be back in half an hour, at the latest, Cousin
Ridd.  You see I remember what you are; when once you
get among horses, or cows, or things of that sort.'

'Things of that sort!  Well done, Ruth!  One would think
you were quite a Cockney.'

Uncle Reuben did not come home to his dinner; and his
granddaughter said she had strictest orders never to
expect him.  Therefore we had none to dine with us,
except the foreman of the shop, a worthy man, named
Thomas Cockram, fifty years of age or so.  He seemed to
me to have strong intentions of his own about little
Ruth, and on that account to regard me with a wholly
undue malevolence.  And perhaps, in order to justify
him, I may have been more attentive to her than
otherwise need have been; at any rate, Ruth and I were
pleasant; and he the very opposite.

'My dear Cousin Ruth,' I said, on purpose to vex Master
Cockram, because he eyed us so heavily, and squinted to
unluckily, 'we have long been looking for you at our
Plover's Barrows farm.  You remember how you used to
love hunting for eggs in the morning, and hiding up in
the tallat with Lizzie, for me to seek you among the
hay, when the sun was down.  Ah, Master Cockram, those
are the things young people find their pleasure in, not
in selling a yard of serge, and giving
twopence-halfpenny change, and writing "settled" at the
bottom, with a pencil that has blacked their teeth. 
Now, Master Cockram, you ought to come as far as our
good farm, at once, and eat two new-laid eggs for
breakfast, and be made to look quite young again.  Our
good Annie would cook for you; and you should have the
hot new milk and the pope's eye from the mutton; and
every foot of you would become a yard in about a
fortnight.'  And hereupon, I spread my chest, to show
him an example.  Ruth could not keep her countenance:
but I saw that she thought it wrong of me; and would
scold me, if ever I gave her the chance of taking those
little liberties.  However, he deserved it all,
according to my young ideas, for his great impertinence
in aiming at my cousin.

But what I said was far less grievous to a man of
honest mind than little Ruth's own behaviour.  I could
hardly have believed that so thoroughly true a girl,
and one so proud and upright, could have got rid of any
man so cleverly as she got rid of Master Thomas
Cockram.  She gave him not even a glass of wine, but
commended to his notice, with a sweet and thoughtful
gravity, some invoice which must be corrected, before
her dear grandfather should return; and to amend which
three great ledgers must be searched from first to
last.  Thomas Cockram winked at me, with the worst of
his two wrong eyes; as much as to say, 'I understand
it; but I cannot help myself.  Only you look out, if
ever'--and before he had finished winking, the door was
shut behind him.  Then Ruth said to me in the simplest
manner, 'You have ridden far today, Cousin Ridd; and
have far to ride to get home again.  What will dear
Aunt Ridd say, if we send you away without nourishment? 
All the keys are in my keeping, and dear grandfather
has the finest wine, not to be matched in the west of
England, as I have heard good judges say; though I know
not wine from cider.  Do you like the wine of Oporto,
or the wine of Xeres?'

'I know not one from the other, fair cousin, except by
the colour,' I answered: 'but the sound of Oporto is
nobler, and richer.  Suppose we try wine of Oporto.'

The good little creature went and fetched a black
bottle of an ancient cast, covered with dust and
cobwebs.  These I was anxious to shake aside; and
indeed I thought that the wine would be better for
being roused up a little.  Ruth, however, would not
hear a single word to that purport; and seeing that she
knew more about it, I left her to manage it.  And the
result was very fine indeed, to wit, a sparkling rosy
liquor, dancing with little flakes of light, and
scented like new violets.  With this I was so pleased
and gay, and Ruth so glad to see me gay, that we quite
forgot how the time went on; and though my fair cousin
would not be persuaded to take a second glass herself,
she kept on filling mine so fast that it was never
empty, though I did my best to keep it so.

'What is a little drop like this to a man of your size
and strength, Cousin Ridd?' she said, with her cheeks
just brushed with rose, which made her look very
beautiful; 'I have heard you say that your head is so
thick--or rather so clear, you ought to say--that no
liquor ever moves it.'

'That is right enough,' I answered; 'what a witch you
must be, dear Ruth, to have remembered that now!'

'Oh, I remember every word I have ever heard you say,
Cousin Ridd; because your voice is so deep, you know,
and you talk so little.  Now it is useless to say
"no".  These bottles hold almost nothing.  Dear
grandfather will not come home, I fear, until long
after you are gone.  What will Aunt Ridd think of me, I
am sure?  You are all so dreadfully hospitable.  Now
not another "no," Cousin Ridd.  We must have another
bottle.'

'Well, must is must,' I answered, with a certain
resignation.  'I cannot bear bad manners, dear; and how
old are you next birthday?'

'Eighteen, dear John;' said Ruth, coming over with the
empty bottle; and I was pleased at her calling me
'John,' and had a great mind to kiss her.  However, I
thought of my Lorna suddenly, and of the anger I should
feel if a man went on with her so; therefore I lay back
in my chair, to wait for the other bottle.

'Do you remember how we danced that night?' I asked,
while she was opening it; 'and how you were afraid of
me first, because I looked so tall, dear?'

'Yes, and so very broad, Cousin Ridd.  I thought that
you would eat me.  But I have come to know, since then,
how very kind and good you are.'

'And will you come and dance again, at my wedding,
Cousin Ruth?'

She nearly let the bottle fall, the last of which she
was sloping carefully into a vessel of bright glass;
and then she raised her hand again, and finished it
judiciously.  And after that, she took the window, to
see that all her work was clear; and then she poured me
out a glass and said, with very pale cheeks, but else
no sign of meaning about her, 'What did you ask me,
Cousin Ridd?'

'Nothing of any importance, Ruth; only we are so fond
of you.  I mean to be married as soon as I can.  Will
you come and help us?'

'To be sure I will, Cousin Ridd--unless, unless, dear
grandfather cannot spare me from the business.'  She
went away; and her breast was heaving, like a rick of
under-carried hay.  And she stood at the window long,
trying to make yawns of sighs.

For my part, I knew not what to do.  And yet I could
think about it, as I never could with Lorna; with whom
I was always in a whirl, from the power of my love.  So
I thought some time about it; and perceived that it was
the manliest way, just to tell her everything; except
that I feared she liked me.  But it seemed to me
unaccountable that she did not even ask the name of my
intended wife.  Perhaps she thought that it must be
Sally; or perhaps she feared to trust her voice.

'Come and sit by me, dear Ruth; and listen to a long,
long story, how things have come about with me.'

'No, thank you, Cousin Ridd,' she answered; 'at least I
mean that I shall be happy--that I shall be ready to
hear you--to listen to you, I mean of course.  But I
would rather stay where I am, and have the air--or
rather be able to watch for dear grandfather coming
home.  He is so kind and good to me.  What should I do
without him?'

Then I told her how, for years and years, I had been
attached to Lorna, and all the dangers and difficulties
which had so long beset us, and how I hoped that these
were passing, and no other might come between us,
except on the score of religion; upon which point I
trusted soon to overcome my mother's objections.  And
then I told her how poor, and helpless, and alone in
the world, my Lorna was; and how sad all her youth had
been, until I brought her away at last.  And many other
little things I mentioned, which there is no need for
me again to dwell upon.  Ruth heard it all without a
word, and without once looking at me; and only by her
attitude could I guess that she was weeping.  Then when
all my tale was told, she asked in a low and gentle
voice, but still without showing her face to me,--

'And does she love you, Cousin Ridd?  Does she say that
she loves you with--with all her heart?'

'Certainly, she does,' I answered.  'Do you think it
impossible for one like her to do so?'

She said no more; but crossed the room before I had
time to look at her, and came behind my chair, and
kissed me gently on the forehead.

'I hope you may be very happy, with--I mean in your new
life,' she whispered very softly; 'as happy as you
deserve to be, and as happy as you can make others be. 
Now how I have been neglecting you!  I am quite ashamed
of myself for thinking only of grandfather:  and it
makes me so low-spirited.  You have told me a very nice
romance, and I have never even helped you to a glass of
wine.  Here, pour it for yourself, dear cousin; I shall
be back again directly.'

With that she was out of the door in a moment; and when
she came back, you would not have thought that a tear
had dimmed those large bright eyes, or wandered down
those pale clear cheeks.  Only her hands were cold and
trembling:  and she made me help myself.

Uncle Reuben did not appear at all; and Ruth, who had
promised to come and see us, and stay for a fortnight
at our house (if her grandfather could spare her), now
discovered, before I left, that she must not think of
doing so.  Perhaps she was right in deciding thus; at
any rate it had now become improper for me to press
her.  And yet I now desired tenfold that she should
consent to come, thinking that Lorna herself would work
the speediest cure of her passing whim.

For such, I tried to persuade myself, was the nature of
Ruth's regard for me: and upon looking back I could not
charge myself with any misconduct towards the little
maiden.  I had never sought her company, I had never
trifled with her (at least until that very day), and
being so engrossed with my own love, I had scarcely
ever thought of her.  And the maiden would never have
thought of me, except as a clumsy yokel, but for my
mother's and sister's meddling, and their wily
suggestions.  I believe they had told the little soul
that I was deeply in love with her; although they both
stoutly denied it.  But who can place trust in a
woman's word, when it comes to a question of
match-making?



CHAPTER LI

A VISIT FROM THE COUNSELLOR

