

CHAPTER V

A MOUNTAIN WALK IN MIST AND SUNSHINE

Chillon was right in his forecast of the mists.  An over-moistened earth
steaming to the sun obscured it before the two had finished breakfast,
which was a finish to everything eatable in the ravaged dwelling, with
the exception of a sly store for the midday meal, that old Mariandl had
stuffed into Chillon's leather sack--the fruit of secret begging on their
behalf about the neighbourhood.  He found the sack heavy and bulky as he
slung it over his shoulders; but she bade him make nothing of such a
trifle till he had it inside him.  'And you that love tea so, my pretty
one, so that you always laughed and sang after drinking a cup with your
mother,' she said to Carinthia, 'you will find one pinch of it in your
bag at the end of the left-foot slipper, to remember your home by when
you are out in the world.'

She crossed the strap of the bag on her mistress's bosom, and was
embraced by Carinthia and Chillon in turns, Carinthia telling her to dry
her eyes, for that she would certainly come back and perhaps occupy the
house one day or other.  The old soul moaned of eyes that would not be
awake to behold her; she begged a visit at her grave, though it was to be
in a Catholic burial-place and the priests had used her dear master and
mistress ill, not allowing them to lie in consecrated ground; affection
made her a champion of religious tolerance and a little afraid of
retribution.  Carinthia soothed her, kissed her, gave the promise, and
the parting was over.

She and Chillon had on the previous day accomplished a pilgrimage to the
resting-place of their father and mother among humble Protestants, iron-
smelters, in a valley out of the way of their present line of march to
the glacier of the great snow-mountain marking the junction of three
Alpine provinces of Austria.  Josef, the cart-driver with the boxes, who
was to pass the valley, vowed of his own accord to hang a fresh day's
wreath on the rails.  He would not hear of money for the purchase, and
they humoured him.  The family had been beloved.  There was an offer of a
home for Carinthia in the castle of Count Lebern, a friend of her
parents, much taken with her, and she would have accepted it had not
Chillon overruled her choice, determined that, as she was English, she
must come to England and live under the guardianship of her uncle, Lord
Levellier, of whose character he did not speak.

The girl's cheeks were drawn thin and her lips shut as they departed;
she was tearless.  A phantom ring of mist accompanied her from her first
footing outside the house.  She did not look back.  The house came
swimming and plunging after her, like a spectral ship on big seas, and
her father and mother lived and died in her breast; and now they were
strong, consulting, chatting, laughing, caressing; now still and white,
caught by a vapour that dived away with them either to right or left, but
always with the same suddenness, leaving her to question herself whether
she existed, for more of life seemed to be with their mystery than with
her speculations.  The phantom ring of mist enclosing for miles the
invariable low-sweeping dark spruce-fir kept her thoughts on them as
close as the shroud.  She walked fast, but scarcely felt that she was
moving.  Near midday the haunted circle widened; rocks were loosely
folded in it, and heads of trees, whose round intervolving roots grasped
the yellow roadside soil; the mists shook like a curtain, and partly
opened and displayed a tapestry-landscape, roughly worked, of woollen
crag and castle and suggested glen, threaded waters, very prominent
foreground, Autumn flowers on banks; a predominant atmospheric greyness.
The sun threw a shaft, liquid instead of burning, as we see his beams
beneath a wave; and then the mists narrowed again, boiled up the valleys
and streams above the mountain, curled and flew, and were Python coils
pierced by brighter arrows of the sun.  A spot of blue signalled his
victory above.

To look at it was to fancy they had been walking under water and had now
risen to the surface.  Carinthia's mind stepped out of the chamber of
death.  The different air and scene breathed into her a timid warmth
toward the future, and between her naming of the lesser mountains on
their side of the pass, she asked questions relating to England, and
especially the ladies she was to see at the Baths beyond the glacier-
pass.  She had heard of a party of his friends awaiting him there,
without much encouragement from him to ask particulars of them,
and she had hitherto abstained, as she was rather shy of meeting her
countrywomen.  The ladies, Chillon said, were cousins; one was a young
widow, the Countess of Fleetwood, and the other was Miss Fakenham, a
younger lady.

Carinthia murmured in German: 'Poor soul!' Which one was she pitying?
The widow, she said, in the tone implying, naturally.

Her brother assured her the widow was used to it, for this was her second
widowhood.

'She marries again!' exclaimed the girl.

'You don't like that idea?' said he.

Carinthia betrayed a delicate shudder.

Her brother laughed to himself at her expressive present tense.  'And
marries again!' he said.  'There will certainly be a third.'

'Husband?' said she, as at the incredible.

'Husband, let's hope,' he answered.

She dropped from her contemplation of the lady, and her look at her
brother signified: It will not be you!

Chillon was engaged in spying for a place where he could spread out the
contents of his bag.  Sharp hunger beset them both at the mention of
eating.  A bank of sloping green shaded by a chestnut proposed the seat,
and here he relieved the bag of a bottle of wine, slices of, meat, bread,
hard eggs, and lettuce, a chipped cup to fling away after drinking the
wine, and a supply of small butler-cakes known to be favourites with
Carinthia.  She reversed the order of the feast by commencing upon one of
the cakes, to do honour to Mariandl's thoughtfulness.  As at their
breakfast, they shared the last morsel.

'But we would have made it enough for our dear old dog Pluto as well, if
he had lived,' said Carinthia, sighing with her thankfulness and
compassionate regrets, a mixture often inspiring a tender babbling
melancholy.  'Dogs' eyes have such a sick look of love.  He might have
lived longer, though he was very old, only he could not survive the loss
of father.  I know the finding of the body broke his heart.  He sprang
forward, he stopped and threw up his head.  It was human language to hear
him, Chillon.  He lay in the yard, trying to lift his eyes when I came to
him, they were so heavy; and he had not strength to move his poor old
tail more than once.  He died with his head on my lap.  He seemed to beg
me, and I took him, and he breathed twice, and that was his end.  Pluto!
old dog!  Well, for you or for me, brother, we could not have a better
wish.  As for me, death!  .  .  .  When we know we are to die!  Only let
my darling live! that is my prayer, and that we two may not be separated
till I am taken to their grave.  Father bought ground for four--his wife
and himself and his two children.  It does not oblige us to be buried
there, but could we have any other desire?'

She stretched her hand to her brother.  He kissed it spiritedly.

'Look ahead, my dear girl.  Help me to finish this wine.  There 's
nothing like good hard walking to give common wine of the country a
flavour--and out of broken crockery.'

'I think it so good,' Carinthia replied, after drinking from the cup.
'In England they, do not grow wine.  Are the people there kind?'

'They're civilized people, of course.'

'Kind--warm to you, Chillon?'

'Some of them, when you know them.  "Warm," is hardly the word.  Winter's
warm on skates.  You must do a great deal for yourself.  They don't boil
over.  By the way, don't expect much of your uncle.'

'Will he not love me?'

'He gives you a lodging in his house, and food enough, we'll hope.  You
won't see company or much of him.'

'I cannot exist without being loved.  I do not care for company.  He must
love me a little.'

'He is one of the warm-hearted race--he's mother's brother; but where his
heart is, I 've not discovered.

Bear with him just for the present, my dear, till I am able to support
you.'

'I will,' she said.

The dreary vision of a home with an unloving uncle was not brightened by
the alternative of her brother's having to support her.  She spoke of
money.  'Have we none, Chillon?'

'We have no debts,' he answered.  'We have a claim on the Government here
for indemnification for property taken to build a fortress upon one of
the passes into Italy.  Father bought the land, thinking there would be a
yield of ore thereabout; and they have seized it, rightly enough, but
they dispute our claim for the valuation we put on it.  A small sum they
would consent to pay.  It would be a very small sum, and I 'm father's
son, I will have justice.'

'Yes!' Carthinia joined with him to show the same stout nature.

'We have nothing else except a bit to toss up for luck.'

'And how can I help being a burden on my brother?' she inquired, in
distress.

'Marry, and be a blessing to a husband,' he said lightly.

They performed a sacrifice of the empty bottle and cracked cup on the
site of their meal, as if it had been a ceremony demanded from
travellers, and leaving them in fragments, proceeded on their journey
refreshed.

Walking was now high enjoyment, notwithstanding the force of the sun, for
they were a hardy couple, requiring no more than sufficient nourishment
to combat the elements with an exulting blood.  Besides they loved
mountain air and scenery, and each step to the ridge of the pass they
climbed was an advance in splendour.  Peaks of ashen hue and pale dry red
and pale sulphur pushed up, straight, forked, twisted, naked, striking
their minds with an indeterminate ghostliness of Indian, so strange they
were in shape and colouring.  These sharp points were the first to greet
them between the blue and green.  A depression of the pass to the left
gave sight of the points of black fir forest below, round the girths of
the barren shafts.  Mountain blocks appeared pushing up in front, and a
mountain wall and woods on it, and mountains in the distance, and cliffs
riven with falls of water that were silver skeins, down lower to meadows,
villages and spires, and lower finally to the whole valley of the foaming
river, field and river seeming in imagination rolled out from the hand of
the heading mountain.

'But see this in winter, as I did with father, Chillon!' said Carinthia.

She said it upon love's instinct to halo the scene with something beyond
present vision, and to sanctify it for her brother, so that this walk of
theirs together should never be forgotten.

A smooth fold of cloud, moveless along one of the upper pastures, and
still dense enough to be luminous in sunlight, was the last of the mist.

They watched it lying in the form of a fish, leviathan diminished, as
they descended their path; and the head was lost, the tail spread
peacockwise, and evaporated slowly in that likeness; and soft to a breath
of air as gossamer down, the body became a ball, a cock, a little lizard,
nothingness.

The bluest bright day of the year was shining.  Chillon led the descent.
With his trim and handsome figure before her, Carinthia remembered the
current saying, that he should have been the girl and she the boy.  That
was because he resembled their mother in face.  But the build of his
limbs and shoulders was not feminine.

To her admiring eyes, he had a look superior to simple strength and
grace; the look of a great sky-bird about to mount, a fountain-like
energy of stature, delightful to her contemplation.  And he had the mouth
women put faith in for decision and fixedness.  She did, most fully; and
reflecting how entirely she did so, the thought assailed her: some one
must be loving him!

She allowed it to surprise her, not choosing to revert to an uneasy
sensation of the morning.

That some one, her process of reasoning informed her, was necessarily an
English young lady.  She reserved her questions till they should cease
this hopping and heeling down the zigzag of the slippery path-track.
When children they had been collectors of beetles and butterflies, and
the flying by of a 'royal-mantle,' the purple butterfly grandly fringed,
could still remind Carinthia of the event it was of old to spy and chase
one.  Chillon himself was not above the sentiment of their "very early
days"; he stopped to ask if she had been that lustrous blue-wing, a rarer
species, prized by youngsters, shoot through the chestnut trees: and they
both paused for a moment, gazing into the fairyland of infancy, she
seeing with her brother's eyes, this prince of the realm having escaped
her.  He owned he might have been mistaken, as the brilliant fellow flew
swift and high between leaves, like an ordinary fritillary.  Not the less
did they get their glimpse of the wonders in the sunny eternity of a
child's afternoon.

'An Auerhahn, Chillon!' she said, picturing the maturer day when she had
scaled perilous heights with him at night to stalk the blackcock in the
prime of the morning.  She wished they could have had another such
adventure to stamp the old home on his heart freshly, to tile exclusion
of beautiful English faces.

On the level of the valley, where they met the torrent-river, walking
side by side with him, she ventured an inquiry: 'English girls are fair
girls, are they not?'

'There are some dark also,' he replied.

'But the best-looking are fair?'

'Perhaps they are, with us.'

'Mother was fair.'

'She was.'

'I have only seen a few of them, once at Vies and at Venice, and those
Baths we are going to; and at Meran, I think.'

'You considered them charming?'

'Not all.'

It was touching that she should be such a stranger to her countrywomen!
He drew a portrait-case from his breast-pocket, pressing the spring,
and handed it to her, saying: 'There is one.'  He spoke indifferently,
but as soon as she had seen the face inside it, with a look at him and a
deep breath; she understood that he was an altered brother, and that they
were three instead of two.

She handed it back to him, saying hushedly and only 'Yes.'

He did not ask an opinion upon the beauty she had seen.  His pace
increased, and she hastened her steps beside him.  She had not much to
learn when some minutes later she said; 'Shall I see her, Chillon?'

'She is one of the ladies we are to meet.'

'What a pity!' Carinthia stepped faster, enlightened as to his wish to
get to the Baths without delay; and her heart softened in reflecting how
readily he had yielded to her silly preference for going on foot.

Her cry of regret was equivocal; it produced no impression on him.  They
reached a village where her leader deemed it adviseable to drive for the
remainder of the distance up the valley to the barrier snow-mountain.
She assented instantly, she had no longer any active wishes of her own,
save to make amends to her brother, who was and would ever be her
brother: she could not be robbed of their relationship.

Something undefined in her feeling of possession she had been robbed of,
she knew it by her spiritlessness; and she would fain have attributed it
to the idle motion of the car, now and them stupidly jolting her on,
after the valiant exercise of her limbs.  They were in a land of
waterfalls and busy mills, a narrowing vale where the runs of grass grew
short and wild, and the glacier-river roared for the leap, more foam than
water, and the savagery, naturally exciting to her, breathed of its lair
among the rocks and ice-fields.

Her brother said: 'There he is.'  She saw the whitecrowned king of the
region, of whose near presence to her old home she had been accustomed to
think proudly, end she looked at him without springing to him, and
continued imaging her English home and her loveless uncle, merely
admiring the scene, as if the fire of her soul had been extinguished.--
'Marry, and be a blessing to a husband.'  Chillon's words whispered of
the means of escape from the den of her uncle.

But who would marry me!  she thought.  An unreproved sensation of melting
pervaded her; she knew her capacity for gratitude, and conjuring it up in
her 'heart, there came with it the noble knightly gentleman who would
really stoop to take a plain girl by the hand, release her, and say: 'Be
mine!' His vizor was down, of course.  She had no power of imagining the
lineaments of that prodigy.  Or was he a dream?  He came and went.  Her
mother, not unkindly, sadly, had counted her poor girl's chances of
winning attention and a husband.  Her father had doated on her face; but,
as she argued, her father had been attracted by her mother, a beautiful
woman, and this was a circumstance that reflected the greater
hopelessness on her prospects.  She bore a likeness to her father,
little to her mother, though he fancied the reverse and gave her the
mother's lips and hair.  Thinking of herself, however, was destructive
to the form of her mirror of knightliness: he wavered, he fled for good,
as the rosy vapour born of our sensibility must do when we relapse to
coldness, and the more completely when we try to command it.  No, she
thought, a plain girl should think of work, to earn her independence.

'Women are not permitted to follow armies, Chillon?' she said.

He laughed out.  'What 's in your head?'

The laugh abashed her; she murmured of women being good nurses for
wounded soldiers, if they were good walkers to march with the army; and,
as evidently it sounded witless to him, she added, to seem reasonable:
'You have not told me the Christian names of those ladies.'

He made queer eyes over the puzzle to connect the foregoing and the
succeeding in her remarks, but answered straightforwardly: 'Livia is one,
and Henrietta!

Her ear seized on the stress of his voice.  'Henrietta!' She chose that
name for the name of the person disturbing her; it fused best, she
thought, with the new element she had been compelled to take into her
system, to absorb it if she could.

'You're not scheming to have them serve as army hospital nurses, my
dear?'

'No, Chillon.'

'You can't explain it, I suppose?'

'A sister could go too, when you go to war, Chillon.'

A sister could go, if it were permitted by the authorities, and be near
her brother to nurse him in case of wounds; others would be unable to
claim the privilege.  That was her meaning, involved with the hazy
project of earning an independence; but she could not explain it, and
Chillon set her down for one of the inexplicable sex, which the simple
adventurous girl had not previously seemed to be.

She was inwardly warned of having talked foolishly, and she held her
tongue.  Her humble and modest jealousy, scarce deserving the title,
passed with a sigh or two.  It was her first taste of life in the world.

A fit of heavy-mindedness ensued, that heightened the contrast her recent
mood had bequeathed, between herself, ignorant as she was, and those
ladies.  Their names, Livia and Henrietta, soared above her and sang the
music of the splendid spheres.  Henrietta was closer to earth, for her
features had been revealed; she was therefore the dearer, and the richer
for him who loved her, being one of us, though an over-earthly one; and
Carinthia gave her to Chillon, reserving for herself a handmaiden's place
within the circle of their happiness.

This done, she sat straight in the car.  It was toiling up the steep
ascent of a glen to the mountain village, the last of her native
province.  Her proposal to walk was accepted, and the speeding of her
blood, now that she had mastered a new element in it, soon restored her
to her sisterly affinity with natural glories.  The sunset was on yonder
side of the snows.  Here there was a feast of variously-tinted sunset
shadows on snow, meadows, rock, river, serrated cliff.  The peaked cap of
the rushing rock-dotted sweeps of upward snow caught a scarlet
illumination: one flank of the white in heaven was violetted wonderfully.

At nightfall, under a clear black sky, alive with wakeful fires round
head and breast of the great Alp, Chillon and Carinthia strolled out of
the village, and he told her some of his hopes.  They referred to
inventions of destructive weapons, which were primarily to place his
country out of all danger from a world in arms; and also, it might be
mentioned, to bring him fortune.  'For I must have money!' he said,
sighing it out like a deliberate oath.  He and his uncle were associated
in the inventions.  They had an improved rocket that would force military
chiefs to change their tactics: they had a new powder, a rifle, a model
musket--the latter based on his own plans; and a scheme for fortress
artillery likely to turn the preponderance in favour of the defensive
once again.  'And that will be really doing good,' said Chillon, 'for
where it's with the offensive, there's everlasting bullying and
plundering.'

Carinthia warmly agreed with him, but begged him be sure his uncle
divided the profits equally.  She discerned what his need of money
signified.

Tenderness urged her to say: 'Henrietta!  Chillon.'

'Well?' he answered quickly.

'Will she wait?'

'Can she, you should ask.'

'Is she brave?'

'Who can tell, till she has been tried?'

'Is she quite free?'

'She has not yet been captured.'

'Brother, is there no one else .  .  . ?'

'There's a nobleman anxious to bestow his titles on her.'

'He is rich?'

'The first or second wealthiest in Great Britain, they say.'

'Is he young?'

'About the same age as mine.'

'Is he a handsome young man?'

'Handsomer than your brother, my girl.'

'No, no, no !' said she.  'And what if he is, and your Henrietta does not
choose him?  Now let me think what I long to think.  I have her close to
me.'

She rocked a roseate image on her heart and went to bed with it by
starlight.

By starlight they sprang to their feet and departed the next morning, in
the steps of a guide carrying, Chillon said, 'a better lantern than we
left behind us at the smithy.'

'Father!' exclaimed Carinthia on her swift inward breath, for this one of
the names he had used to give to her old home revived him to her thoughts
and senses fervently.




CHAPTER VI

THE NATURAL PHILOSOPHER

Three parts down a swift decline of shattered slate, where travelling
stones loosened from rows of scree hurl away at a bound after one roll
over, there sat a youth dusty and torn, nursing a bruised leg, not in the
easiest of postures, on a sharp tooth of rock, that might at any moment
have broken from the slanting slab at the end of which it formed a stump,
and added him a second time to the general crumble of the mountain.  He
had done a portion of the descent in excellent imitation of the detached
fragments, and had parted company with his alpenstock and plaid;
preserving his hat and his knapsack.  He was alone, disabled, and
cheerful; in doubt of the arrival of succour before he could trust his
left leg to do him further service unaided; but it was morning still, the
sun was hot, the air was cool; just the tempering opposition to render
existence pleasant as a piece of vegetation, especially when there has
been a question of your ceasing to exist; and the view was of a
sustaining sublimity of desolateness: crag and snow overhead; a gloomy
vale below; no life either of bird or herd; a voiceless region where
there had once been roars at the bowling of a hill from a mountain to the
deep, and the third flank of the mountain spoke of it in the silence.

He would have enjoyed the scene unremittingly, like the philosopher he
pretended to be, in a disdain of civilization and the ambitions of men,
had not a contest with earth been forced on him from time to time to keep
the heel of his right foot, dug in shallow shale, fixed and supporting.
As long as it held he was happy and maintained the attitude of a guitar-
player, thrumming the calf of the useless leg to accompany tuneful
thoughts, but the inevitable lapse and slide of the foot recurred, and
the philosopher was exhibited as an infant learning to crawl.  The seat,
moreover, not having been fashioned for him or for any soft purpose,
resisted his pressure and became a thing of violence, that required to be
humiliatingly coaxed.  His last resource to propitiate it was counselled
by nature turned mathematician: tenacious extension solved the problem;
he lay back at his length, and with his hat over his eyes consented to
see nothing for the sake of comfort.  Thus he was perfectly rational,
though when others beheld him he appeared the insanest of mortals.

A girl's voice gave out the mountain carol ringingly above.  His heart
and all his fancies were in motion at the sound.  He leaned on an elbow
to listen; the slide threatened him, and he resumed his full stretch,
determined to take her for a dream.  He was of the class of youths who,
in apprehension that their bright season may not be permanent, choose to
fortify it by a systematic contempt of material realities unless they
come in the fairest of shapes, and as he was quite sincere in this
feeling and election of the right way to live, disappointment and
sullenness overcame him on hearing men's shouts and steps; despite his
helpless condition he refused to stir, for they had jarred on his dream.
Perhaps his temper, unknown to himself, had been a little injured by his
mishap, and he would not have been sorry to charge them with want of
common humanity in passing him; or he did not think his plight so bad,
else he would have bawled after them had they gone by: far the youths of
his description are fools only upon system,--however earnestly they
indulge the present self-punishing sentiment.  The party did not pass;
they stopped short, they consulted, and a feminine tongue more urgent
than the others, and very musical, sweet to hear anywhere, put him in
tune.  She said, 'Brother!  brother!' in German.  Our philosopher flung
off his hat.

'You see!' said the lady's brother.

'Ask him, Anton,'she said to their guide.

'And quick!' her brother added.

The guide scrambled along to him, and at a closer glance shouted: 'The
Englishman!' wheeling his finger to indicate what had happened to the
Tomnoddy islander.

His master called to know if there were broken bones, as if he could stop
for nothing else.

The cripple was raised.  The gentleman and lady made their way to him,
and he tried his hardest to keep from tottering on the slope in her
presence.  No injury had been done to the leg; there was only a
stiffness, and an idiotic doubling of the knee, as though at each step
his leg pronounced a dogged negative to the act of walking.  He said
something equivalent to 'this donkey leg,' to divert her charitable eyes
from a countenance dancing with ugly twitches.  She was the Samaritan.  A
sufferer discerns his friend, though it be not the one who physically
assists him: he is inclined by nature to put material aid at a lower mark
than gentleness, and her brief words of encouragement, the tone of their
delivery yet more, were medical to his blood, better help than her
brother's iron arm, he really believed.  Her brother and the guide held
him on each side, and she led to pick out the safer footing for him; she
looked round and pointed to some projection that would form a step; she
drew attention to views here and there, to win excuses for his resting;
she did not omit to soften her brother's visible impatience as well, and
this was the art which affected her keenly sensible debtor most.

'I suppose I ought to have taken a guide,' he said.

'There's not a doubt of that,' said Chillon Kirby.

Carinthia halted, leaning on her staff: 'But I had the same wish.  They
told us at the inn of an Englishman who left last night to sleep on the
mountain, and would go alone; and did I not say, brother, that must be
true love of the mountains?'

'These freaks get us a bad name on the Continent,' her brother replied.
He had no sympathy with nonsense, and naturally not with a youth who
smelt of being a dreamy romancer and had caused the name of Englishman to
be shouted in his ear in derision.  And the fellow might delay his
arrival at the Baths and sight of the lady of his love for hours!

They managed to get him hobbling and slipping to the first green tuft of
the base, where long black tongues of slate-rubble pouring into the
grass, like shore-waves that have spent their burden, seem about to draw
back to bring the mountain down.  Thence to the level pasture was but a
few skips performed sliding.

'Well, now,' said Chillon, 'you can stand?'

'Pretty well, I think.'  He tried his foot on the ground, and then
stretched his length, saying that it only wanted rest.  Anton pressed a
hand at his ankle and made him wince, but the bones were sound, leg and
hip not worse than badly bruised.  He was advised by Anton to plant his
foot in the first running water he came to, and he was considerate enough
to say to Chillon

'Now you can leave me; and let me thank you.  Half an hour will set me
right.  My name is Woodseer, if ever we meet again.'

Chillon nodded a hurried good-bye, without a thought of giving his name
in return.  But Carinthia had thrown herself on the grass.  Her brother
asked her in dismay if she was tired.  She murmured to him: 'I should
like to hear more English.'

'My dear girl, you'll have enough of it in two or three weeks.'

'Should we leave a good deed half done, Chillon?'

'He shall have our guide.'

'He may not be rich.'

'I'll pay Anton to stick to him.'

'Brother, he has an objection to guides.'

Chillon cast hungry eyes on his watch: 'Five minutes, then.'  He
addressed Mr. Woodseer, who was reposing, indifferent to time, hard-by:
'Your objection to guides might have taught you a sharp lesson.  It 's
like declining to have a master in studying a science--trusting to
instinct for your knowledge of a bargain.  One might as well refuse an
oar to row in a boat.'

'I 'd rather risk it,' the young man replied.  'These guides kick the
soul out of scenery.  I came for that and not for them.'

'You might easily have been a disagreeable part of the scene.'

'Why not here as well as elsewhere?'

'You don't care for your life?'

'I try not to care for it a fraction more than Destiny does.'

'Fatalism.  I suppose you care for something?'

'Besides I've a slack purse, and shun guides and inns when I can.  I care
for open air, colour, flowers, weeds, birds, insects, mountains.  There's
a world behind the mask.  I call this life; and the town's a boiling pot,
intolerably stuffy.  My one ambition is to be out of it.  I thank heaven
I have not another on earth.  Yes, I care for my note-book, because it's
of no use to a human being except me.  I slept beside a spring last
night, and I never shall like a bedroom so well.  I think I have
discovered the great secret: I may be wrong, of course.'  And if so,
he had his philosophy, the admission was meant to say.

Carinthia expected the revelation of a notable secret, but none came;
or if it did it eluded her grasp:--he was praising contemplation, he was
praising tobacco.  He talked of the charm of poverty upon a settled
income of a very small sum of money, the fruit of a compact he would
execute with the town to agree to his perpetual exclusion from it,
and to retain his identity, and not be the composite which every townsman
was. He talked of Buddha.  He said: 'Here the brook's the brook, the
mountain's the mountain: they are as they always were.'

'You'd have men be the same,' Chillon remarked as to a nursling prattler,
and he rejoined: 'They've lost more than they've gained; though, he
admitted, 'there has been some gain, in a certain way.'

Fortunately for them, young men have not the habit of reflecting upon the
indigestion of ideas they receive from members of their community,
sometimes upon exchange.  They compare a view of life with their own
view, to condemn it summarily; and he was a curious object to Chillon as
the perfect opposite of himself.

'I would advise you,' Chillon said, 'to get a pair of Styrian boots, if
you intend to stay in the Alps.  Those boots of yours are London make.'

'They 're my father's make,' said Mr. Woodseer.

Chillon drew out his watch.  'Come, Carinthia, we must be off.'  He
proposed his guide, and, as Anton was rejected, he pointed the route over
the head of the valley, stated the distance to an inn that way, saluted
and strode.

Mr. Woodseer, partly rising, presumed, in raising his hat and thanking
Carinthia, to touch her fingers.  She smiled on him, frankly extending
her open hand, and pointing the route again, counselling him to rest at
the inn, even saying: 'You have not yet your strength to come on with
us?'

He thought he would stay some time longer: he had a disposition to smoke.

She tripped away to her brother and was watched through the whiffs of a
pipe far up the valley, guiltless of any consciousness of producing an
impression.  But her mind was with the stranger sufficiently to cause her
to say to Chillon, at the close of a dispute between him and Anton on the
interesting subject of the growth of the horns of chamois: 'Have we been
quite kind to that gentleman?'

Chillon looked over his shoulder.  'He's there still; he's fond of
solitude.  And, Carin, my dear, don't give your hand when you are meeting
or parting with people it's not done.'

His uninstructed sister said: 'Did you not like him?'

She was answered with an 'Oh,' the tone of which balanced lightly on the
neutral line.  'Some of the ideas he has are Lord Fleetwood's, I hear,
and one can understand them in a man of enormous wealth, who doesn't know
what to do with himself and is dead-sick of flattery; though it seems odd
for an English nobleman to be raving about Nature.  Perhaps it's because
none else of them does.'

'Lord Fleetwood loves our mountains, Chillon?'

'But a fellow who probably has to make his way in the world!--and he
despises ambition!' .  .  .  Chillon dropped him.  He was antipathetic to
eccentrics, and his soldierly and social training opposed the profession
of heterodox ideas: to have listened seriously to them coming from the
mouth of an unambitious bootmaker's son involved him in the absurdity.
He considered that there was no harm in the lad, rather a commendable
sort of courage and some notion of manners; allowing for his ignorance of
the convenable in putting out his hand to take a young lady's, with the
plea of thanking her.  He hoped she would be more on her guard.

Carinthia was sure she had the name of the nobleman wishing to bestow his
title upon the beautiful Henrietta.  Lord Fleetwood!  That slender thread
given her of the character of her brother's rival who loved the mountains
was woven in her mind with her passing experience of the youth they had
left behind them, until the two became one, a highly transfigured one,
and the mountain scenery made him very threatening to her brother.  A
silky haired youth, brown-eyed, unconquerable in adversity, immensely
rich, fond of solitude, curled, decorated, bejewelled by all the elves
and gnomes of inmost solitude, must have marvellous attractions, she
feared.  She thought of him so much, that her humble spirit conceived the
stricken soul of the woman as of necessity the pursuer; as shamelessly,
though timidly, as she herself pursued in imagination the enchanted
secret of the mountain-land.  She hoped her brother would not supplicate,
for it struck her that the lover who besieged the lady would forfeit her
roaming and hunting fancy.

'I wonder what that gentleman is doing now,' she said to Chillon.

He grimaced slightly, for her sake; he would have liked to inform her,
for the sake of educating her in the customs of the world she was going
to enter, that the word 'gentleman' conveys in English a special
signification.

Her expression of wonder whether they were to meet him again gave Chillon
the opportunity of saying:

'It 's the unlikeliest thing possible--at all events in England.'

'But I think we shall,' said she.

'My dear, you meet people of your own class; you don't meet others.'

'But we may meet anybody, Chillon!'

'In the street.  I suppose you would not stop to speak to him in the
street.'

'It would be strange to see him in the street!' Carinthia said.

'Strange or not!'

.  .  Chillon thought he had said sufficient.  She was under his
protectorship, otherwise he would not have alluded to the observance of
class distinctions.  He felt them personally in this case because of
their seeming to stretch grotesquely by the pretentious heterodoxy of the
young fellow, whom, nevertheless, thinking him over now that he was
mentioned, he approved for his manliness in bluntly telling his origin
and status.

A chalet supplied them with fresh milk, and the inn of a village on a
perch with the midday meal.  Their appetites were princely and swept over
the little inn like a conflagration.  Only after clearing it did they
remember the rearward pedestrian, whose probable wants Chillon was urged
by Carthinia to speak of to their host.  They pushed on, clambering up,
scurrying down, tramping gaily, till by degrees the chambers of
Carinthia's imagination closed their doors and would no longer
intercommunicate.  Her head refused to interest her, and left all
activity to her legs and her eyes, and the latter became unobservant,
except of foot-tracks, animal-like.  She felt that she was a fine
machine, and nothing else: and she was rapidly approaching those ladies!

'You will tell them how I walked with you,' she said.

'Your friends over yonder?' said he.

'So that they may not think me so ignorant, brother.'  She stumbled on
the helpless word in a hasty effort to cloak her vanity.

He laughed.  Her desire to meet the critical English ladies with a
towering reputation in one department of human enterprise was
comprehensible, considering the natural apprehensiveness of the half-wild
girl before such a meeting.  As it often happens with the silly phrases
of simple people, the wrong word, foolish although it was, went to the
heart of the hearer and threw a more charitable light than ridicule on
her.  So that they may know I can do something they cannot do, was the
interpretation.  It showed her deep knowledge of her poorness in laying
bare the fact.

Anxious to cheer her, he said: 'Come, come, you can dance.  You dance
well, mother has told me, and she was a judge.  You ride, you swim, you
have a voice for country songs, at all events.  And you're a bit of a
botanist too.  You're good at English and German; you had a French
governess for a couple of years.  By the way, you understand the use of a
walking-stick in self-defence: you could handle a sword on occasion.'

'Father trained me,' said Carthinia.  'I can fire a pistol, aiming.'

'With a good aim, too.  Father told me you could.  How fond he was of his
girl!  Well, bear in mind that father was proud of you, and hold up your
head wherever you are.'

'I will,' she said.

He assured her he had a mind to have a bugle blown at the entrance
of the Baths for a challenge to the bathers to match her in warlike
accomplishments.

She bit her lips: she could not bear much rallying on the subject just
then:

'Which is the hard one to please?' she asked.

'The one you will find the kinder of the two.'

'Henrietta?'

He nodded.

'Has she a father?'

'A gallant old admiral: Admiral Baldwin Fakenham.'

'I am glad of that!' Carinthia sighed out heartily.  'And he is with her?
And likes you, Chillon?'

'On the whole, I think he does.'

'A brave officer!'  Such a father would be sure to like him.

So the domestic prospect was hopeful.

At sunset they stood on the hills overlooking the basin of the Baths, all
enfolded in swathes of pink and crimson up to the shining grey of a high
heaven that had the fresh brightness of the morning.

'We are not tired in the slightest,' said Carinthia, trifling with the
vision of a cushioned rest below.  'I could go on through the night quite
comfortably.'

'Wait till you wake up in your little bed to-morrow,' Chillon replied
stoutly, to drive a chill from his lover's heart, that had seized it at
the bare suggestion of their going on.




CHAPTER VII

THE LADY'S LETTER

Is not the lover a prophet?  He that fervently desires may well be one;
his hurried nature is alive with warmth to break the possible blow: and
if his fears were not needed they were shadows; and if fulfilled, was he
not convinced of his misfortune by a dark anticipation that rarely erred?
Descending the hills, he remembered several omens: the sun had sunk when
he looked down on the villas and clustered houses, not an edge of the orb
had been seen; the admiral's quarters in tile broad-faced hotel had worn
an appearance resembling the empty house of yesterday; the encounter with
the fellow on the rocks had a bad whisper of impish tripping.  And what
moved Carinthia to speak of going on?

A letter was handed to Chillon in the hall of the admiral's hotel, where
his baggage had already been delivered.  The manager was deploring the
circumstance that his rooms were full to the roof, when Chillon said:

'Well, we must wash and eat'; and Carinthia, from watching her brother's
forehead during his perusal of the letter, declared her readiness for
anything.  He gave her the letter to read by herself while preparing to
sit at table, unwilling to ask her for a further tax on her energies--but
it was she who had spoken of going on!  He thought of it as of a debt she
had contracted and might be supposed to think payable to their
misfortune.

She read off the first two sentences.

'We can have a carriage here, Chillon; order a carriage; I shall get as
much sleep in a carriage as in a bed: I shall enjoy driving at night,'
she said immediately, and strongly urged it and forced him to yield, the
manager observing that a carriage could be had.

In the privacy of her room, admiring the clear flowing hand, she read the
words, delicious in their strangeness to her, notwithstanding the heavy
news, as though they were sung out of a night-sky:

              'Most picturesque of Castles!

               May none these marks efface,
               For they appeal from Tyranny . . .'

'We start at noon to-day.  Sailing orders have been issued, and I could
only have resisted them in my own person by casting myself overboard.
I go like the boat behind the vessel.  You were expected yesterday, at
latest this morning.  I have seen boxes in the hall, with a name on them
not foreign to me.  Why does the master tarry?  Sir, of your valliance
you should have held to your good vow,--quoth the damozel, for now you
see me sore perplexed and that you did not your devoir is my affliction.
Where lingers chivalry, she should have proceeded, if not with my knight?
I feast on your regrets.  I would not have you less than miserable: and I
fear the reason is, that I am not so very, very sure you will be so at
all or very hugely, as I would command it of you for just time enough to
see that change over your eyebrows I know so well.

'If you had seen a certain Henrietta yesterday you would have the picture
of how you ought to look.  The admiral was heard welcoming a new arrival
--you can hear him.  She ran down the stairs quicker than any cascade of
this district, she would have made a bet with Livia that it could be no
one else--her hand was out, before she was aware of the difference it was
locked in Lord F.'s!

'Let the guilty absent suffer for causing such a betrayal of
disappointment.  I must be avenged!  But if indeed you are unhappy and
would like to chide the innocent, I am full of compassion for the poor
gentleman inheriting my legitimate feelings of wrath, and beg merely that
he will not pour them out on me with pen and paper, but from his lips and
eyes.

'Time pressing, I chatter no more.  The destination is Livia's beloved
Baden.  We rest a night in the city of Mozart, a night at Munich, a night
at Stuttgart.  Baden will detain my cousin full a week.  She has Captain
Abrane and Sir Meeson Corby in attendance--her long shadow and her short:
both devoted to Lord F., to win her smile, and how he drives them!  The
captain has been paraded on the promenade, to the stupefaction of the
foreigner.  Princes, counts, generals, diplomats passed under him in awe.
I am told that he is called St.  Christopher.

'Why do we go thus hastily?--my friend, this letter has to be concealed.
I know some one who sees in the dark.

'Think no harm of Livia.  She is bent upon my worldly advantage, and that
is plain even to the person rejecting it.  How much more so must it be to
papa, though he likes you, and when you are near him would perhaps, in a
fit of unworldliness, be almost as reckless as the creature he calls
madcap and would rather call countess.  No! sooner with a Will-o'-the-
wisp, my friend.  Who could ever know where the man was when he himself
never knows where he is.  He is the wind that bloweth as it listeth--
because it is without an aim or always with a new one.  And am I the one
to direct him?  I need direction.  My lord and sovereign must fix my
mind.  I am volatile, earthly, not to be trusted if I do not worship.  He
himself said to me that--he reads our characters.  "Nothing but a proved
hero will satisfy Henrietta," his words!  And the hero must be shining
like a beacon-fire kept in a blaze.  Quite true; I own it.  Is Chillon
Kirby satisfied?  He ought to be.

'But oh!--to be yoked is an insufferable thought, unless we name all the
conditions.  But to be yoked to a creature of impulses!  Really I could
only describe his erratic nature by commending you to the study of a
dragon-fly.  It would map you an idea of what he has been in the twenty-
four hours since we had him here.  They tell me a vain sort of person is
the cause.  Can she be the cause of his resolving to have a residence
here, to buy up half the valley--erecting a royal palace--and marking
out the site--raving about it in the wildest language, poetical if
it had been a little reasonable--and then, after a night, suddenly,
unaccountably, hating the place, and being under the necessity of flying
from it in hot haste, tearing us all away, as if we were attached to a
kite that will neither mount nor fall, but rushes about headlong.  Has he
heard, or suspected?  or seen certain boxes bearing a name?  Livia has no
suspicion, though she thinks me wonderfully contented in so dull a place,
where it has rained nine days in a fortnight.  I ask myself whether my
manner of greeting him betrayed my expectation of another.  He has
brains.  It is the greatest of errors to suppose him at all like the
common run of rich young noblemen.  He seems to thirst for brilliant wits
and original sayings.  His ambition is to lead all England in everything!
I readily acknowledge that he has generous ideas too; but try to hold
him, deny him his liberty, and it would be seen how desperate and
relentless he would be to get loose.  Of this I am convinced: he would be
either the most abject of lovers, or a woman (if it turned out not to be
love) would find him the most unscrupulous of yoke-fellows.  Yoke-fellow!
She would not have her reason in consenting.  A lamb and a furious bull!
Papa and I have had a serious talk.  He shuts his ears to my comparisons,
but admits, that as I am the principal person concerned, etc.  Rich and a
nobleman is too tempting for an anxious father; and Livia's influence is
paramount.  She has not said a syllable in depreciation of you.  That is
to her credit.  She also admits that I must yield freely if at all, and
she grants me the use of similes; but her tactics are to contest them one
by one, and the admirable pretender is not as shifty as the mariner's
breeze, he is not like the wandering spark in burnt paper, of which you
cannot say whether it is chasing or chased: it is I who am the shifty
Pole to the steadiest of magnets.  She is a princess in other things
besides her superiority to Physics.  There will be wild scenes at Baden.

'My Diary of to-day is all bestowed on you.  What have I to write in it
except the pair of commas under the last line of yesterday--" He has not
come!"  Oh! to be caring for a he.

'O that I were with your sister now, on one side of her idol, to correct
her extravagant idolatry!  I long for her.  I had a number of nice little
phrases to pet her with.

'You have said (I have it written) that men who are liked by men are the
best friends for women.  In which case, the earl should be worthy of our
friendship; he is liked.  Captain Abrane and Sir Meeson, in spite of the
hard service he imposes on them with such comical haughtiness, incline to
speak well of him, and Methuen Rivers--here for two days on his way to
his embassy at Vienna--assured us he is the rarest of gentlemen on the
point of honour of his word.  They have stories of him, to confirm
Livia's eulogies, showing him punctilious to chivalry: No man alive is
like him in that, they say.  He grieves me.  All that you have to fear
is my pity for one so sensitive.  So speed, sir!  It is not good for us
to be much alone, and I am alone when you are absent.

'I hear military music!

'How grand that music makes the dullest world appear in a minute.  There
is a magic in it to bring you to me from the most dreadful of distances.
--Chillon! it would kill me!--Writing here and you perhaps behind the
hill, I can hardly bear it;--I am torn away, my hand will not any more.
This music burst out to mock me!  Adieu.

                    'I am yours.

                                        'Your HENRIETTA.

'A kiss to the sister.  It is owing to her.'

Carinthia kissed the letter on that last line.  It seemed to her to end
in a celestial shower.

She was oppressed by wonder of the writer who could run like the rill of
the mountains in written speech; and her recollection of the contents
perpetually hurried to the close, which was more in her way of writing,
for there the brief sentences had a throb beneath them.

She did not speak of the letter to her brother when she returned it.  A
night in the carriage, against his shoulder, was her happy prospect, in
the thought that she would be with her dearest all night, touching him
asleep, and in the sweet sense of being near to the beloved of the
fairest angel of her sex.  They pursued their journey soon after Anton
was dismissed with warm shakes of the hand and appointments for a
possible year in the future.

The blast of the postillion's horn on the dark highway moved Chillon to
say: 'This is what they call posting, my dear.'

She replied: 'Tell me, brother: I do not understand, "Let none these
marks efface," at the commencement, after most "picturesque of Castles":
--that is you.'

'They are quoted from the verses of a lord who was a poet, addressed to
the castle on Lake Leman.  She will read them to you.'

'Will she?'

The mention of the lord set Carinthia thinking of the lord whom that
beautiful SHE pitied because she was forced to wound him and he was very
sensitive.  Wrapped in Henrietta, she slept through the joltings of the
carriage, the grinding of the wheels, the blowing of the horn, the
flashes of the late moonlight and the kindling of dawn.




CHAPTER VIII

OF THE ENCOUNTER OF TWO STRANGE YOUNG MEN AND THEIR CONSORTING: IN WHICH
THE MALE READER IS REQUESTED TO BEAR IN MIND WHAT WILD CREATURE HE WAS IN
HIS YOUTH, WHILE THE FEMALE SHOULD MARVEL CREDULOUSLY.

The young man who fancied he had robed himself in the plain homespun
of a natural philosopher at the age of twenty-three journeyed limping
leisurely in the mountain maid Carinthia's footsteps, thankful to the
Fates for having seen her; and reproving the remainder of superstition
within him, which would lay him open to smarts of evil fortune if he,
encouraged a senseless gratitude for good; seeing that we are simply to
take what happens to us.  The little inn of the village on the perch
furnished him a night's lodging and a laugh of satisfaction to hear of a
young lady and gentleman, and their guide, who had devoured everything
eatable half a day in advance of him, all save the bread and butter, and
a few scraps of meat, apologetically spread for his repast by the maid of
the inn: not enough for, a bantam cock, she said, promising eggs for
breakfast.  He vowed with an honest heart, that it was more than enough,
and he was nourished by sympathy with the appetites of his precursors and
the maid's description of their deeds.  That name, Carinthia, went a good
way to fill him.

Farther on he had plenty, but less contentment.  He was compelled to
acknowledge that he had expected to meet Carinthia again at the Baths.
Her absence dealt a violent shock to the aerial structure he dwelt in;
for though his ardour for the life of the solitudes was unfeigned, as was
his calm overlooking of social distinctions, the self-indulgent dreamer
became troubled with an alarming sentience, that for him to share the
passions of the world of men was to risk the falling lower than most.
Women are a cause of dreams, but they are dreaded enemies of his kind of
dream, deadly enemies of the immaterial dreamers; and should one of them
be taken on board a vessel of the vapourish texture young Woodseer sailed
in above the clouds lightly while he was in it alone, questions of past,
future, and present, the three weights upon humanity, bear it down, and
she must go, or the vessel sinks.  And cast out of it, what was he?  The
asking exposed him to the steadiest wind the civilized world is known to
blow.  From merely thinking upon one of the daughters of earth, he was
made to feel his position in that world, though he refused to understand
it, and assisted by two days of hard walking he reduced Carinthia to an
abstract enthusiasm, no very serious burden.  His note-book sustained it
easily.  He wrote her name in simple fondness of the name; a verse, and
hints for more, and some sentences, which he thought profound.  They were
composed as he sat by the roadway, on the top of hills, and in a boat
crossing a dark green lake deep under wooded mountain walls: things of
priceless value.

It happened, that midway on the lake he perceived his boatman about to
prime a pistol to murder the mild-eyed stillness, and he called to the
man in his best German to desist.  During the altercation, there passed a
countryman of his in another of the punts, who said gravely: 'I thank you
for that.'  It was early morning, and they had the lake to themselves,
each deeming the other an intruder; for the courtship of solitude wanes
when we are haunted by a second person in pursuit of it; he is
discolouring matter in our pure crystal cup.  Such is the worship of the
picturesque; and it would appear to say, that the spirit of man finds
itself yet in the society of barbarians.  The case admits of good
pleading either way, even upon the issue whether the exclusive or the
vulgar be the more barbarous.  But in those days the solicitation of the
picturesque had been revived by a poet of some impassioned rhetoric, and
two devotees could hardly meet, as the two met here, and not be mutually
obscurants.

They stepped ashore in turn on the same small shoot of land where a farm-
house near a chapel in the shadow of cliffs did occasional service for an
inn.  Each had intended to pass a day and a night in this lonely
dwelling-place by the lake, but a rival was less to be tolerated there
than in love, and each awaited the other's departure, with an air that
said: 'You are in my sunlight'; and going deeper, more sternly: 'Sir, you
are an offence to Nature's pudency!'

Woodseer was the more placable of the two; he had taken possession of the
bench outside, and he had his note-book and much profundity to haul up
with it while fish were frying.  His countryman had rushed inside to
avoid him, and remained there pacing the chamber like a lion newly caged.
Their boatmen were brotherly in the anticipation of provision and
payment.

After eating his fish, Woodseer decided abruptly, that as he could not
have the spot to himself, memorable as it would have been to intermarry
with Nature in so sacred a welldepth of the mountains, he had better be
walking and climbing.  Another boat paddling up the lake had been spied:
solitude was not merely shared with a rival, but violated by numbers.
In the first case, we detest the man; in the second, we fly from an
outraged scene.  He wrote a line or so in his book, hurriedly paid his
bill, and started, full of the matter he had briefly committed to his
pages.

At noon, sitting beside the beck that runs from the lake, he was
overtaken by the gentleman he had left behind, and accosted in the
informal English style, with all the politeness possible to a nervously
blunt manner: 'This book is yours,--I have no doubt it is yours; I am
glad to be able to restore it; I should be glad to be the owner-writer of
the contents, I mean.  I have to beg your excuse; I found it lying open;
I looked at the page, I looked through the whole; I am quite at your
mercy.'

Woodseer jumped at the sight of his note-book, felt for the emptiness of
his pocket, and replied: 'Thank you, thank you.  It's of use to me,
though to no one else.'

'You pardon me?'

'Certainly.  I should have done it myself.'

'I cannot offer you my apologies as a stranger.'  Lord Fleetwood was the
name given.

Woodseer's plebeian was exchanged for it, and he stood up.

The young lord had fair, straight, thin features, with large restless
eyes that lighted quickly, and a mouth that was winning in his present
colloquial mood.

'You could have done the same?  I should find it hard to forgive the man
who pried into my secret thoughts,' he remarked.

'There they are.  If one puts them to paper! . . .' Woodseer shrugged.

'Yes, yes.  They never last long enough with me.  So far I'm safe.  One
page led to another.  You can meditate.  I noticed some remarks on
Religions.  You think deeply.'

Woodseer was of that opinion, but modesty urged him to reply with a small
flourish.  'Just a few heads of ideas.  When the wind puffs down a sooty
chimney the air is filled with little blacks that settle pretty much like
the notes in this book of mine.  There they wait for another puff, or my
fingers to stamp them.'

'I could tell you were the owner of that book,' said Lord Fleetwood.  He
swept his forehead feverishly.  'What a power it is to relieve one's
brain by writing!  May I ask you, which one of the Universities .  .  ?'

The burden of this question had a ring of irony to one whom it taught to
feel rather defiantly, that he carried the blazon of a reeking tramp.
'My University,' Woodseer replied, 'was a merchant's office in Bremen
for some months.  I learnt more Greek and Latin in Bremen than business.
I was invalided home, and then tried a merchant's office in London.
I put on my hat one day, and walked into the country.  My College fellows
were hawkers, tinkers, tramps and ploughmen, choughs and crows.  A volume
of our Poets and a History of Philosophy composed my library.  I had
scarce any money, so I learnt how to idle inexpensively--a good first
lesson.  We're at the bottom of the world when we take to the road; we
see men as they were in the beginning--not so eager for harness till they
get acquainted with hunger, as I did, and studied in myself the old
animal having his head pushed into the collar to earn a feed of corn.'

Woodseer laughed, adding, that he had been of a serious mind in those
days of the alternation of smooth indifference and sharp necessity, and
he had plucked a flower from them.

His nature prompted him to speak of himself with simple candour, as he
had done spontaneously to Chillon Kirby, yet he was now anxious to let
his companion know at once the common stuff he was made of, together with
the great stuff he contained.  He grew conscious of an over-anxiety, and
was uneasy, recollecting how he had just spoken about his naturalness,
dimly if at all apprehending the cause of this disturbance within.  What
is a lord to a philosopher!  But the world is around us as a cloak, if
not a coat; in his ignorance he supposed it specially due to a lord
seeking acquaintance with him, that he should expose his condition: doing
the which appeared to subject him to parade his intellectual treasures
and capacity for shaping sentences; and the effect upon Lord Fleetwood
was an incentive to the display.  Nevertheless he had a fretful desire to
escape from the discomposing society of a lord; he fixed his knapsack and
began to saunter.

The young lord was at his elbow.  'I can't part with you.  Will you allow
me?'

Woodseer was puzzled and had to say: 'If you wish it.'

'I do wish it: an hour's walk with you.  One does not meet a man like you
every day.  I have to join a circle of mine in Baden, but there's no
hurry; I could be disengaged for a week.  And I have things to ask you,
owing to my indiscretion--but you have excused it.'

Woodseer turned for a farewell gaze at the great Watzmann, and saluted
him.

'Splendid,' said Lord Fleetwood; 'but don't clap names on the mountains.
--I saw written in your book: "A text for Dada."  You write: "A despotism
would procure a perfect solitude, but kill the ghost."  That was my
thought at the place where we were at the lake.  I had it.  Tell me--
though I could not have written it, and "ghost" is just the word, the
exact word--tell me, are you of Welsh blood?  "Dad" is good Welsh--
pronounce it hard.'

Woodseer answered: 'My mother was a Glamorganshire woman.  My father,
I know, walked up from Wales, mending boots on his road for a livelihood.
He is not a bad scholar, he knows Greek enough to like it.  He is a
Dissenting preacher.  When I strike a truism, I 've a habit of scoring it
to give him a peg or tuning-fork for one of his discourses.  He's a man
of talent; he taught himself, and he taught me more than I learnt at
school.  He is a thinker in his way.  He loves Nature too.  I rather envy
him in some respects.  He and I are hunters of Wisdom on different
tracks; and he, as he says, "waits for me."  He's patient!'

Ah, and I wanted to ask you,' Lord Fleetwood observed, bursting with it,
'I was puzzled by a name you write here and there near the end, and
permit me to ask, it: Carinthia!  It cannot be the country?  You write
after, the name: "A beautiful Gorgon--a haggard Venus."  It seized me.
I have had the face before my eyes ever since.  You must mean a woman.
I can't be deceived in allusions to a woman: they have heart in them.
You met her somewhere about Carinthia, and gave her the name?  You write
--may I refer to the book?'

He received the book and flew through the leaves:

'Here--"A panting look": you write again: "A look of beaten flame: a look
of one who has run and at last beholds!"  But that is a living face: I
see her!  Here again: "From minute to minute she is the rock that loses
the sun at night and reddens in the morning."  You could not create an
idea of a woman to move you like that.  No one could, I am certain of it,
certain; if so, you 're a wizard--I swear you are.  But that's a face
high over beauty.  Just to know there is a woman like her, is an
antidote.  You compare her to a rock.  Who would imagine a comparison of
a woman to a rock!  But rock is the very picture of beautiful Gorgon,
haggard Venus.  Tell me you met her, you saw her.  I want only to hear
she lives, she is in the world.  Beautiful women compared to roses may
whirl away with their handsome dragoons!  A pang from them is a thing
to be ashamed of.  And there are men who trot about whining with it!
But a Carinthia makes pain honourable.  You have done what I thought
impossible--fused a woman's face and grand scenery, to make them
inseparable.  She might be wicked for me.  I should see a bright rim
round hatred of her!--the rock you describe.  I could endure horrors
and not annihilate her!  I should think her sacred.'

Woodseer turned about to have a look at the man who was even quicker than
he at realizing a person from a hint of description, and almost insanely
extravagant in the pitch of the things he uttered to a stranger.  For
himself, he was open with everybody, his philosophy not allowing that
strangers existed on earth.  But the presence of a lord brought the
conventional world to his feelings, though at the same time the title
seemed to sanction the exceptional abruptness and wildness of this lord.
As for suspecting him to be mad, it would have been a common idea: no
stretching of speech or overstepping of social rules could waken a
suspicion so spiritless in Woodseer.

He said: 'I can tell you I met her and she lives.  I could as soon swim
in that torrent or leap the mountain as repeat what she spoke, or sketch
a feature of her.  She goes into the blood, she is a new idea of women.
She has the face that would tempt a gypsy to evil tellings.  I could
think of it as a history written in a line: Carinthia, Saint and Martyr!
As for comparisons, they are flowers thrown into the fire.'

'I have had that--I have thought that,' said Lord Fleetwood.  'Go on;
talk of her, pray; without comparisons.  I detest them.  How did you meet
her?  What made you part?  Where is she now?  I have no wish to find her,
but I want thoroughly to believe in her.'

Another than Woodseer would have perceived the young lord's malady.  Here
was one bitten by the serpent of love, and athirst for an image of the
sex to serve for the cooling herb, as youth will be.  Woodseer put it
down to a curious imaginative fellowship with himself.  He forgot the
lord, and supposed he had found his own likeness, less gifted in speech.
After talking of Carinthia more and more in the abstract, he fell upon
his discovery of the Great Secret of life, against which his hearer
struggled for a time, though that was cooling to him too; but ultimately
there was no resistance, and so deep did they sink into the idea of pure
contemplation, that the idea of woman seemed to have become a part of it.
No stronger proof of their aethereal conversational earnestness could be
offered.  A locality was given to the Great Secret, and of course it was
the place where the most powerful recent impression had been stamped on
the mind of the discoverer: the shadowy valley rolling from the slate-
rock.  Woodseer was too artistic a dreamer to present the passing vision
of Carinthia with any associates there.  She passed: the solitude
accepted her and lost her; and it was the richer for the one swift gleam:
she brought no trouble, she left no regrets; she was the ghost of the
rocky obscurity.  But now remembering her mountain carol, he chanced to
speak of her as a girl.

'She is a girl?' cried Lord Fleetwood, frowning over an utter revolution
of sentiment at the thought of the beautiful Gorgon being a girl; for,
rapid as he was to imagine, he had raised a solid fabric upon his
conception of Carinthia the woman, necessarily the woman--logically.
Who but the woman could look the Gorgon!  He tried to explain it to be
impossible for a girl to wear the look: and his notion evidently was,
that it had come upon a beautiful face in some staring horror of a world
that had bitten the tender woman.  She touched him sympathetically
through the pathos.

Woodseer flung out vociferously for the contrary.  Who but a girl could
look the beautiful Gorgon!  What other could seem an emanation of the
mountain solitude?  A woman would instantly breathe the world on it to
destroy it.  Hers would be the dramatic and not the poetic face.  It
would shriek of man, wake the echoes with the tale of man, slaughter all.
quietude.  But a girl's face has no story of poisonous intrusion.  She
indeed may be cast in the terrors of Nature, and yet be sweet with
Nature, beautiful because she is purely of Nature.  Woodseer did his best
to present his view irresistibly.  Perhaps he was not clear; it was a
piece of skiamachy, difficult to render clear to the defeated.

Lord Fleetwood had nothing to say but 'Gorgon! a girl a Gorgon!' and it
struck Woodseer as intensely unreasonable, considering that he had seen
the girl whom, in his effort to portray her, he had likened to a
beautiful Gorgon.  He recounted the scene of the meeting with her,
pictured it in effective colours, but his companion gave no response, nor
a nod.  They ceased to converse, and when the young lord's hired carriage
drew up on the road, Woodseer required persuasion to accompany him.  They
were both in their different stations young tyrants of the world, ready
to fight the world and one another for not having their immediate view of
it such as they wanted it.  They agreed, however, not to sleep in the
city.  Beds were to be had near the top of a mountain on the other side
of the Salza, their driver informed them, and vowing themselves to that
particular height, in a mutual disgust of the city, they waxed
friendlier, with a reserve.

Woodseer soon had experience that he was receiving exceptional treatment
from Lord Fleetwood, whose manservant was on the steps of the hotel in
Salzburg on the lookout for his master.

'Sir Meeson has been getting impatient, my lord,' said the man.

Sir Meeson Corby appeared; Lord Fleetwood cut him short: 'You 're in a
hurry; go at once, don't wait for me; I join you in Baden.--Do me the
favour to eat with me,' he turned to Woodseer.  'And here, Corby!  tell
the countess I have a friend to bear me company, and there is to be an
extra bedroom secured at her hotel.  That swinery of a place she insists
on visiting is usually crammed.  With you there,' he turned to Woodseer,
'I might find it agreeable.--You can take my man, Corby; I shall not want
the fellow.'

'Positively, my dear Fleetwood, you know,' Sir Meeson expostulated, 'I am
under orders; I don't see how--I really can't go on without you.'

'Please yourself.  This gentleman is my friend, Mr. Woodseer.'

Sir Meeson Corby was a plump little beau of forty, at war with his fat
and accounting his tight blue tail coat and brass buttons a victory.  His
tightness made his fatness elastic; he looked wound up for a dance, and
could hardly hold on a leg; but the presentation of a creature in a
battered hat and soiled garments, carrying a tattered knapsack half
slung, lank and with disorderly locks, as the Earl of Fleetwood's friend
--the friend of the wealthiest nobleman of Great Britain!--fixed him in a
perked attitude of inquiry that exhausted interrogatives.  Woodseer
passed him, slouching a bow.  The circular stare of Sir Meeson seemed
unable to contract.  He directed it on Lord Fleetwood, and was then
reminded that he dealt with prickles.

'Where have you been?' he said, blinking to refresh his eyeballs.  'I
missed you, I ran round and round the town after you.'

'I have been to the lake.'

'Queer fish there!' Sir Meeson dropped a glance on the capture.

Lord Fleetwood took Woodseer's arm.  'Do you eat with us?' he asked the
baronet, who had stayed his eating for an hour and was famished; so they
strode to the dining-room.

'Do you wash, sir, before eating?' Sir Meeson said to Woodseer, caressing
his hands when they had seated themselves at table.  'Appliances are to
be found in this hotel.'

'Soap?' said Lord Fleetwood.

'Soap--at least, in my chamber.'

'Fetch it, please.'

Sir Meeson, of course, could not hear that.  He requested the waiter to
show the gentleman to a room.

Lord Fleetwood ordered the waiter to bring a handbasin and towel.  'We're
off directly and must eat at once,' he said.

'Soap--soap! my dear Fleetwood,' Sir Meeson knuckled on the table, to
impress it that his appetite and his gorge demanded a thorough cleansing
of those fingers, if they were to sit at one board.

'Let the waiter fetch it.'

'The soap is in my portmanteau.'

'You spoke of it as a necessity for this gentleman and me.  Bring it.'

Woodseer had risen.  Lord Fleetwood motioned him down.  He kept an eye
dead--as marble on Corby, who muttered: 'You can't mean that you ask me
.  .  .?' But the alternative was forced on Sir Meeson by too strong a
power of the implacable eye; there was thunder in it, a continuity of
gaze forcefuller than repetitions of the word.  He knew Lord Fleetwood.
Men privileged to attend on him were dogs to the flinty young despot:
they were sure to be called upon to expiate the faintest offence to him.
He had hastily to consider, that he was banished beyond appeal, with the
whole torture of banishment to an adorer of the Countess Livia, or else
the mad behest must be obeyed.  He protested, shrugged, sat fast, and
sprang up, remarking, that he went with all the willingness imaginable.
It could not have been the first occasion.

He was affecting the excessively obsequious when he came back bearing his
metal soap-case.  The performance was checked by another look solid as
shot, and as quick.  Woodseer, who would have done for Sir Meeson Corby
or Lazarus what had been done for him, thought little of the service, but
so intense a peremptoriness in the look of an eye made him uncomfortable
in his own sense of independence.  The humblest citizen of a free nation
has that warning at some notable exhibition of tyranny in a neighbouring
State: it acts like a concussion of the air.

Lord Fleetwood led an easy dialogue with him and Sir Meeson, on their
different themes immediately, which was not less impressive to an
observer.  He listened to Sir Meeson's entreaties that he should start
at once for Baden, and appeared to pity the poor gentleman, condemned by
his office to hang about him in terror of his liege lady's displeasure.
Presently, near the close of the meal, drawing a ring from his finger,
he handed it to the baronet, and said, 'Give her that.  She knows I shall
follow that.'  He added to himself:--I shall have ill-luck till I have it
back! and he asked Woodseer whether he put faith in the virtue of
talismans.

'I have never possessed one,' said Woodseer, with his natural frankness.
'It would have gone long before this for a night's lodging.'

Sir Meeson heard him, and instantly urged Lord Fleetwood not to think of
dismissing his man Francis.  'I beg it, Fleetwood!  I beg you to take the
man.  Her ladyship will receive me badly, ring or no ring, if she hears
of your being left alone.  I really can't present myself.  I shall not
go, not go.  I say no.'

'Stay, then,' said Fleetwood.

He turned to Woodseer with an air of deference, and requested the
privilege of glancing at his notebook again, and scanned it closely
at one of the pages.  'I believe it true,' he cried; 'I had a half
recollection of it--I have had some such thought, but never could
put it in words.  You have thought deeply.'

'That is only a surface thought, or common reflection,' said Woodseer.

Sir Meeson stared at them in turn.  Judging by their talk and the effect
produced on the earl, he took Woodseer for a sort of conjuror.

It was his duty to utter a warning.

He drew Fleetwood aside.  A word was whispered, and they broke asunder
with a snap.  Francis was called.  His master gave him his keys, and
despatched him into the town to purchase a knapsack or bag for the outfit
of a jolly beggar.  The prospect delighted Lord Fleetwood.  He sang notes
from the deep chest, flaunting like an opera brigand, and contemplating
his wretched satellite's indecision with brimming amusement.

'Remember, we fight for our money.  I carry mine,' he said to Woodseer.

'Wouldn't it be expedient, Fleetwood .  .  .'  Sir Meeson suggested a
treasurer in the person of himself.

'Not a florin, Corby!  I should find it all gambled away at Baden.'

'But I am not Abrane, I'm not Abrane!  I never play, I have no mania,
none.  It would be prudent, Fleetwood.'

'The slightest bulging of a pocket would show on you, Corby; and they
would be at you, they would fall on you and pluck you to have another
fling.  I 'd rather my money should go to a knight of the road than feed
that dragon's jaw.  A highwayman seems an honest fellow compared with
your honourable corporation of fly-catchers.  I could surrender to him
with some satisfaction after a trial of the better man.  I 've tried
these tables, and couldn't stir a pulse.  Have you?'

It had to be explained to Woodseer what was meant by trying the tables.
'Not I,' said he, in strong contempt of the queer allurement.

Lord Fleetwood studied him half a minute, as if measuring and discarding
a suspicion of the young philosopher's possible weakness under
temptation.

Sir Meeson Corby accompanied the oddly assorted couple through the town
and a short way along the road to the mountain, for the sake of quieting
his conscience upon the subject of his leaving them together.  He could
not have sat down a second time at a table with those hands.  He said
it:--he could not have done the thing.  So the best he could do was to
let them go.  Like many of his class, he had a mind open to the effect of
striking contrasts, and the spectacle of the wealthiest nobleman in Great
Britain tramping the road, pack on back, with a young nobody for his
comrade, a total stranger, who might be a cut-throat, and was avowedly
next to a mendicant, charged him with quantities of interjectory matter,
that he caught himself firing to the foreign people on the highway.
Hundreds of thousands a year, and tramping it like a pedlar, with a
beggar for his friend!  He would have given something to have an English
ear near him as he watched them rounding under the mountain they were
about to climb.




CHAPTER IX

CONCERNING THE BLACK GODDESS FORTUNE AND THE WORSHIP OF HER, TOGETHER
WITH AN INTRODUCTION OF SOME OF HER VOTARIES

In those early days of Fortune's pregnant alternations of colour between
the Red and the Black, exhibited publicly, as it were a petroleum spring
of the ebony-fiery lake below, Black-Forest Baden was the sprightliest'
of the ante-chambers of Hades.  Thither in the ripeness of the year
trooped the devotees of the sable goddess to perform sacrifice; and
annually among them the beautiful Livia, the Countess of Fleetwood; for
nowhere else had she sensation of the perfect repose which is rocked to a
slumber by gales.

She was not of the creatures who are excited by an atmosphere of
excitement; she took it as the nymph of the stream her native wave, and
swam on the flood with expansive languor, happy to have the master
passions about her; one or two of which her dainty hand caressed,
fearless of a sting; the lady petted them as her swans.  It surprised
her to a gentle contempt of men and women, that they should be ruffled
either by love or play.  A withholding from the scene will naturally
arouse disturbing wishes; but to be present lulls; for then we live, we
are in our element.  And who could expect, what sane person can desire,
perpetual good luck?  Fortune, the goddess, and young Love, too, are
divine in their mutability: and Fortune would resemble a humdrum
housewife, Love a droning husband, if constancy were practised by them.
Observe the staggering and plunging of the blindfold wretch seeking to be
persuaded of their faithfulness.

She could make for herself a quiet centre in the heart of the whirlwind,
but the whirlwind was required.  The clustered lights at the corner of
the vale under forest hills, the burst of music, the blazing windows of
the saloons of the Furies, and the gamblers advancing and retreating,
with their totally opposite views of consequences, and fashions of
wearing or tearing the mask; and closer, the figures shifting up and down
the promenade, known and unknown faces, and the histories half known,
half woven, weaving fast, which flew their, threads to provoke
speculation; pleasantly embraced and diverted the cool-blooded lady
surrounded by her courtiers, who could upon occasion supply the luminous
clue or anecdote.  She had an intuitive liveliness to detect interchanges
of eyes, the shuttle of intrigue; the mild hypocrisy, the clever
audacity, the suspicion confirmed, the complication threatening to become
resonant and terrible; and the old crossing the young and the young
outwitting the old, wiles of fair traitors and dark, knaves of all suits
of the pack.  A more intimate acquaintance with their lineaments inspired
a regard for them, such as poets may feign the throned high moon to
entertain for objects causing her rays to flash.

The simple fools, performing in character, were a neutral people,
grotesques and arabesques wreathed about the margins of the scene.
Venus or Fortune smote them to a relievo distinguishing one from another.
Here, however, as elsewhere, the core of interest was with the serious
population, the lovers and the players in earnest, who stood round the
furnace and pitched themselves into it, not always under a miscalculation
of their chances of emerging transfigured instead of serving for fuel.
These, the tragical children of folly, were astute: they played with
lightning, and they knew the conditions of the game; victories were to be
had.

The ulterior conditions of the game, the price paid for a victory, they
thought little of: for they were feverish worshippers of the phantasmal
deity called the Present; a god reigning over the Past, appreciable only
in the Future; whose whiff of actual being is composed of the embryo idea
of the union of these two periods.  Still he is occasionally a benevolent
god to the appetites; which have but to be continuous to establish him in
permanence; and as nothing in us more readily supposes perpetuity than
the appetite rushing to destroy itself, the rational nature of the most
universal worship on earth is perceived at once.

Now, the price paid for a victory is this: that having been favoured in a
single instance by the spouse of the aforesaid eminent divinity--the
Black Goddess of the golden fringes--men believe in her for ever after,
behold her everywhere, they belong to her.  Their faith as to sowing and
reaping has gone; and so has their capacity to see the actual as it is:
she has the power to attach them to her skirts the more by rewarding
their impassioned devotion with cuffs and scorns.  They have ceased to
have a first notion upon anything without a second haunting it, which
directs them to propitiate Fortune.

But I am reminded by the convulsions of Dame Gossip, that the wisdom of
our ancestors makes it a mere hammering of commonplace to insist on such
reflections.  Many of them, indeed, took the union of the Black Goddess
and the Rosy Present for the composition of the very Arch-Fiend.  Some
had a shot at the strange conjecture, figuring her as tired of men in the
end and challengeing him below--equally tired of his easy conquests of
men since the glorious old times of the duelling saints.  By virtue of
his one incorrigible weakness, which we know him to have as long as we
have it ourselves: viz., the belief in her existence, she is to get the
better of him.

Upon this point the experience of Captain Abrane has a value.  Livia was
a follower of the Red and Black and the rounding ball in the person of
the giant captain, through whom she received her succession of sweetly
teasing thrills and shocks, as one of the adventurous company they formed
together.  The place was known to him as the fair Philistine to another
muscular hero; he had been shorn there before, and sent forth tottering,
treating the friends he met as pillars to fall with him; and when the
operation was done thoroughly, he pronounced himself refreshed by it,
like a more sensible Samson, the cooler for his clipping.  Then it was
that he relapsed undistractedly upon processes of his mind and he often
said he thought Fortune would beat the devil.

Her power is shown in the moving of her solicitors to think, instantly
after they have made their cast, that the reverse of it was what they
intended.  It comes as though she had withdrawn the bandage from her
forehead and dropped a leaden glance on them, like a great dame angry to
have her signal misinterpreted.  Well, then, distinguished by the goddess
in such a manner, we have it proved to us how she wished to favour: for
the reverse wins, and we who are pinched blame not her cruelty but our
blind folly.  This is true worship.  Henceforth the pain of her nip is
mingled with the dream of her kiss; between the positive and the imagined
of her we remain confused until the purse is an empty body on a gallows,
honour too, perhaps.

Captain Abrane was one of the Countess Livia's numerous courtiers on the
border of the promenade under the lighted saloons.  A colossus inactive,
he had little to say among the chattering circle; for when seated, cards
were wanted to animate him: and he looked entirely out of place and
unfitted, like a great vessel's figure-head in a shipwright's yard.

She murmured: 'Not this evening?'

Abrane quoted promptly a line of nursery song 'How shall he cut it
without e'er a knife?'

'Have we run it down so low?' said she, with no reproach in her tone.

The captain shrugged over his clean abyss, where nothing was.

Yesterday their bank presented matronly proportions.  But an importuned
goddess reduces the most voluminous to bare stitches within a few winks
of an eye.

Livia turned to a French gentleman of her court, M. de St. Ombre, and
pursued a conversation.  He was a stately cavalier of the Gallicized
Frankish outlines, ready, but grave in his bearing, grave in his
delivery, trimly moustached, with a Guise beard.

His profound internal question relating to this un-English beauty of the
British Isles:--had she no passion in her nature? was not convinced by
her apparent insensibility to Fortune's whips.

Sir Meeson Corby inserted a word of Bull French out of place from time to
time.

As it might be necessary to lean on the little man for weapons of war,
supposing Lord Fleetwood delayed his arrival yet another day, Livia was
indulgent.  She assisted him to think that he spoke the foreign tongue.

Mention of Lord Fleetwood set Sir Meeson harping again on his alarms, in
consideration of the vagabond object of the young lord had roamed away
with.

'You forget that Russett has gypsy in him: Welsh! it's about the same,'
said Livia.  'He can take excellent care of himself and his purse.'

'Countess, he is a good six days overdue.'

'He will be in time for the ball at the Schloss.'

Sir Meeson Corby produced an aspect of the word 'if,' so perkily, that
the dejected Captain Abrane laughed outright and gave him double reason
to fret for Lord Fleetwood's arrival, by saying: 'If he hangs off much
longer, I shall have to come on you for another fifty.'

Our two pedestrians out of Salzburg were standing up in the night of
cloud and pines above the glittering pool, having made their way along
the path from the hill anciently dedicated to the god Mercury; and at the
moment when Sir Meeson put forth his frilled wrists to say: 'If you had
seen his hands--the creature Fleetwood trotted off alone with!--you'd be
a bit anxious too'; the young lord called his comrade to gaze underneath
them: 'There they are, hard at it, at their play!--it's the word used for
the filthiest gutter scramble.'

They had come to know something of one another's humours; which are
taken by young men for their characters; and should the humours please,
they are friends, until further humours develop, trying these nascent
conservatives hard to suit them to their moods as well as the accustomed.
Lord Fleetwood had discovered in his companion, besides the spirit of
independence and the powers of thought impressed on him by Woodseer's
precocious flashes, a broad playfulness, that trenched on buffoonery; it
astonished, amused, and relieved him, loosening the spell of reverence
cast over him by one who could so wonderfully illumine his brain.  Prone
to admire and bend the knee where he admired, he chafed at subjection,
unless he had the particular spell constantly renewed.  A tone in him
once or twice of late, different from the comrade's, had warned Woodseer
to be guarded.

Susceptible, however, of the extreme contrast between the gamblers below
and Nature's lover beside him, Fleetwood returned to his enthusiasm
without thinking it a bondage.

'I shall never forget the walk we 've had.  I have to thank you for the
noblest of pleasures.  You 've taught me--well, a thousand things; the
things money can't buy.  What mornings they were!  And the dead-tired
nights!  Under the rock and up to see the snowy peak pink in a gap of
thick mist.  You were right: it made a crimsoning colour shine like a new
idea.  Up in those mountains one walks with the divinities, you said.
It's perfectly true.  I shall remember I did.  I have a treasure for
life!  Now I understand where you get your ideas.  The life we lead down
there is hoggish.  You have chosen the right.  You're right, over and
over again, when you say, the dirty sweaters are nearer the angels for
cleanliness than my Lord and Lady Sybarite out of a bath, in chemical
scents.  A man who thinks, loathes their High Society.  I went through
Juvenal at college.  But you--to be sure, you add example--make me feel
the contempt of it more.  I am everlastingly indebted to you.  Yes, I
won't forget: you preach against the despising of anything.

This was pleasant in Woodseer's ears, inasmuch as it established the
young nobleman as the pupil of his philosophy for the conduct of life;
and to fortify him, he replied:

'Set your mind on the beauty, and there'll be no room for comparisons.
Most of them are unjust, precious few instructive.  In this case, they
spoil both pictures: and that scene down there rather hooks me; though I
prefer the Dachstein in the wane of the afterglow.  You called it
Carinthia.'

'I did: the beautiful Gorgon, haggard Venus--if she is to be a girl!'
Fleetwood rejoined.  'She looked burnt out--a spectre.'

'One of the admirably damned,' said Woodseer, and he murmured with
enjoyment: 'Between the lights--that 's the beauty and the tragedy of
Purgatory!'

His comrade fell in with the pictured idea: 'You hit it:--not what you
called the "sublimely milky," and not squalid as you'll see the faces of
the gambling women at the tables below.  Oblige me--may I beg?--don't
clap names on the mountains we've seen.  It stamps guide-book on them,
English tourist, horrors.  We'll moralize over the crowds at the tables
down there.  On the whole, it's a fairish game: you know the odds against
you, as you don't on the Turf or the Bourse.  Have your fling; but don't
get bitten.  There's a virus.  I'm not open to it.  Others are.'

Hereupon Woodseer, wishing to have his individuality recognised in the
universality it consented to, remarked on an exchequer that could not
afford to lose, and a disposition free of the craving to win.

These were, no doubt, good reasons for abstaining, and they were grand
morality.  They were, at the same time, customary phrases of the
unfleshed in folly.  They struck Fleetwood with a curious reminder
of the puking inexperienced, whom he had seen subsequently plunge
suicidally.  He had a sharp vision of the attractive forces of the game;
and his elemental nature exulted in siding with the stronger against a
pretender to the superhuman.  For Woodseer had spoken a trifle loftily,
as quite above temptation.  To see a forewarned philosopher lured to try
the swim on those tides, pulled along the current, and caught by the
undertug of the lasher, would be fun.

'We'll drop down on them, find our hotel, and have a look at what they're
doing,' he said, and stepped.

Woodseer would gladly have remained.  The starlit black ridges about him
and the dragon's mouth yawing underneath were an opposition of spiritual
and mundane; innocent, noxious; exciting to the youthful philosopher.
He had to follow, and so rapidly in the darkness that he stumbled and
fell on an arm; a small matter.

Bed-chambers awaited them at the hotel, none of the party: and
Fleetwood's man-servant was absent.

'Gambling, the rascal!' he said.  Woodseer heard the first note of the
place in that.

His leader was washed, neatly dressed, and knocking at his door very
soon, impatient to be off, and he flung a promise of 'supper presently'
to one whose modest purse had fallen into a debate with this lordly
hostelry, counting that a supper and a night there would do for it.
They hurried on to the line of promenaders, a river of cross-currents
by the side of seated groups; and the willowy swish of silken dresses,
feminine perfumery, cigar-smoke, chatter, laughter, told of pleasure
reigning.

Fleetwood scanned the groups.  He had seen enough in a moment and his
face blackened.  A darting waiter was called to him.

He said to Woodseer, savagely, as it sounded: 'You shall have something
to joint your bones!' What cause of wrath he had was past a guess: a wolf
at his vitals bit him, hardening his handsome features.

The waiter darted back, bearing a tray and tall glasses filled each with
piled parti-coloured liqueurs, on the top of which an egg-yolk swam.
Fleetwood gave example.  Swallowing your egg, the fiery-velvet triune
behind slips after it, in an easy milky way, like a princess's train on a
state-march, and you are completely, transformed, very agreeably; you
have become a merry demon.  'Well, yes, it's next to magic,' he replied
to Woodseer's astonished snigger after the draught, and explained, that
it was a famous Viennese four-of-the-morning panacea, the revellers'
electrical restorer.  'Now you can hold on for an hour or two, and then
we'll sup.  At Rome?'

'Ay!  Druids to-morrow!' cried the philosopher bewitched.

He found himself bowing to a most heavenly lady, composed of day and
night in her colouring, but more of night, where the western edge has
become a pale steel blade.  Men were around her, forming a semi-circle.
The world of men and women was mere timber and leafage to this flower of
her sex, glory of her kind.  How he behaved in her presence, he knew not;
he was beyond self-criticism or conscious reflection; simply the engine
of the commixed three liqueurs, with parlous fine thoughts, and a sense
of steaming into the infinite.

To leave her was to have her as a moon in the heavens and to think of her
creatively.  A swarm of images rushed about her and away, took lustre and
shade.  She was a miracle of greyness, her eyes translucently grey, a
dark-haired queen of the twilights; and his heart sprang into his brain
to picture the novel beauty; language became a flushed Bacchanal in a
ring of dancing similes.  Lying beside a bank of silvery cinquefoil
against a clear evening sky, where the planet Venus is a point of new and
warmer light, one has the vision of her.  Or something of Persephone
rising to greet her mother, when our beam of day first melts through her
as she kneels to gather an early bud of the year, would be near it.  Or
there is a lake in mid-forest, that curls part in shadow under the foot
of morning: there we have her.

He strained to the earthly and the skyey likenesses of his marvel of
human beauty because they bestowed her on him in passing.  All the while,
he was gazing on a green gaming-table.

The gold glittered, and it heaped or it vanished.  Contemptuous of money,
beyond the limited sum for his needs, he gazed; imagination was blunted
in him to the hot drama of the business.  Moreover his mind was engaged
in insisting that the Evening Star is not to be called Venus, because of
certain stories; and he was vowed to defend his lady from any allusion
to them.  This occupied him.  By degrees, the visible asserted its
authority; his look on the coin fell to speculating.  Oddly, too, he was
often right;--the money, staked on the other side, would have won.  He
considered it rather a plain calculation than a guess.

Philosophy withdrew him from his temporary interest in the tricks of a
circling white marble ball.  The chuck farthing of street urchins has
quite as much dignity.  He compared the creatures dabbling, over the
board to summer flies on butcher's meat, periodically scared by a cloth.
More in the abstract, they were snatching at a snapdragon bowl.  It
struck him, that the gamblers had thronged on an invitation to drink the
round of seed-time and harvest in a gulp.  Again they were desperate
gleaners, hopping, skipping, bleeding, amid a whizz of scythe-blades,
for small wisps of booty.  Nor was it long before the presidency of an
ancient hoary Goat-Satan might be perceived, with skew-eyes and pucker-
mouth, nursing a hoof on a knee.

Our mediaeval Enemy sat symbolical in his deformities, as in old Italian
and Dutch thick-line engravings of him.  He rolled a ball for souls,
excited like kittens, to catch it, and tumbling into the dozens of vacant
pits.  So it seemed to Woodseer, whose perceptions were discoloured by
hereditary antagonism.  Had he preserved his philosopher's eye, he would
have known that the Hoofed One is too wily to show himself, owing to his
ugliness.  The Black Goddess and no other presides at her own game.
She (it is good for us to know it) is the Power who challenges the
individual, it is he who spreads the net for the mass.  She liquefies
the brain of man; he petrifies or ossifies the heart.  From her comes
craziness, from him perversity: a more provocative and, on the whole,
more contagious disease.  The gambler does not seek to lead his fellows
into perdition; the snared of the Demon have pleasure in the act.  Hence
our naturally interested forecasts of the contests between them: for if
he is beaten, as all must be at the close of an extended game with her,
we have only to harden the brain against her allurements and we enter a
clearer field.

Woodseer said to Fleetwood: 'That ball has a look of a nymph running
round and round till she changes to one of the Fates.'

'We'll have a run with her,' said Fleetwood, keener for business than for
metaphors--at the moment.

He received gold for a bank-note.  Captain Abrane hurriedly begged a
loan.  Both of them threw.  Neither of them threw on the six numbers
Woodseer would have selected, and they lost.  He stated that the number
of 17 had won before.  Abrane tried the transversal enclosing this
favoured number.  'Of course!' he cried, with foul resignation and a
hostile glare: the ball had seated itself and was grinning at him from
the lowest of the stalls.

Fleetwood quitted the table-numbers to throw on Pair; he won, won again,
pushed his luck and lost, dragging Abrane with him.  The giant varied his
tone of acquiescence in Fortune's whims: 'Of course!  I 've only to
fling!  Luck hangs right enough till I put down my stake.'

'If the luck has gone three times, the chances .  .  .  .'  Woodseer was
rather inquiring than pronouncing. . . .  Lord Fleetwood cut him short.
'The chances are equally the contrary!' and discomposed his argumentative
mind.

As argument in such a place was impossible, he had a wild idea of
example--'just to see'--; and though he smiled, his brain was liquefying.
Upon a calculation of the chances, merely for the humour of it, he laid a
silver piece on the first six, which had been neglected.  They were now
blest.  He laid his winnings on the numbed 17.  Who would have expected
it?  why, the player, surely!  Woodseer comported himself like a veteran:
he had proved that you can calculate the chances.  Instead of turning in
triumph to Lord Fleetwood, he laid gold pieces to hug the number 17, and
ten in the centre.  And it is the truth, he hoped then to lose and have
done with it--after proving his case.  The ball whirled, kicked, tried
for seat in two, in three points, and entered 17.  The usual temporary
wonderment flew round the table; and this number was courted in dread,
avoided with apprehension.

Abrane let fly a mighty breath: 'Virgin, by Jove!'

Success was a small matter to Gower Woodseer.  He displayed his contempt
of fortune by letting his heap of bank-notes lie on Impair, and he won.
Abrane bade him say 'Maximum' in a furious whisper.  He did so, as one at
home with the word; and winning repeatedly, observed to Fleetwood: 'Now I
can understand what historians mean, in telling us of heroes rushing into
the fray and vainly seeking death.  I always thought death was to be had,
if you were in earnest.'

Fleetwood scrutinized the cast of his features and the touch of his
fingers on the crispy paper.

'Come to another of these "green fields,"' he returned briefly.  'The
game here is child's play.'

Urging Virgin Luck not to quit his initiatory table, the captain
reluctantly went at their heels.  Shortly before the tables were clad in
mantles for the night, he reported to Livia one of the great cases of
Virgin Luck; described it, from the silver piece to the big heap of
notes, and drew on his envy of the fellow to sketch the indomitable
coolness shown in following or in quitting a run.  'That fellow it is,
Fleetwood's tag-rag; holds his head like a street-fiddler; Woodler or
some name.  But there's nothing to be done if we don't cultivate him.
He must have pocketed a good three thousand and more.  They had a quarrel
about calculations of chances, and Fleet ran the V up his forehead at a
piece of impudence.  Fellow says some high-flying stuff; Fleet brightens
like a Sunday chimney-sweep.  If I believed in Black Arts, upon my word!'

'Russett is not usually managed with ease,' the lady said.

Her placid observation was directed on the pair then descending the
steps.

'Be careful how you address, this gentleman,' she counselled Abrane.
'The name is not Woodier, I know.  It must be the right name or none.'

Livia's fairest smile received them.  She heard the captain accosting the
child of luck as Mr. Woodier, and she made a rustle in rising to take
Fleetwood's arm.

'We haven't dined, we have to sup,' said he.

'You are released at the end of the lamps.  You redeem your ring,
Russett, and I will restore it.  I have to tell you, Henrietta is here
to-morrow.'

'She might be in a better place.'

'The place where she is to be seen is not generally undervalued by men.
It is not her fault that she is absent.  The admiral was persuaded to go
and attend those cavalry manoeuvres with the Grand Duke, to whom he had
been civil when in command of the Mediterranean squadron.  You know, the
admiral believes he has military--I mean soldierly-genius; and the
delusion may have given him wholesome exercise and helped him to forget
his gout.  So far, Henrietta will have been satisfied.  She cannot have
found much amusement among dusty troopers or at that court at Carlsruhe.
Our French milliner there has helped in retarding her quite against her
will.  She has had to choose a balldress for the raw mountain-girl they
have with them, and get her fitted, and it's a task!  Why take her to the
ball?  But the admiral's infatuated with this girl, and won't hear of her
exclusion--because, he says, she understands a field of battle; and the
Ducal party have taken to her.  Ah, Russett, you should not have flown!
No harm, only Henrietta does require a trifle of management.  She writes,
that she is sure of you for the night at the Schloss.'

'Why, ma'am?'

'You have given your word.  "He never breaks his lightest word," she
says.'

'It sounds like the beginning of respect.'

'The rarest thing men teach women to feel for them!'

'A respectable love match--eh?  Good Lord!  You'll be civil to my friend.
You have struck him to the dust.  You have your one poetical admirer in
him.'

'I am honoured, Russett.'

'Cleared out, I suppose?  Abrane is a funnel for pouring into that Bank.
Have your fun as you like it!  I shall get supplies to-morrow.  By the
way, you have that boy Cressett here.  What are you doing with him?'

Livia spoke of watching over him and guarding him:

'He was at the table beside me, bursting to have a fling; and my friend
Mr. Woodseer said, it was "Adonis come to spy the boar":--the picture!'

Prompt as bugle to the breath, Livia proposed to bet him fifty pounds
that she would keep young Cressett from gambling a single louis.  The
pretty saying did not touch her.

Fleetwood moved and bowed.  Sir Meeson Corby simulated a petrifaction of
his frame at seeing the Countess of Fleetwood actually partly bent with
her gracious acknowledgement of the tramp's gawky homage.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Accounting his tight blue tail coat and brass buttons a victory
Amused after their tiresome work of slaughter
And her voice, against herself, was for England
As for comparisons, they are flowers thrown into the fire
As if the age were the injury!
Brains will beat Grim Death if we have enough of them
But a great success is full of temptations
Could affect me then, without being flung at me
Country enclosed us to make us feel snug in our own importance
Did not know the nature of an oath, and was dismissed
Dogs' eyes have such a sick look of love
Drank to show his disdain of its powers
Earl of Cressett fell from his coach-box in a fit
Father used to say, four hours for a man, six for a woman
Fond, as they say, of his glass and his girl
Found that he 'cursed better upon water'
Good-bye to sorrow for a while--Keep your tears for the living
Had got  the trick of lying, through fear of telling the truth
Hard enough for a man to be married to a fool
He was a figure on a horse, and naught when off it
Her intimacy with a man old enough to be her grandfather
I hate sleep: I hate anything that robs me of my will
Innocence and uncleanness may go together
It was an honest buss, but dear at ten thousand
Limit was two bottles of port wine at a sitting
Little boy named Tommy Wedger said he saw a dead body go by
Mighty Highnesses who had only smelt the outside edge of battle
No enemy's shot is equal to a weak heart in the act
Not afford to lose, and a disposition free of the craving to win
Past, future, and present, the three weights upon humanity
Put material aid at a lower mark than gentleness
Puzzle to connect the foregoing and the succeeding
Seventy, when most men are reaping and stacking their sins
Should we leave a good deed half done
Showery, replied the admiral, as his cocked-hat was knocked off
So indulgent when they drop their blot on a lady's character
So much for morality in those days!
Steady shakes them
Sweetest on earth to her was to be prized by her brother
They could have pardoned her a younger lover
Thus are we stricken by the days of our youth
Truth is, they have taken a stain from the life they lead
Very little parleying between determined men
Warm, is hardly the word--Winter's warm on skates
Woman finds herself on board a rudderless vessel
Writer society delights in, to show what it is composed of
You are to imagine that they know everything
You saw nothing but handkerchiefs out all over the theatre




End of this Project Gutenberg Etext of The Amazing Marriage, v1
by George Meredith






THE AMAZING MARRIAGE

By GEORGE MEREDITH

1895



BOOK 2.

X.        SMALL CAUSES
XI.       THE PRISONER OF HIS WORD
XII.      HENRIETTA'S LETTER TREATING OF THE GREAT EVENT
XIII.     AN IRRUPTION OF MISTRESS GOSSIP IN BREACH OF THE CONVENTION
XIV.      A PENDANT OF THE FOREGOING
XV.       OPENING STAGE OF THE HONEYMOON
XVI.      IN WHICH THE BRIDE FROM FOREIGN PARTS IS GIVEN A TASTE OF OLD
          ENGLAND
XVII.     RECORDS A SHADOW CONTEST CLOSE ON THE FOREGOING
XVIII.    DOWN WHITECHAPEL WAY
XIX.      THE GIRL MADGE



CHAPTER X

SMALL CAUSES

A clock sounded one of the later morning hours of the night as Gower
Woodseer stood at his hotel door, having left Fleetwood with a band of
revellers.  The night was now clear.  Stars were low over the ridge of
pines, dropped to a league of our strange world to record the doings.
Beneath this roof lay the starry She.  He was elected to lie beneath it
also: and he beheld his heavenly lady floating on the lull of soft white
cloud among her sister spheres.  After the way of imaginative young men,
he had her features more accurately now she was hidden, and he idealized
her more.  He could escape for a time from his coil of similes and paint
for himself the irids of her large, long, grey eyes darkly rimmed; purest
water-grey, lucid within the ring, beneath an arch of lashes.  He had
them fast; but then he fell to contemplating their exceeding rareness;
And the mystery of the divinely grey swung a kindled fancy to the flight
with some queen-witch of woods, of whom a youth may dream under the spell
of twilights, East or West, among forest branches.

She had these marvellous eyes and the glamour for men.  She had not yet
met a man with the poetical twist in the brain to prize her elementally.
All admitted the glamour; none of her courtiers were able to name it,
even the poetical head giving it a name did not think of the witch in her
looks as a witch in her deeds, a modern daughter of the mediaeval.  To
her giant squire the eyes of the lady were queer: they were unlit glass
lamps to her French suppliant; and to the others, they were attractively
uncommon; the charm for them being in her fine outlines, her stature,
carriage of her person, and unalterable composure; particularly her
latent daring.  She had the effect on the general mind of a lofty crag-
castle with a history.  There was a whiff of gunpowder exciting the
atmosphere in the anecdotal part of the history known.

Woodseer sat for a certain time over his note-book.  He closed it with a
thrilling conceit of the right thing written down; such as entomologists
feel when they have pinned the rare insect.  But what is butterfly or
beetle compared with the chiselled sentences carved out of air to
constitute us part owner of the breathing image and spirit of an adored
fair woman?  We repeat them, and the act of repeating them makes her come
close on ours, by virtue of the eagle thought in the stamped gold of the
lines.

Then, though she is not ever to be absolutely ours (and it is an
impoverishing desire that she should be), we have beaten out the golden
sentence--the essential she and we in one.  But is it so precious after
all?  A suspicious ring of an adjective drops us on a sickening descent.

The author dashed at his book, examined, approved, keenly enjoyed, and he
murderously scratched the adjective.  She stood better without it, as a
bright planet star issuing from clouds, which are perhaps an adornment to
our hackneyed moon.  This done, he restored the book to his coat's
breast-pocket, smiling or sneering at the rolls of bank-notes there,
disdaining to count them.  They stuffed an inner waistcoat pocket and his
trousers also.  They at any rate warranted that we can form a calculation
of the chances, let Lord Fleetwood rave as he may please.

Woodseer had caught a glimpse of the elbow-point of his coat when
flinging it back to the chair.  There was distinctly abrasion.
Philosophers laugh at such things.  But they must be the very ancient
pallium philosophers, ensconced in tubs, if they pretend to merriment
over the spectacle of nether garments gapped at the spot where man is
most vulnerable.  He got loose from them and held them up to the candle,
and the rays were admitted, neither winking nor peeping.  Serviceable old
clothes, no doubt.  Time had not dealt them the final kick before they
scored a good record.

They dragged him, nevertheless, to a sort of confession of some weakness,
that he could not analyze for the swirl of emotional thoughts in the way;
and they had him to the ground.  An eagle of the poetic becomes a mere
squat toad through one of these pretty material strokes.  Where then is
Philosophy?  But who can be philosopher and the fervent admirer of a
glorious lady?  Ask again, who in that frowzy garb can presume to think
of her or stand within fifty miles of her orbit?

A dreary two hours brought round daylight.  Woodseer quitted his restless
bed and entered the abjured habiliments, chivalrous enough to keep from
denouncing them until he could cast the bad skin they now were to his
uneasy sensations.  He remembered having stumbled and fallen on the slope
of the hill into this vale, and probably then the mischief had occurred
though a brush would have, been sufficient, the slightest collision.
Only, it was odd that the accident should have come to pass just previous
to his introduction.  How long antecedent was it?  He belaboured his
memory to reckon how long it was from the moment of the fall to the first
sight of that lady.

His window looked down on the hotel stable-yard.  A coach-house door was
open.  Odd or not--and it certainly looked like fate--that he should be
bowing to his lady so shortly after the mishap expelling him, he had to
leave the place.  A groom in the yard was hailed, and cheerily informed
him he could be driven to Carlsruhe as soon as the coachman had finished
his breakfast.  At Carlsruhe a decent refitting might be obtained, and he
could return from exile that very day, thanks to the praiseworthy early
hours of brave old Germany.

He had swallowed a cup of coffee with a roll of stale bread, in the best
of moods, and entered his carriage; he was calling the order to start
when a shout surprised his ear: 'The fiddler bolts!'

Captain Abrane's was the voice.  About twenty paces behind, Abrane,
Fleetwood, and one whom they called Chummy Potts, were wildly waving
arms.  Woodseer could hear the captain's lowered roar: 'Race you, Chummy,
couple of louis, catch him first!' The two came pelting up to the
carriage abreast.

They were belated revellers, and had been carelessly strolling under the
pinky cloudlets bedward, after a prolonged carousal with the sons and
daughters of hilarious nations, until the apparition of Virgin Luck on
the wing shocked all prospect of a dead fight with the tables that day.

'Here, come, no, by Jove, you, Mr. Woodsir! won't do, not a bit! can't
let you go,' cried Abrane, as he puffed.  'What! cut and run and leave
us, post winnings--bankers--knock your luck on the head!  What a fellow!
Can't let you.  Countess never forgive us.  You promised--swore it--play
for her.  Struck all aheap to hear of your play!  You've got the trick.
Her purse for you in my pocket.  Never a fellow played like you.  Cool as
a cook over a-gridiron!  Comme un phare!  St. Ombre says--that Frenchman.
You astonished the Frenchman!  And now cut and run?  Can't allow it.
Honour of the country at stake.'

'Hands off!' Woodseer bellowed, feeling himself a leaky vessel in dock,
his infirmities in danger of exposure.  'If you pull!--what the deuce do
you want?  Stop!'

'Out you come,' said the giant, and laughed at the fun to his friends,
who were entirely harmonious when not violently dissenting, as is the way
with Night's rollickers before their beds have reconciled them to the
day-beams.

Woodseer would have had to come and was coming; he happened to say:
'Don't knock my pipe out of my mouth,' and touched a chord in the giant.

'All--right; smoke your pipe,' was answered to his remonstrance.

During the amnesty, Fleetwood inquired: 'Where are you going?'

'Far a drive,--to be sure.  Don't you see!'

'You'll return?'

'I intend to return.'

'He's beastly excited,' quoth Abrane.

Fleetwood silenced him, though indeed Woodseer appeared suspiciously
restive.

'Step down and have a talk with me before you start.  You're not to go
yet.'

'I must.  I'm in a hurry.'

'What 's the hurry?'

'I want to smoke and think.'

'Takes a carriage on the top of the morning to smoke and think!  Hark at
that!' Abrane sang out.  'Oh, come along quietly, you fellow, there's a
good fellow!  It concerns us all, every man Jack; we're all bound up in
your fortunes.  Fellow with luck like yours can't pretend to behave
independently.  Out of reason!'

'Do you give me your word you return?' said Fleetwood.

Woodseer replied: 'Very well, I do; there, I give my word.  Hang it!
now I know what they mean by "anything for a quiet life."  Just a shake
brings us down on that cane-bottomed chair!'

'You return to-day?'

'To-day, yes, yes.'

Fleetwood signified the captive's release; and Abrane immediately
suggested:

'Pop old Chummy in beside the fellow to mount guard.'

Potts was hustled and precipitated into the carriage by the pair, with
whom he partook this last glimmer of their night's humorous
extravagances, for he was an easy creature.  The carriage drove off.

'Keep him company!' they shouted.

'Escort him back!' said he, nodding.

He remarked to Woodseer: 'With your permission,' concerning the seat he
took, and that 'a draught of morning air would do him good.'  Then he
laughed politely, exchanged wavy distant farewells with his comrades,
touched a breast-pocket for his case of cigars, pulled forth one,
obtained 'the loan of a light,' blew clouds and fell into the anticipated
composure, quite understanding the case and his office.

Both agreed as to the fine morning it was.  Woodseer briefly assented to
his keeper's reiterated encomium on the morning, justified on oath.  A
fine morning, indeed.  'Damned if I think I ever saw so fine a morning!'
Potts cried.  He had no other subject of conversation with this hybrid:
and being equally disposed for hot discourse or for sleep,
the deprivation of the one and the other forced him to seek amusement
in his famous reading of character; which was profound among the biped
equine, jockeys, turfmen, sharpers, pugilists, demireps.  He fronted
Woodseer with square shoulders and wide knees, an elbow on one, a fist on
the other, engaged in what he termed the 'prodding of his eel,' or
'nicking of his man,' a method of getting straight at the riddle of the
fellow by the test of how long he could endure a flat mute stare and
return look for look unblinking.  The act of smoking fortifies and partly
covers the insolence.  But if by chance an equable, not too narrowly
focussed, counterstare is met, our impertinent inquisitor may resemble
the fisherman pulled into deep waters by his fish.  Woodseer perused his
man, he was not attempting to fathom him: he had besides other stuff in
his head.  Potts had naught, and the poor particle he was wriggled under
detection.

'Tobacco before breakfast!' he said disgustedly tossing his cigar to the
road.  'Your pipe holds on.  Bad thing, I can tell you, that smoking on
an empty stomach.  No trainer'd allow it, not for a whole fee or double.
Kills your wind.  Let me ask you, my good sir, are you going to turn?
We've sat a fairish stretch.  I begin to want my bath and a shave, linen
and coffee.  Thirsty' as a dog.'

He heard with stupefaction, that he could alight on the spot, if he
pleased, otherwise he would be driven into Carlsruhe.  And now they had a
lingual encounter, hot against cool; but the eyes of Chummy Potts having
been beaten, his arguments and reproaches were not backed by the powerful
looks which are an essential part of such eloquence as he commanded.
They fled from his enemy's currishly, even while he was launching
epithets.  His pathetic position subjected him to beg that Woodseer would
direct the driver to turn, for he had no knowledge of 'their German
lingo.'  And said he: 'You've nothing to laugh at, that I can see.  I'm
at your mercy, you brute; caught in a trap.  I never walk;--and the sun
fit to fry a mackerel along that road!  I apologize for abusing you; I
can't do more.  You're an infernally clever player--there!  And, upon my
soul, I could drink ditchwater!  But if you're going in for transactions
at Carlsruhe, mark my words, your luck's gone.  Laugh as much as you
like.'

Woodseer happened to be smiling over the excellent reason for not turning
back which inflicted the wofulness.  He was not without sympathy for a
thirsty wretch, and guessing, at the sight of an avenue of limes to the
left of the road, that a wayside inn was below, he said: 'You can have
coffee or beer in two minutes,' and told the driver where to pull up.

The sight of a grey-jacketed, green-collared sportsman, dog at heel,
crossing the flat land to the hills of the forest, pricked him enviously,
and caused him to ask what change had come upon him, that he should be
hurrying to a town for a change of clothes.  Just as Potts was about to
jump out, a carriage, with a second behind it, left the inn door.  He
rubbed a hand on his unshaven chin, tried a glance at his shirt-front,
and remarking: 'It won't be any one who knows me,' stood to let the
carriages pass.  In the first were a young lady and a gentleman: the lady
brilliantly fair, an effect of auburn hair and complexion, despite the
signs of a storm that had swept them and had not cleared from her
eyelids.  Apparently her maid, a damsel sitting straight up, occupied the
carriage following; and this fresh-faced young person twice quickly and
bluntly bent her head as she was driven by.  Potts was unacquainted with
the maid.  But he knew the lady well, or well enough for her inattention
to be the bigger puzzle.  She gazed at the Black Forest hills in the
steadiest manner, with eyes betraying more than they saw; which solved
part of the puzzle, of course.  Her reasons for declining to see him were
exposed by the presence of the gentleman beside her.  At the same time,
in so highly bred a girl, a defenceless exposure was unaccountable.  Half
a nod and the shade of a smile would have been the proper course; and her
going along on the road to the valley seemed to say it might easily have
been taken; except that there had evidently been a bit of a scene.

Potts ranked Henrietta's beauty far above her cousin Livia's.  He was
therefore personally offended by her disregard of him, and her bit of a
scene with the fellow carrying her off did him injury on behalf of his
friend Fleetwood.  He dismissed Woodseer curtly.  Thirsting more to
gossip than to drink, he took a moody draught of beer at the inn, and by
the aid of a conveyance, hastily built of rotten planks to serve his
needs, and drawn by a horse of the old wars,' as he reported on his
arrival at Baden,--reached that home of the maltreated innocents twenty
minutes before the countess and her party were to start for lunch up the
Lichtenthal.  Naturally, he was abused for letting his bird fly: but as
he was shaven, refreshed, and in clean linen, he could pull his shirt-
cuffs and take seat at his breakfast-table with equanimity while Abrane
denounced him.

'I'll bet you the fellow's luck has gone,' said Potts.  'He 's no new
hand and you don't think him so either, Fleet.  I've looked into the
fellow's eye and seen a leery old badger at the bottom of it.  Talks vile
stuff.  However, 'perhaps I didn't drive out on that sweltering Carlsruhe
road for nothing.'

He screwed a look at the earl, who sent Abrane to carry a message and
heard the story Potts had to tell.

'Henrietta Fakenham! no mistake about her; driving out from a pothouse;
man beside her, military man; might be a German.  And, if you please,
quite unacquainted with your humble servant, though we were as close as
you to me.  Something went wrong in that pothouse.  Red eyes.  There had
been a scene, one could swear.  Behind the lady another carriage, and her
maid.  Never saw the girl before, and sets to bowing and smirking at me,
as if I was the-fellow of all others!  Comical.  I made sure they were
bound for this place.  They were on the Strasburg road.  No sign of
them?'

'You speak to me?' said Fleetwood.

Potts muttered.  He had put his foot into it.

'You have a bad habit of speaking to yourself,' Fleetwood remarked, and
left him.  He suffered from the rustics he had to deal with among his
class, and it was not needed that he should thunder at them to make his
wrath felt.

Livia swam in, asking: 'What has come to Russett?  He passed me in one of
his black fits.'

The tale of the Carlsruhe road was repeated by Potts.  She reproved him.
'How could you choose Russett for such a report as that!  The admiral was
on the road behind.  Henrietta--you're sure it was she?  German girls
have much the same colouring.  The gentleman with her must have been one
of the Court equerries.  They were driving to some chateau or battlefield
the admiral wanted to inspect.  Good-looking man?  Military man?'

'Oh! the man! pretty fair, I dare say,' Potts rejoined.  'If it wasn't
Henrietta Fakenham, I see with the back of my head.  German girl!  The
maid was a German girl.'

'That may well be,' said Livia.

She conceived the news to be of sufficient importance for her to
countermand the drive up the Lichtenthal, and take the Carlsruhe road
instead; for Henrietta was weak, and Chillon Kirby an arch-plotter, and
pleader too, one of the desperate lovers.  He was outstaying his leave of
absence already, she believed; he had to be in England.  If he feared to
lose Henrietta, he would not hesitate to carry her off.  Livia knew him,
and knew the power of his pleading with a firmer woman than Henrietta.




CHAPTER XI

THE PRISONER OF HIS WORD

Nothing to rouse alarm was discovered at Carlsruhe.  Livia's fair cousin
was there with the red-haired gaunt girl of the mountains; and it was
frankly stated by Henrietta, that she had accompanied the girl a certain
distance along the Strasburg road, for her to see the last of her brother
Chillon on his way to England.  Livia was not the woman to push
inquiries.  On that subject, she merely said, as soon as they were alone
together:

'You seem to have had the lion's share of the parting.'

'Yes, we passed Mr. Chumley Potts,' was Henrietta's immediate answer; and
her reference to him disarmed Livia.

They smiled at his name transiently, but in agreement: the tattler-spout
of their set was, a fatal person to encounter, and each deemed the sudden
apparition of him in the very early morning along the Carlsruhe road
rather magical.

'You place particular confidence in Russett's fidelity to his word,
Riette--as you have been hearing yourself called.  You should be serious
by this time.  Russett won't bear much more.  I counted on the night of
the Ball for the grand effect.  You will extinguish every woman there--
and if he is absent?'

'I shall excuse him.'

'You are not in a position to be so charitable.  You ought to know your
position, and yourself too, a little better than you do.  How could you
endure poverty?  Chillon Kirby stands in his uniform, and all's told.  He
can manoeuvre, we know.  He got the admiral away to take him to those
reviews cleverly.  But is he thinking of your interests when he does it?
He requires twenty years of active service to give you a roof to your
head.  I hate such allusions.  But look for a moment at your character:
you must have ordinary luxuries and pleasures, and if you were to find
yourself grinding against common necessities--imagine it!  Russett is
quite manageable.  He is, trust me!  He is a gentleman; he has more
ability than most young men: he can do anything he sets his mind to do.
He has his great estates and fortune all in his own hands.  We call him
eccentric.  He is only young, with a lot of power.  Add, he's in love,
and some one distracts him.  Not love, do you say?--you look it.  He
worships.  He has no chance given him to show himself at his best.
Perhaps he is off again now.  Will you bet me he is not?'

'I should incline to make the bet, if I betted,' said Henrietta.  'His
pride is in his word, and supposing he's in love, it's with his pride,
which never quits him.'

'There's firmness in a man who has pride of that kind.  You must let me
take you back to Baden.  I hold to having you with me to-day.  You must
make an appearance there.  The admiral will bring us his Miss Kirby to-
morrow, if he is bound to remain here to-night.  There's no harm in his
bachelor dinners.  I suspect his twinges of gout come of the prospect of
affairs when he lands in England.  Remember our bill with Madame
Clemence.  There won't be the ghost of a bank-note for me if Russett
quits the field; we shall all be stranded.'

Henrietta inquired: 'Does it depend on my going with you to-day?'

'Consider, that he is now fancying a thousand things.  We won't talk of
the road to Paris.'

A shot of colour swept over Henrietta.

'I will speak to papa:--if he can let me go.  He has taken to Miss
Kirby.'

'Does she taste well?'

Henrietta debated.  'It's impossible to dislike her.  Oh! she is wild!
She knows absolutely nothing of the world.  She can do everything we
can't--or don't dare to try.--Men would like her.  Papa's beginning to
doat.  He says she would have made a first-rate soldier.  She fears blood
as little as her morning cup of milk.  One of the orderlies fell rather
badly from a frightened horse close by our carriage.  She was out in a
moment and had his head on her lap, calling to papa to keep the carriage
fast and block the way of the squadron, for the man's leg was hurt.  I
really thought we were lost.  At these manoeuvres anything may happen, at
any instant.  Papa will follow the horse-artillery.  You know his vanity
to be a military quite as much as a naval commander like the Greeks and
Romans, he says.  We took the bruised man into our carriage and drove him
to camp, Carinthia nursing him on the way.'

'Carinthia!  She's well fitted with her name.  What with her name and her
hair and her build and her singular style of attire, one wonders at her
coming into civilized parts.  She 's utterly unlike Chillon.'

Henrietta reddened at the mention of one of her own thoughts in the
contrasting of the pair.

They had their points of likeness, she said.

It did not concern Livia to hear what these were.  Back to Baden, with
means to procure the pleasant shocks of the galvanic battery there, was
her thought; for she had a fear of the earl's having again departed in a
huff at Henrietta's behaviour.

The admiral consented that his daughter should go, as soon as he heard
that Miss Kirby was to stay.  He had when a young man met her famous
father; he vowed she was the Old Buccaneer young again in petticoats and
had made prize of an English man-of-war by storm; all the profit,
however, being his.  This he proved with a courteous clasp of the girl
and a show of the salute on her cheek, which he presumed to take at the
night's farewell.  'She's my tonic,' he proclaimed heartily.  She seemed
to Livia somewhat unstrung and toneless.  The separation from her brother
in the morning might account for it.  And a man of the admiral's age
could be excused if he exalted the girl.  Senility, like infancy, is fond
of plain outlines for the laying on of its paints.  The girl had rugged
brows, a short nose, red hair; no young man would look at her twice.  She
was utterly unlike Chillon!  Kissing her hand to Henrietta from the steps
of the hotel, the girl's face improved.

Livia's little squire, Sir Meeson Corby, ejaculated as they were driving
down the main street, 'Fleetwood's tramp!  There he goes.  Now see, Miss
Fakenham, the kind of object Lord Fleetwood picks up and calls friend!--
calls that object friend!  .  .  But, what?  He has been to a tailor and
a barber!'

'Stop the coachman.  Run, tell Mr. Woodseer I wish him to join us,' Livia
said, and Sir Meeson had to thank his tramp for a second indignity.  He
protested, he simulated remonstrance,--he had to go, really feeling a
sickness.

The singular-looking person, whose necessities or sense of the decencies
had, unknown to himself and to the others, put them all in motion that
day, swung round listening to the challenge to arms, as the puffy little
man's delivery of the countess's message sounded.  He was respectably
clad, he thought, in the relief of his escape from the suit of clothes
discarded, and he silently followed Sir Meeson's trot to the carriage.
'Should have mistaken you for a German to-day, sir,' the latter said,
and trotted on.

'A stout one,' Woodseer replied, with his happy indifference to his
exterior.

His dark lady's eyes were kindly overlooking, like the heavens.  Her fair
cousin, to whom he bowed, awakened him to a perception of the spectacle
causing the slight, quick arrest of her look, in an astonishment not
unlike the hiccup in speech, while her act of courtesy proceeded.  At
once he was conscious of the price he paid for respectability, and saw
the Teuton skin on the slim Cambrian, baggy at shoulders, baggy at seat,
pinched at the knees, short at the heels, showing outrageously every spot
where he ought to have been bigger or smaller.  How accept or how reject
the invitation to drive in such company to Baden!

'You're decided enough, sir, in your play, they tell me,' the vindictive
little baronet commented on his hesitation, and Woodseer sprang to the
proffered vacant place.  But he had to speak of his fly waiting for him
at the steps of a certain hotel.

'Best hotel in the town!' Sir Beeson exclaimed pointedly to Henrietta,
reading her constraint with this comical object before her.  It was the
admiral's hotel they stopped at.

'Be so good as to step down and tell the admiral he is to bring Madame
Clemence in his carriage to-morrow; and on your way, you will dismiss Mr.
Woodseer's fly,' Livia mildly addressed her squire.  He stared: again he
had to go, muttering: 'That nondescript's footman!' and his mischance in
being checked and crossed and humiliated perpetually by a dirty-fisted
vagabond impostor astounded him.  He sent the flyman to the carriage for
orders.

Admiral Fakenham and Carinthia descended.  Sir Meeson heard her cry out:
'Is it you!' and up stood the pretentious lout in the German sack,
affecting the graces of a born gentleman fresh from Paris,--bowing,
smirking, excusing himself for something; and he jumped down to the young
lady, he talked intimately with her, with a joker's air; he roused the
admiral to an exchange of jokes, and the countess and Miss Fakenham more
than smiled; evidently at his remarks, unobservant of the preposterous
figure he cut.  Sir Meeson Corby had intimations of the disintegration of
his country if a patent tramp burlesquing in those clothes could be
permitted to amuse English ladies of high station, quite at home with
them.  Among the signs of England's downfall, this was decidedly one.
What to think of the admiral's favourite when, having his arm paternally
on her shoulder, she gave the tramp her hand at parting, and then
blushed!  All that the ladies had to say about it was, that a spread of
colour rather went to change the character of her face.

Carinthia had given Woodseer her hand and reddened under the recollection
of Chillon's words to her as they mounted the rise of the narrow vale,
after leaving the lame gentleman to his tobacco on the grass below the
rocks.  Her brother might have counselled her wisely and was to be
obeyed.  Only, the great pleasure in seeing the gentleman again inspired
gratitude: he brought the scene to her; and it was alive, it chatted and
it beckoned; it neighboured her home; she had passed it on her walk away
from her home; the gentleman was her link to the mountain paths; he was
just outside an association with her father and mother.  At least, her
thinking of them led to him, he to them.  Now that she had lost Chillon,
no one was near to do so much.  Besides, Chillon loved Henrietta; he was
her own.  His heart was hers and his mind his country's.  This gentleman
loved the mountains; the sight of him breathed mountain air.  To see him
next day was her anticipation: for it would be at the skirts of hilly
forest land, where pinetrees are a noble family, different from the dusty
firs of the weariful plains, which had tired her eyes of late.

Baden was her first peep at the edges of the world since she had grown to
be a young woman.  She had but a faint idea of the significance of
gambling.  The brilliant lights, the band music, the sitting groups and
company of promenaders were novelties; the Ball of the ensuing night at
the Schloss would be a wonder, she acknowledged in response to Henrietta,
who was trying to understand her; and she admired her ball-dress, she
said, looking unintelligently when she heard that she would be guilty of
slaying numbers of gentlemen before the night was over.  Madame Clemence
thought her chances in that respect as good as any other young lady's,
if only she could be got to feel interested.  But at a word of the pine
forest, and saying she intended to climb the hills early with the light
in the morning, a pointed eagerness flushed Carinthia, the cold engraving
became a picture of colour.

She was out with the earliest light.  Yesterday's parting between Chillon
and Henrietta had taught her to know some little about love; and if her
voice had been heeded by Chillon's beloved, it would not have been a
parting.  Her only success was to bring a flood of tears from Henrietta.
The tears at least assured her that her brother's beautiful girl had no
love for the other one,--the young nobleman of the great wealth, who was
to be at the Ball, and had 'gone flying,' Admiral Fakenham shrugged to
say; for Lord Fleetwood was nowhere seen.

The much talk of him on the promenade overnight fetched his name to her
thoughts; he scarcely touched a mind that her father filled when she was
once again breathing early morning air among the stems of climbing pines,
broken alleys of the low-sweeping spruce branches and the bare straight
shafts carrying their heads high in the march upward.  Her old father was
arch-priest of such forest land, always recoverable to her there.  The
suggestion of mountains was enough to make her mind play, and her old
father and she were aware of one another without conversing in speech.
He pointed at things to observe; he shared her satisfied hunger for the
solitudes of the dumb and growing and wild sweet-smelling.  He would not
let a sorrowful thought backward or an apprehensive idea forward disturb
the scene.  A half-uprooted pine-tree stem propped mid-fall by standing
comrades, and the downy drop to ground and muted scurry up the bark of
long-brush squirrels, cocktail on the wary watch, were noticed by him as
well as by her; even the rotting timber drift, bark and cones on the
yellow pine needles, and the tortuous dwarf chestnut pushing level out,
with a strain of the head up, from a crevice of mossed rock, among ivy
and ferns; he saw what his girl saw.  Power of heart was her conjuring
magician.

She climbed to the rock-slabs above.  This was too easily done.  The poor
bit of effort excited her frame to desire a spice of danger, her walk was
towering in the physical contempt of a mountain girl for petty lowland
obstructions.  And it was just then, by the chance of things--by the
direction of events, as Dame Gossip believes it to be--while colour,
expression, and her proud stature marked her from her sex, that a
gentleman, who was no other than Lord Fleetwood, passed Carinthia,
coming out of the deeper pine forest.

Some distance on, round a bend of the path, she was tempted to adventure
by a projected forked head of a sturdy blunted and twisted little rock-
fostered forest tree pushing horizontally for growth about thirty feet
above the lower ground.  She looked on it, and took a step down to the
stem soon after.

Fleetwood had turned and followed, merely for the final curious peep at
an unexpected vision; he had noticed the singular shoot of thick timber
from the rock, and the form of the goose-neck it rose to, the sprout of
branches off the bill in the shape of a crest.  And now a shameful spasm
of terror seized him at sight of a girl doing what he would have dreaded
to attempt.  She footed coolly, well-balanced, upright.  She seated
herself.

And there let her be.  She was a German girl, apparently.  She had an air
of breeding, something more than breeding.  German families of the nobles
give out, here and there, as the Great War showed examples of, intrepid
young women, who have the sharp lines of character to render them
independent of the graces.  But, if a young woman out alone in the woods
was hardly to be counted among the well-born, she held rank above them.
Her face and bearing might really be taken to symbolize the forest life.
She was as individual a representative as the Tragic and Comic masks, and
should be got to stand between them for sign of the naturally straight-
growing untrained, a noble daughter of the woods.

Not comparable to Henrietta in feminine beauty, she was on an upper
plateau, where questions as to beauty are answered by other than the
shallow aspect of a girl.  But would Henrietta eclipse her if they were
side by side?  Fleetwood recalled the strange girl's face.  There was in
it a savage poignancy in serenity unexampled among women--or modern
women.  One might imagine an apotheosis of a militant young princess of
Goths or Vandals, the glow of blessedness awakening her martial ardours
through the languor of the grave:--Woodseer would comprehend and hit on
the exact image to portray her in a moment, Fleetwood thought, and longed
for that fellow.

He walked hurriedly back to the stunted rock tree.  The damsel had
vanished.  He glanced below.  She had not fallen.  He longed to tell
Woodseer he had seen a sort of Carinthia sister, cousin, one of the
family.  A single glimpse of her had raised him out of his grovelling
perturbations, cooled and strengthened him, more than diverting the
course of the poison Henrietta infused, and to which it disgraced him
to be so subject.  He took love unmanfully; the passion struck at his
weakness; in wrath at the humiliation, if only to revenge himself for
that, he could be fiendish; he knew it, and loathed the desired fair
creature who caused and exposed to him these cracks in his nature, whence
there came a brimstone stench of the infernal pits.  And he was made for
better.  Of this he was right well assured.  Superior to station and to
wealth, to all mundane advantages, he was the puppet of a florid puppet
girl; and he had slept at the small inn of a village hard by, because it
was intolerable to him to see the face that had been tearful over her
lover's departure, and hear her praises of the man she trusted to keep
his word, however grievously she wounded him.

He was the prisoner of his word;--rather like the donkeys known as
married men: rather more honourable than most of them.  He had to be
present at the ball at the Schloss and behold his loathed Henrietta,
suffer torture of chains to the rack, by reason of his having promised
the bitter coquette he would be there.  So hellish did the misery seem to
him, that he was relieved by the prospect of lying a whole day long in
loneliness with the sunshine of the woods, occasionally conjuring up the
antidote face of the wood-sprite before he was to undergo it.  But,
as he was not by nature a dreamer, only dreamed of the luxury of being
one, he soon looked back with loathing on a notion of relief to come from
the state of ruminating animal, and jumped up and shook off another of
men's delusions--that they can, if they have the heart to suffer pain,
deaden it with any semi-poetical devices, similar to those which Rufus
Abrane's 'fiddler fellow' practised and was able to carry out because he
had no blood.  The spite of a present entire opposition to Woodseer's
professed views made him exult in the thought, that the mouther of
sentences was likely to be at work stultifying them and himself in the
halls there below during the day.  An imp of mischief offered consolatory
sport in those halls of the Black Goddess; already he regarded his recent
subservience to the conceited and tripped peripatetic philosopher as
among the ignominies he had cast away on his road to a general contempt;
which is the position of a supreme elevation for particularly sensitive
young men.

Pleasure in the scenery had gone, and the wood-sprite was a flitted
vapour; he longed to be below there, observing Abrane and Potts and the
philosopher confounded, and the legible placidity of Countess Livia.
Nevertheless, he hung aloft, feeding where he could, impatient of the
solitudes, till night, when, according to his guess, the ladies were at
their robing.

Half the fun was over: but the tale of it, narrated in turn by Abrane and
his Chummy Potts on the promenade, was a very good half.  The fiddler had
played for the countess and handed her back her empty purse, with a bow
and a pretty speech.  Nothing had been seen of him since.  He had lost
all his own money besides.  'As of course he would,' said Potts.  'A
fellow calculating the chances catches at a knife in the air.'

'Every franc-piece he had!' cried Abrane.  'And how could the jackass
expect to keep his luck!  Flings off his old suit and comes back here
with a rig of German bags--you never saw such a figure!--Shoreditch Jew's
holiday!--why, of course, the luck wouldn't stand that.'

They confessed ruefully to having backed him a certain distance,
notwithstanding.  'He took it so coolly, just as if paying for goods
across a counter.'

'And he had something to bear, Braney, when you fell on him,' said Potts,
and murmured aside: 'He can be smartish.  Hears me call Braney Rufus, and
says he, like a fellow-chin on his fiddle--"Captain Mountain, Rufus Mus'.
Not bad, for a counter."'

Fleetwood glanced round: he could have wrung Woodseer's hand.  He saw
young Cressett instead, and hailed him: 'Here you are, my gallant!  You
shall flash your maiden sword tonight.  When I was under your age by a
long count, I dealt sanctimoniousness a flick o' the cheek, and you
shall, and let 'em know you're a man.  Come and have your first boar-hunt
along with me.  Petticoats be hanged.'

The boy showed some recollection of the lectures of his queen, but he had
not the vocables for resistance to an imperative senior at work upon
sneaking inclinations.  'Promised Lady F.'--do you hear him?' Fleetwood
called to the couple behind; and as gamblers must needs be parasites,
manly were the things they spoke to invigorate the youthful plunger and
second the whim of their paymaster.

At half-past eleven, the prisoner of his word entered under the Schloss
partico, having vowed to himself on the way, that he would satisfy the
formulas to gain release by a deferential bow to the great personages,
and straightway slip out into the heavenly starlight, thence down among
the jolly Parisian and Viennese Bacchanals.




CHAPTER XII

HENRIETTA'S LETTER TREATING OF THE GREAT EVENT

By the first light of an autumn morning, Henrietta sat at her travelling-
desk, to shoot a spark into the breast of her lover with the story of the
great event of the night.  For there had been one, one of our biggest,
beyond all tongues and trumpets and possible anticipations.  Wonder at it
hammered on incredulity as she wrote it for fact, and in writing had
vision of her lover's eyes over the page.

'Monsieur Du Lac!

'Grey Dawn.  'You are greeted.  This, if you have been tardy on the
journey home, will follow close on the heels of the prowest, I believe
truest, of knights, and bear perhaps to his quick mind some help to the
solution he dropped a hint of seeking.

'The Ball in every way a success.  Grand Duke and Duchess perfect in
courtesy, not a sign of the German morgue.  Livia splendid.  Compared to
Day and Night.  But the Night eclipses the Day.  A summer sea of dancing.
Who, think you, eclipsed those two?

'I tell you the very truth when I say your Carinthia did.  If you had
seen her,--the "poor dear girl" you sigh to speak of,--with the doleful
outlook on her fortunes: "portionless, unattractive!"  Chillon, she was
magical!

You cannot ever have seen her irradiated with happiness.  Her pleasure in
the happiness of all around her was part of the charm.  One should be a
poet to describe her.  It would task an artist to paint the rose-crystal
she became when threading her way through the groups to be presented.
This is not meant to say that she looked beautiful.  It was the something
above beauty--more unique and impressive--like the Alpine snow-cloak
towering up from the flowery slopes you know so well and I a little.

'You choose to think, is it Riette who noticed my simple sister so
closely before .  .  .?  for I suppose you to be reading this letter a
second time and reflecting as you read.  In the first place, acquaintance
with her has revealed that she is not the simple person--only in her
manner.  Under the beams of subsequent events, it is true I see her more
picturesquely.  But I noticed also just a suspicion of the "grenadier"
stride when she was on the march to make her curtsey.  But Livia had no
cause for chills and quivers.  She was not the very strange bird
requiring explanatory excuses; she dances excellently, and after the
first dance, I noticed she minced her steps in the walk with her partner.
She catches the tone readily.  If not the image of her mother, she has
inherited her mother's bent for the graces; she needs but a small amount
of practice.

'Take my assurance of that; and you know who has critical eyes.  Your
anxiety may rest; she is equal to any station.

'As expected by me, my Lord Tyrant appeared, though late, near midnight.
I saw him bowing to the Ducal party.  Papa had led your "simple sister"
there.  Next I saw the Tyrant and Carinthia conversing.  Soon they were
dancing together, talking interestedly, like cheerful comrades.  Whatever
his faults, he has the merit of being a man of his word.  He said he
would come, he did not wish to come, and he came.

'His word binds him--I hope not fatally; irrevocably, it certainly does.
There is charm of character in that.  His autocrat airs can be forgiven
to a man who so profoundly respects his word.

'It occurred during their third dance.  Your Riette was not in the
quadrille.  O but she was a snubbed young woman last night!  I refrain
--the examples are too minute for quotation.

'A little later and he had vanished.  Carinthia Kirby may already be
written Countess of Fleetwood!  His hand was offered and hers demanded in
plain terms.  Her brother would not be so astounded if he had seen the
brilliant creature she was--is, I could say; for when she left me here,
to go to her bed, she still wore the "afterglow."  She tripped over to me
in the ball-room to tell me.  I might doubt, she had no doubt whatever.
I fancied he had subjected her to some degree of trifling.  He was in a
mood.  His moods are known to me.  But no, he was precise; her report of
him strikes the ear as credible, in spite of the marvel it insists on our
swallowing.

"'Lord Fleetwood had asked me to marry him."  Neither assurance nor
bashfulness; newspaper print; aid an undoubting air of contentment.

'Imagine me hearing it.

'"To be his wife?"

'"He said wife."

'"And you replied?"

'"I--said I would."

'"Tell me all?"

'"He said we were plighted."

'Now, "wife" is one of the words he abhors; and he loathes the hearing of
a girl as "engaged."  However, "plighted" carried a likeness.

'I pressed her: "My dear Carinthia, you thought him in earnest?"

'"He was."

'"How do you judge?"

'"By his look when he spoke."

'"Not by his words?"

"'I repeat them to you."

'She has repeated them to me here in my bedroom.  There is no variation.
She remembers every syllable.  He went so far as to urge her to say
whether she would as willingly utter consent if they were in a church and
a clergyman at the altar-rails.

'That was like him.

'She made answer: "Wherever it may be, I am bound, if I say yes."

'She then adds: "He told me he joined hands with me."

'"Did he repeat the word 'wife'?"

'"He said it twice."

'I transcribe verbatim scrupulously.  There cannot be an error, Chillon.
It seems to show, that he has embraced the serious meaning of the word--
or seriously embraced the meaning, reads' better.  I have seen his lips
form "wife."

'But why wonder so staringly?  They both love the mountains.  Both are
wildish.  She was looking superb.  And he had seen her do a daring thing
on the rocks on the heights in the early morning, when she was out by
herself, unaware of a spectator, he not knowing who she was;--the Fates
had arranged it so.  That was why he took to her so rapidly.  So he told
her.  She likes being admired.  The preparation for the meeting does
really seem "under direction."  She likes him too, I do think.  Between
her repetitions of his compliments, she praised his tone of voice, his
features.  She is ready to have the fullest faith in the sincerity of his
offer; speaks without any impatience for the fulfilment.  If it should
happen, what a change in the fortunes of a girl--of more than one,
possibly.

'Now I must rest "eyelids fall."  It will be with a heart galloping.
No rest for me till this letter flies.  Good morning is my good night to
you, in a world that has turned over.'

Henrietta resumes:

'Livia will not hear of it, calls up all her pretty languor to put it
aside.  It is the same to-day as last night.  "Why mention Russett's
nonsense to me?"  Carinthia is as quietly circumstantial as at first.
She and the Tyrant talked of her native home.  Very desirous to see it!
means to build a mansion there!  "He said it must be the most romantic
place on earth."

'I suppose I slept.  I woke with my last line to you on my lips, and the
great news thundering.  He named Esslemont and his favourite--always
uninhabited--Cader Argau.  She speaks them correctly.  She has an
unfailing memory.  The point is, that it is a memory.

'Do not forget also--Livia is affected by her distaste--that he is a
gentleman.  He plays with his nobility.  With his reputation of
gentleman, he has never been known to play.  You will understand the
slightly hypocritical air--it is not of sufficient importance for it to
be alluded to in papa's presence--I put on with her.

'Yes, I danced nearly all the dances.  One, a princeling in scarlet
uniform, appearing fresh from under earth; Prussian: a weighty young Graf
in green, between sage and bottle, who seemed to have run off a tree in
the forest, and was trimmed with silver like dew-drops: one in your
Austrian white, dragon de Boheme, if I caught his French rightly.  Others
as well, a list.  They have the accomplishment.  They are drilled in it
young, as girls are, and so few Englishmen--even English officers.  How
it may be for campaigning, you can pronounce; but for dancing, the
pantalon collant is the perfect uniform.  Your critical Henrietta had not
to complain of her partners, in the absence of the one.

'I shall be haunted by visions of Chillon's amazement until I hear or we
meet.  I serve for Carinthia's mouthpiece, she cannot write it, she says.
It would be related in two copybook lines, if at all.

'The amazement over London!  The jewel hand of the kingdom gone in a
flash, to "a raw mountain girl," as will be said.  I can hear Lady Endor,
Lady Eldritch, Lady Cowry.  The reasonable woman should be Lady
Arpington.  I have heard her speak of your mother, seen by her when she
was in frocks.

'Enter the "plighted."  Poor Livia! to be made a dowager of by any but a
damsel of the family.  She may well ridicule "that nonsense of Russett's
last night"!  Carinthia kisses, embraces, her brother.  I am to say:
"What Henrietta tells you is true, Chillon."  She is contented though she
has not seen him again and has not the look of expecting to see him.  She
still wears the kind of afterglow.

'Chillon's Viennese waltz was played by the band: played a second time,
special request, conveyed to the leader by Prince Ferdinand.  True, most
true, she longs to be home across the water.  But be it admitted, that to
any one loving colour, music, chivalry, the Island of Drab is an exile.
Imagine, then, the strange magnetism drawing her there!  Could warmer
proof be given?

'Adieu.  Livia's "arch-plotter" will weigh the letter he reads to the
smallest fraction of a fraction before he moves a step.

'I could leave it and come to it again and add and add.  I foresee in
Livia's mind a dread of the aforesaid "arch," and an interdict.  So the
letter must be closed, sealed and into the box, with the hand I still
call mine, though I should doubt my right if it were contested fervently.
I am singing the waltz.

          'Adieu,
                    'Ever and beyond it,
                              'Your obedient Queen,
                                               'HENRIETTA.

'P.S.-My Lord Tyrant has departed--as on other occasions.  The prisoner
of his word is sure to take his airing before he presents himself to
redeem it.  His valet is left to pay bills, fortunately for Livia.  She
entrusted her purse yesterday to a man picked up on the road by my lord,
that he might play for her.  Captain Abrane assured her he had a star,
and Mr. Potts thought him a rush compere, an adept of those dreadful
gambling tables.  Why will she continue to play!  The purse was returned
to her, without so much as a piece of silver in it; the man has flown.
Sir M. Corby says, he is a man whose hands betray him--or did to Sir M.;
expects to see him one day on the wrong side of the criminal bar.  He
struck me as not being worse than absurd.  He was, in any case, an unfit
companion, and our C. would help to rescue the Eccentric from such
complicating associates.  I see worlds of good she may do.  Happily, he
is no slave of the vice of gambling; so she would not suffer that
anxiety.  I wish it could be subjoined, that he has no malicious pleasure
in misleading others.  Livia is inconsolable over her pet, young Lord
Cressett, whom he yesterday induced to "try his luck"--with the result.
We leave, if bills are paid, in two days.  Captain Abrane and Mr. Potts
left this afternoon; just enough to carry them home.  Papa and your
blissful sister out driving.  Riette within her four walls and signing
herself,

                         'THE PRISONER OF CHILLON.'




CHAPTER XIII

AN IRRUPTION.  OF MISTRESS GOSSIP IN BREACH OF THE CONVENTION

'It is a dark land,' Carinthia said, on seeing our Island's lowered
clouds in swift motion, without a break of their folds, above the sheer
white cliffs.

--She said it, we know.  That poor child Carinthia Jane, when first she
beheld Old England's shores, tossing in the packet-boat on a wild Channel
sea, did say it and think it, for it is in the family that she did; and
no wonder that she should, the day being showery from the bed of the sun,
after a frosty three days, at the close of autumn.  We used to have an
eye of our own for English weather before printed Meteorological
Observations and Forecasts undertook to supplant the shepherd and the
poacher, and the pilot with his worn brown leather telescope tucked
beneath his arm.  All three would have told you, that the end of a three
days' frost in the late season of the year and the early, is likely to
draw the warm winds from the Atlantic over Cornish Land's End and Lizard.

Quite by chance of things, Carinthia Jane looked on the land of her
father and mother for the first time under those conditions.  There can
be no harm in quoting her remark.  Only--I have to say it--experience
causes apprehension, that we are again to be delayed by descriptions, and
an exposition of feelings; taken for granted,--of course, in a serious
narrative; which it really seems these moderns think designed for a
frequent arrest of the actors in the story and a searching of the
internal state of this one or that one of them: who is laid out stark
naked and probed and expounded, like as in the celebrated picture by a
great painter--and we, thirsting for events as we are, are to stop to
enjoy a lecture on Anatomy.  And all the while the windows of the
lecture-room are rattling, if not the whole fabric shaking, with exterior
occurrences or impatience for them to come to pass.  Every explanation is
sure to be offered by the course events may take; so do, in mercy, I say,
let us bide for them.

She thought our Island all the darker because Henrietta had induced her
to talk on the boat of her mountain home and her last morning there for
the walk away with Chillon John.  Soon it was to appear supernaturally
bright, a very magician's cave for brilliancy.

Now, this had happened--and comment on it to yourselves, remembering
always, that Chillon John was a lover, and a lover has his excuses,
though they will not obviate the penalties he may incur; and dreadful
they were.  After reading Henrietta's letter to him, he rode out of his
Canterbury quarters across the country to the borders of Sussex, where
his uncle Lord Levellier lived, on the ridge of ironstone, near the wild
land of a forest, Croridge the name of the place.  Now, Chillon John knew
his uncle was miserly, and dreaded the prospect of having to support a
niece in the wretched establishment at Lekkatts, or, as it was popularly
called, Leancats; you can understand why.  But he managed to assure
himself he must in duty consult with the senior and chief member of .his
family on a subject of such importance as the proposal of marriage to his
lordship's niece.

The consultation was short: 'You will leave it to me,' his uncle said:
and we hear of business affairs between them, involving payment of moneys
due to the young man; and how, whenever he touched on them, his uncle
immediately fell back on the honour of the family and Carinthia Jane's
reputation, her good name to be vindicated, and especially that there
must be no delays, together with as close a reckoning as he could make of
the value of Lord Fleetwood's estates in Kent and in Staffordshire and
South Wales, and his house property in London.

'He will have means to support her,' said the old lord, shrugging as if
at his own incapacity for that burden.

The two then went to the workshops beside a large pond, where there was
an island bordered with birch trees and workmen's cottages near the main
building; and that was an arsenal containing every kind of sword and
lance and musket, rifle and fowling-piece and pistol, and more gunpowder
than was, I believe, allowed by law.  For they were engaged in inventing
a new powder for howitzer shells, of tremendous explosive power.

Nothing further did either of them say, concerning the marriage.  Nor did
Carinthia Jane hear any mention of Lord Fleetwood from her brother on the
landingplace at Dover.  She was taken to Admiral Baldwin Fakenham's house
in Hampshire; and there she remained, the delight of his life, during two
months, patiently expecting and rebuking the unmaidenliness of her
expectations, as honest young women in her position used to do.  So did
they sometimes wait for years; they have waited until they withered into
their graves, like the vapours of a brief winter's day: a moving picture
of a sex restrained by modesty in those purer times from the taking of
one step forward unless inquired for.

Two months she waited in our 'dark land.'  January arrived, and her
brother.  Henrietta communicated the news:

'My Janey, you are asked by Lord Fleetwood whether it is your wish that
he should marry you.'

Now, usually a well-born young woman's answer, if a willing one, is an
example of weak translation.  Here it was the heart's native tongue,
without any roundabout, simple but direct.

'Oh, I will, I am ready, tell him.'

Remember, she was not speaking publicly.

Henrietta knew the man enough to be glad he did not hear.  She herself
would have felt a little shock on his behalf: only, that answer suited
the scheme of the pair of lovers.

How far those two were innocent in not delivering the whole of Lord
Fleetwood's message to Carinthia Jane through Lord Levellier, we are
unable to learn.  We may suspect the miserly nobleman of curtailing it
for his purposes; and such is my idea.  But the answer would have been
the same, I am sure.

In consequence and straight away, Chillon John betakes him to Admiral
Baldwin and informs him of Lord Fleetwood's proposal on the night at
Baden, and renewal of it through the mouth of Lord Levellier, not
communicating, however (he may really not have known), the story of how
it had been wrung from the earl by a surprise movement on the part of the
one-armed old lord, who burst out on him in the street from the ambush of
a Club-window, where he had been stationed every day for a fortnight,
indefatigably to watch for the passing of the earl, as there seemed no
other way to find him.  They say, indeed, there was a scene, judging by
the result, and it would have been an excellent scene for the stage;
though the two noblemen were to all appearance politely exchanging their
remarks.  But the audience hearing what passes, appreciates the courteous
restraint of an attitude so contrasting with their tempers.  Behind the
ostentation of civility, their words were daggers.

For it chanced, that the young earl, after a period of refuge at his
Welsh castle, supposing, as he well might, that his latest mad freak of
the proposal of his hand and title to the strange girl in a quadrille at
a foreign castle had been forgotten by her, and the risks of annoyance on
the subject had quite blown over, returned to town, happy in having done
the penance for his impulsiveness, and got clean again--that is to say,
struck off his fetters and escaped from importunities--the very morning
of the day when Lord Levellier sprang upon him!  It shows the old
campaigner's shrewdness in guessing where his prey would come, and not
putting him on his guard by a call at his house.  Out of the window he
looked for all the hours of light during an entire fortnight.  'In the
service of my sister's child,' he said.  'To save him from the cost of
maintaining her,' say his enemies.  At any rate he did it.

He was likely to have done the worse which I suspect.

Now, the imparting of the wonderful news to Admiral Baldwin Fakenham
was, we read, the whiff of a tropical squall to lay him on his beam ends.
He could not but doubt; and his talk was like the sails of a big ship
rattling to the first puff of wind.  He had to believe; and then, we
read, he was for hours like a vessel rolling in the trough of the sea.
Of course he was a disappointed father.  Naturally his glance at the loss
to Henrietta of the greatest prize of the matrimonial market of all
Europe and America was vexing and saddening.  Then he woke up to think of
the fortunes of his 'other girl,' as he named her, and cried: 'Crinny
catches him!'

He cried it in glee and rubbed his hands.

So thereupon, standing before him, Chillon John, from whom he had the
news, bent to him slightly, as his elegant manner was, and lengthened the
admiral's chaps with another proposal; easy, deliberate, precise, quite
the respectful bandit, if you please, determined on having his daughter
by all means, only much preferring the legal, formal, and friendly.  Upon
that, in the moment of indecision, Henrietta enters, followed by Admiral
Baldwin's heroine, his Crinny, whom he embraced and kissed, congratulated
and kissed again.  One sees the contrivance to soften him.

So it was done, down in that Hampshire household on the heights near the
downs, whence you might behold, off a terra firma resembling a roll of
billows, England's big battle-ships in line fronting the island; when
they were a spectacle of beauty as well as power: which now they are no
more, but will have to be, if they are both to float and to fight.  For I
have, had quoted to me by a great admirer of the Old Buccaneer, one of
the dark sayings in his MAXIMS FOR MEN, where Captain John Peter Kirby
commends his fellow-men to dissatisfaction with themselves if they have
not put an end to their enemy handsomely..  And he advises the copying of
Nature in this; whose elements have always, he says, a pretty, besides a
thorough, style of doing it, when they get the better of us; and the one
by reason of the other.  He instances the horse, the yacht, and chiefly
the sword, for proof, that the handsomest is the most effective.  And he
prints large: 'UGLY IS ONLY HALF WAY TO A THING.'  To an invention, I
suppose he intends to say.  But looking on our huge foundering sea-
monsters and the disappearance of the unwieldy in Nature, and the
countenances of criminals, who are, he bids us observe, always in the
long run beaten, I seem to see a meaning our country might meditate on.

So, as I said, it was done; for Admiral Baldwin could refuse his Crinny
nothing; as little as he would deny anything to himself, the heartiest
of kindly hosts, fathers, friends.  Carinthia Jane's grand good fortune
covered that pit, the question of money, somehow, and was, we may
conceive, a champagne wine in their reasoning faculties.  The admiral was
in debt, Henrietta had no heritage, Chillon John was the heir of a
miserly uncle owing him sums and evading every application for them, yet
they behaved as people who had the cup of golden wishes.  Perhaps it was
because Henrietta and her lover were so handsome a match as to make it
seem to them and others they must marry; and as to character, her father
could trust her to the man of her choice more readily than to the wealthy
young nobleman; of whose discreetness he had not the highest opinion.  He
reconciled this view with his warm feeling for the Countess of Fleetwood
to be, by saying: 'Crinny will tame him!'  His faith was in her dauntless
bold spirit, not thinking of the animal she was to tame.

Countess Livia, after receiving Henrietta's letter of information,
descended on them and thought them each and all a crazed set.  Love,
as a motive of action for a woman, she considered the female's lunacy
and suicide.  Men are born subject to it, happily, and thus the balance
between the lordly half of creation and the frail is rectified.  We women
dress, and smile, sigh, if you like, to excite the malady.  But if we are
the fools to share it, we lose our chance; instead of the queens, we are
the slaves, and instead of a life of pleasure, we pass from fever to
fever at a tyrant's caprice: he does rightly in despising us.  Ay, and
many a worthy woman thinks the same.  Educated in dependency as they are,
they come to the idea of love to snatch at it for their weapon of the
man's weakness.  For which my lord calls them heartless, and poets are
angry with them, rightly or wrongly.

It must, I fear, be admitted for a truth, that sorrow is the portion of
young women who give the full measure of love to the engagement, marrying
for love.  At least, Countess Livia could declare subsequently she had
foretold it and warned her cousin.  Not another reflection do you hear
from me, if I must pay forfeit of my privilege to hurry you on past
descriptions of places and anatomy of character and impertinent talk
about philosophy in a story.  When we are startled and offended by the
insinuated tracing of principal incidents to a thread-bare spot in the
nether garments of a man of no significance, I lose patience.

Henrietta's case was a secondary affair.  What with her passion--it was
nothing less--and her lover's cunning arts, and her father's consent
given, and in truth the look of the two together, the dissuasion of them
from union was as likely to keep them apart as an exhortation addressed
to magnet and needle.  Countess Livia attacked Carinthia Jane and the
admiral backing her.  But the admiral, having given his consent to his
daughter's marriage, in consequence of the earl's pledged word to 'his
other girl,' had become a zealot for this marriage and there was only not
a grand altercation on the subject because Livia shunned annoyances.
Alone with Carinthia Jane, as she reported to Henrietta, she spoke to a
block, that shook a head and wore a thin smile and nursed its own idea of
the better knowledge of Edward Russett, Earl of Fleetwood, gained in the
run of a silly quadrille at a ball:

What is a young man's word to his partner in a quadrille?

Livia put the question, she put it twice rather sternly, and the girl
came out with: 'Oh, he meant it!'

The nature, the pride, the shifty and furious moods of Lord Fleetwood
were painted frightful to her.

She had conceived her own image of him.

Whether to set her down as an enamoured idiot or a creature not a whit
less artful than her brother, was Countess Livia's debate.  Her
inclination was to misdoubt the daughter of the Old Buccaneer: she might
be simple, at her age, and she certainly was ignorant; but she clung to
her prize.  Still the promise was extracted from her, that she would not
worry the earl to fulfil the word she supposed him to mean in its full
meaning.

The promise was unreluctantly yielded.  No, she would not write.  Admiral
Fakenham, too, engaged to leave the matter to a man of honour.

Meanwhile, Chillon John had taken a journey to Lekkatts; following which,
his uncle went to London.  Lord Fleetwood heard that Miss Kirby kept him
bound.  He was again the fated prisoner of his word.

And following that, not so very long, there was the announcement of the
marriage of Chillon John Kirby Levellier, Lieutenant in the King's Own
Hussars, and Henrietta, daughter of Admiral Baldwin Fakenham.  A county
newspaper paragraph was quoted for its eulogy of the Beauty of Hampshire
--not too strong, those acquainted with her thought.  Interest at Court
obtained an advancement for the bridegroom: he was gazetted Captain
during his honeymoon, and his prospects under his uncle's name were
considerd fair, though certain people said at the time, it was likely to
be all he would get while old Lord Levellier of Leancats remained in the
flesh.

Now, as it is good for those to tell who intend preserving their taste
for romance and hate anatomical lectures, we never can come to the exact
motives of any extraordinary piece of conduct on the part of man or
woman.  Girls are to read; and the study of a boy starts from the monkey.
But no literary surgeon or chemist shall explain positively the cause of
the behaviour of men and women in their relations together; and speaking
to rescue my story, I say we must with due submission accept the facts.
We are not a bit the worse for wondering at them.  So it happened that
Lord Fleetwood's reply to Lord Levellier's hammer--hammer by post and
messenger at his door, one may call it, on the subject of the celebration
of the marriage of the young Croesus and Carinthia Jane, in which there
was demand for the fixing of a date forthwith, was despatched on the day
when London had tidings of Henrietta Pakenham's wedding.

The letter, lost for many years, turned up in the hands of a Kentish
auctioneer, selling it on behalf of a farm-serving man, who had it from
Lord Levellier's cook and housemaid, among the things she brought him as
her wifely portion after her master's death, and this she had not found
saleable in her husband's village at her price, but she had got the habit
of sticking to the scraps, being proud of hearing it said that she had
skinned Leancats to some profit: and her expectation proved correct after
her own demise, for her husband putting it up at the auction; our
relative on the mother's side, Dr. Glossop, interested in the documents
and particulars of the story as he was, had it knocked down to him, in
contest with an agent of a London gentleman, going as high as two pounds
ten shillings, for the sum of two pounds and fifteen shillings.  Count
the amount that makes for each word of a letter a marvel of brevity,
considering the purport!  But Dr. Glossop was right in saying he had it
cheap.  The value of that letter may now be multiplied by ten: nor for
that sum would he part with it.

Thus it ran, I need not refer to it in Bundle No. 3:

     'MY LORD: I drive to your church-door on the fourteenth of the month
     at ten A.M., to keep my appointment with Miss C. J. Kirby, if I do
     not blunder the initials.
                         'Your lordship's obedient servant,
                                                       'FLEETWOOD.'

That letter will ever be a treasured family possession with us.

That letter was dated from Lord Fleetwood's Kentish mansion, Esslemont,
the tenth of the month.  He must have quitted London for Esslemont, for
change of scene, for air, the moment after the news of Henrietta's
marriage.  Carinthia Jane received the summons without transmission of
the letter from her uncle on the morning of the twelfth.  It was a
peremptory summons.

Unfortunately, Admiral Fakenham, a real knight and chevalier of those
past times, would not let her mount the downs to have her farewell view
of the big ships unaccompanied by him; and partly and largely in pure
chivalry, no doubt; but her young idea of England's grandeur, as shown in
her great vessels of war, thrilled him, too, and restored his youthful
enthusiasm for his noble profession or made it effervesce.  However it
was, he rode beside her and rejoiced to hear the young girl's talk of her
father as a captain of one of England's thunderers, and of the cruelty of
that Admiralty to him: at which Admiral Baldwin laughed, but had not the
heart to disagree with her, for he could belabour the Admiralty in
season, cause or no cause.  Altogether he much enjoyed the ride,
notwithstanding intimations of the approach of 'his visitor,' as he
called his attacks of gout.

Riding home, however, the couple passed through a heavy rainfall, and the
next day, when he was to drive with the bride to Lekkatts, gout, the
fiercest he had ever known, chained him fast to his bed.  Such are the
petty accidents affecting circumstances.  They are the instruments of
Destiny.

There he lay, protesting that the ceremony could not possibly be for the
fourteenth, because Countess Livia had, he now remembered, written of her
engagement to meet Russett on the night of that day at a ball at Mrs.
Cowper Quillett's place, Canleys, lying south of the Surrey hills: a
house famed for its gatherings of beautiful women; whither Lord Fleetwood
would be sure to engage to go, the admiral now said; and it racked him
like gout in his mind, and perhaps troubled his conscience about handing
the girl to such a young man.  But he was lying on his back, the posture
for memory to play the fiend with us, as we read in the BOOK of MAXIMS of
the Old Buccaneer.  Admiral Baldwin wished heartily to be present at his
Crinny's wedding 'to see her launched,' if wedding it was to be, and he
vowed the date of the fourteenth, in Lord Levellier's announcement of it,
must be an error and might be a month in advance, and ought to be.  But
it was sheer talking and raving for a solace to his disappointment or his
anxiety.  He had to let Carinthia Jane depart under the charge of his
housekeeper, Mrs. Carthew, a staid excellent lady, poorly gifted with
observation.

Her report of the performance of the ceremony at Croridge village church,
a half mile from Lekkatts, was highly reassuring to the anxious old
admiral still lying on his back with memory and gout at their fiend's
play, and livid forecasts hovering.  He had recollected that there had
been no allusion in Lord Levellier's message to settlements or any
lawyer's preliminaries, and he raged at himself for having to own it
would have been the first of questions on behalf of his daughter.

'All passed off correctly,' Mrs. Carthew said.  'The responses of the
bride and bridegroom were particularly articulate.'

She was reserved upon the question of the hospitality of Lekkatts.  The
place had entertained her during her necessitated residence there, and
honour forbade her to smile concordantly at the rosy admiral's mention of
Leancats.  She took occasion, however, to praise the Earl of Fleetwood's
eminently provident considerateness for his bride, inasmuch as he had
packed a hamper in his vehicle, which was a four-in-hand, driven by
himself.

Admiral Baldwin inquired: 'Bride inside?'

He was informed: 'The Countess of Fleetwood sat on the box on the left of
my lord.'

She had made no moan about the absence of bridesmaids.

'She appeared too profoundly happy to meditate an instant upon
deficiencies.'

'How did the bridegroom behave?'

'Lord Fleetwood was very methodical.  He is not, or was not, voluntarily
a talker.'

'Blue coat, brass buttons, hot-house flower? old style or new?'

'His lordship wore a rather low beaver and a buttoned white overcoat, not
out of harmony with the bride's plain travelling-dress.'

'Ah! he's a good whip, men say.  Keeps first-rate stables, hacks, and
bloods.  Esslemont hard by will be the place for their honeymoon, I
guess.  And he's a lucky dog, if he knows his luck.'

So said Admiral Baldwin.  He was proceeding to say more, for he had a
prodigious opinion of the young countess and the benefit of her marriage
to the British race.  As it concerned a healthy constitution and
motherhood, Mrs. Carthew coughed and retired.  Nor do I reprove either
of them.  The speculation and the decorum are equally commendable.
Masculine ideas are one thing; but let feminine ever be feminine, or our
civilization perishes.

At Croridge village church, then, one of the smallest churches in the
kingdom, the ceremony was performed and duly witnessed, names written in
the vestry book, the clergyman's fee, the clerk, and the pew-woman, paid
by the bridegroom.  And thus we see how a pair of lovers, blind with the
one object of lovers in view; and a miserly uncle, all on edge to save
himself the expense of supporting his niece; and an idolatrous old
admiral, on his back with gout; conduced in turn and together to the
marriage gradually exciting the world's wonder, till it eclipsed the
story of the Old Buccaneer and Countess Fanny, which it caused to be
discussed afresh.

Mrs. Carthew remembered Carinthia Jane's last maiden remark and her first
bridal utterance.  On the way, walking to the church of Croridge from
Lekkatts, the girl said: 'Going on my feet, I feel I continue the
mountain walk with my brother when we left our home.'  And after leaving
the church, about to mount the coach, she turned to Mrs. Carthew, saying,
as she embraced her:

'A happy bride's kiss should bring some good fortune.'  And looking down
from her place on the top of the coach:

'Adieu, dear Mrs. Carthew.  A day of glory it is to-day.'  She must
actually have had it in her sight as a day of glory: and it was a day of
the clouds off our rainy quarter, similar in every way to the day of her
stepping on English soil and saying: 'It is a dark land.'  For the heart
is truly declared to be our colourist.  A day having the gale in its
breast, sweeping the whole country and bending the trees for the twigs to
hiss like spray of the billows around our island, was a day of golden
splendour to the young bride of the Earl of Fleetwood, though he scarcely
addressed one syllable to her, and they sat side by side all but dumb,
he like a coachman driving an unknown lady fare, on a morning after a
night when his wife's tongue may have soured him for the sex.




CHAPTER XIV

A PENDANT OF THE FOREGOING

Mention has been omitted or forgotten by the worthy Dame, in her vagrant
fowl's treatment of a story she cannot incubate, will not relinquish, and
may ultimately addle, that the bridegroom, after walking with a
disengaged arm from the little village church at Croridge to his coach
and four at the cross of the roads to Lekkatts and the lowland, abruptly,
and as one pursuing a deferential line of conduct he had prescribed to
himself, asked his bride, what seat she would prefer.

He shouted: 'Ives!'

A person inside the coach appeared to be effectually roused.

The glass of the window dropped.  The head of a man emerged.  It was the
head of one of the bargefaced men of the British Isles, broad, and
battered flattish, with sentinel eyes.

In an instant the heavy-headed but not ill-looking fellow was nimble and
jumped from the coach.

'Napping, my lord,' he said.

Heavy though the look of him might be, his feet were light; they flipped
a bar of a hornpipe at a touch of the ground.  Perhaps they were allowed
to go with their instinct for the dance, that his master should have a
sample of his wakefulness.  He quenched a smirk and stood to take orders;
clad in a flat blue cap, a brown overcoat, and knee-breeches, as the
temporary bustle of his legs had revealed.

Fleet-wood heard the young lady say: 'I would choose, if you please, to
sit beside you.'

He gave a nod of enforced assent, glancing at the vacated box.

The man inquired: 'A knee and a back for the lady to mount up, my lord?'

'In!' was the smart command to him; and he popped in with the agility of
his popping out.

Then Carinthia made reverence to the grey lean figure of her uncle and
kissed Mrs. Carthew.  She needed no help to mount the coach.  Fleetwood's
arm was rigidly extended, and he did not visibly wince when this foreign
girl sprang to the first hand-grip on the coach and said: 'No, my
husband, I can do it'; unaided,' was implied.

Her stride from the axle of the wheel to the step higher would have been
a graceful spectacle on Alpine crags.

Fleetwood swallowed that, too, though it conjured up a mocking
recollection of the Baden woods, and an astonished wild donkey preparing
himself for his harness.  A sour relish of the irony in his present
position sharpened him to devilish enjoyment of it, as the finest form
of loathing: on the principle that if we find ourselves consigned to the
nether halls, we do well to dance drunkenly.  He had cried for Romance--
here it was!

He raised his hat to Mrs. Carthew and to Lord Levellier.  Previous to the
ceremony, the two noblemen had interchanged the short speech of mannered
duellists punctiliously courteous in the opening act.  Their civility was
maintained at the termination of the deadly work.  The old lord's bosom
thanked the young one for not requiring entertainment and a repast; the
young lord's thanked the old one for a strict military demeanour at an
execution and the abstaining from any nonsensical talk over the affair.

A couple of liveried grooms at the horses' heads ran and sprang to the
hinder seats as soon as their master had taken the reins.  He sounded the
whip caressingly: off those pretty trotters went.

Mrs. Carthew watched them, waving to the bride.  She was on the present
occasion less than usually an acute or a reflective observer, owing to
her admiration of lordly state and masculine commandership; and her
thought was: 'She has indeed made a brilliant marriage!'

The lady thought it, notwithstanding an eccentricity in the wedding
ceremony, such as could not but be noticeable.  But very wealthy noblemen
were commonly, perhaps necessarily, eccentric, for thus they proved
themselves egregious, which the world expected them to be.

Lord Levellier sounded loud eulogies of the illustrious driver's team.
His meditation, as he subsequently stated to Chillon, was upon his
vanquished antagonist's dexterity, in so conducting matters, that he had
to be taken at once, with naught of the customary preface and apology for
taking to himself the young lady, of which a handsome settlement, is the
memorial.

We have to suppose, that the curious occupant of the coach inside aroused
no curiosity in the pair of absorbed observers.

Speculations regarding the chances of a fall of rain followed the coach
until it sank and the backs of the two liveried grooms closed the chapter
of the wedding, introductory to the honeymoon at Esslemont, seven miles
distant by road, to the right of Lekkatts.  It was out of sight that the
coach turned to the left, Northwestward.




CHAPTER XV

OPENING STAGE OF THE HONEYMOON

A famous maxim in the book of the Old Buccaneer, treating of PRECAUTION,
as 'The brave man's clean conscience,' with sound counsel to the
adventurous, has it:--

'Then you sail away into the tornado, happy as a sealed bottle of ripe
wine.'

It should mean, that brave men entering the jaws of hurricanes are found
to have cheerful hearts in them when they know they have done their best.
But, touching the picture of happiness, conceive the bounteous Bacchic
spirit in the devoutness of a Sophocles, and you find comparison
neighbour closely between the sealed wine-flask and the bride, who is
being driven by her husband to the nest of the unknown on her marriage
morn.

Seated beside him, with bosom at heave and shut mouth, in a strange land,
travelling cloud-like, rushing like the shower-cloud to the vale, this
Carinthia, suddenly wedded, passionately grateful for humbleness exalted,
virginly sensible of treasures of love to give, resembled the inanimate
and most inspiring, was mindless and inexpressive, past memory, beyond
the hopes, a thing of the thrilled blood and skylark air, since she laid
her hand in this young man's.  His not speaking to her was accepted.
Her blood rather than recollection revived their exchanges during the
dance at Baden, for assurance that their likings were one, their aims
rapturously one; that he was she, she he, the two hearts making one soul.

Could she give as much as he?  It was hardly asked.  If we feel we can
give our breath of life, the strength of the feeling fully answers.  It
bubbles perpetually from the depth like a well-spring in tumult.  Two
hearts that make one soul do not separately count their gifts.

For the rest, her hunger to admire disposed her to an absorbing sentience
of his acts; the trifles, gestures, manner of this and that; which were
seized as they flew, and swiftly assimilated to stamp his personality.
Driving was the piece of skill she could not do.  Her husband's mastery
of the reins endowed him with the beauty of those harmonious trotters he
guided and kept to their pace; and the humming rush of the pace, the
smooth torrent of the brown heath-knolls and reddish pits and hedge-lines
and grass-flats and copses pouring the counter-way of her advance,
belonged to his wizardry.  The bearing of her onward was her abandonment
to him.  Delicious as mountain air, the wind sang; it had a song of many
voices.  Quite as much as on the mountains, there was the keen, the
blissful, nerve-knotting catch of the presence of danger in the steep
descents, taken as if swallowed, without swerve or check.  She was in her
husband's hands.  At times, at the pitch of a rapid shelving, that was
like a fall, her heart went down; and at the next throb exalted before it
rose, not reasoning why;--her confidence was in him; she was his comrade
whatever chanced.  Up over the mountain-peaks she had known edged
moments, little heeded in their passage, when life is poised as a crystal
pitcher on the head, in peril of a step.  Then she had been dependent on
herself.  Now she had the joy of trusting to her husband.

His hard leftward eye had view of her askant, if he cared to see how she
bore the trial; and so relentlessly did he take the slopes, that the man
inside pushed out an inquiring pate, the two grooms tightened arms across
their chests.  Her face was calmly set, wakeful, but unwrinkled: the
creature did not count among timid girls--or among civilized.  She had
got what she wanted from her madman--mad in his impulses, mad in his
reading of honour.  She was the sister of Henrietta's husband.  Henrietta
bore the name she had quitted.  Could madness go beyond the marrying of
the creature?  He chafed at her containment, at her courage, her silence,
her withholding the brazen or the fawnish look-up, either of which he
would have hated.

He, however, was dragged to look down.  Neither Gorgon nor Venus, nor a
mingling of them, she had the chasm of the face, recalling the face of
his bondage, seen first that night at Baden.  It recalled and it was not
the face; it was the skull of the face, or the flesh of the spirit.
Occasionally she looked, for a twinkle or two, the creature or vision she
had been, as if to mock by reminding him.  She was the abhorred delusion,
who captured him by his nerves, ensnared his word--the doing of a foul
witch.  How had it leapt from his mouth?  She must have worked for it.
The word spoken--she must have known it--he was bound, or the detested
Henrietta would have said: Not even true to his word!

To see her now, this girl, insisting to share his name, for a slip of his
tongue, despite the warning sent her through her uncle, had that face
much as a leaden winter landscape pretends to be the country radiant in
colour.  She belonged to the order of the variable animals--a woman
indeed!--womanish enough in that.  There are men who love women--the idea
of woman.  Woman is their shepherdess of sheep.  He loved freedom,
loathed the subjection of a partnership; could undergo it only in
adoration of an ineffable splendour.  He had stepped to the altar
fancying she might keep to her part of the contract by appearing the
miracle that subdued him.  Seen by light of day, this bitter object
beside him was a witch without her spells; that is, the skeleton of the
seductive, ghastliest among horrors and ironies.  Let her have the credit
of doing her work thoroughly before the exposure.  She had done it.
She might have helped--such was the stipulation of his mad freak in
consenting to the bondage--yes, she might have helped to soften the sting
of his wound.  She was beside him bearing his name, for the perpetual
pouring of an acid on the wound that vile Henrietta--poisoned honey of a
girl!--had dealt.

He glanced down at his possession:--heaven and the yawning pit were the
contrast!  Poisoned honey is after all honey while you eat it.  Here
there was nothing but a rocky bowl of emptiness.  And who was she?  She
was the sister of Henrietta's husband.  He was expected to embrace the
sister of Henrietta's husband.  Those two were on their bridal tour.

This creature was also the daughter of an ancient impostor and desperado
called the Old Buccaneer; a distinguished member of the family of the
Lincolnshire Kirbys, boasting a present representative grimly acquitted,
men said, on a trial for murder.  An eminent alliance!  Society
considered the Earl of Fleetwood wildish, though he could manage his
affairs.  He and his lawyers had them under strict control.  How of
himself?  The prize of the English marriage market had taken to his bosom
for his winsome bride the daughter of the Old Buccaneer.  He was to mix
his blood with the blood of the Lincolnshire Kirbys, lying pallid under
the hesitating acquittal of a divided jury.

How had he come to this pass, which swung him round to think almost
regretfully of the scorned multitude of fair besiegers in the market,
some of whom had their unpoetic charms?

He was renowned and unrivalled as the man of stainless honour: the
one living man of his word.  He had never broken it--never would.  There
was his distinction among the herd.  In that, a man is princely above
princes.  The nobility of Edward Russett, Earl of Fleetwood, surpassed
the nobility of common nobles.  But, by all that is holy, he pays for
his distinction.

The creature beside him is a franked issue of her old pirate of a father
in one respect--nothing frightens her.  There she sits; not a screw of
her brows or her lips; and the coach rocked, they were sharp on a spill
midway of the last descent.  It rocks again.  She thinks it scarce worth
while to look up to reassure him.  She is looking over the country.

'Have you been used to driving?' he said.

She replied: 'No, it is new to me on a coach.'

Carinthia felt at once how wild the wish or half expectation that he
would resume the glowing communion of the night which had plighted them.

She did not this time say 'my husband,' still it flicked a whip at his
ears.

She had made it more offensive, by so richly toning the official title
just won from him as to ring it on the nerves; one had to block it or be
invaded.  An anticipation that it would certainly recur haunted every
opening of her mouth.

Now that it did not, he felt the gap, relieved, and yet pricked to
imagine a mimicry of her tones, for the odd foreignness of the word and
the sound.  She had a voice of her own besides her courage.  At the
altar, her responses had their music.  No wonder: the day was hers.
'My husband' was a manner of saying 'my fish.'

He, spoke very civilly.  'Oblige me by telling me what name you are
accustomed to answer to.'

She seemed unaware of an Arctic husband, and replied: 'My father called
me Carin--short for Carinthia.  My mother called me Janey; my second name
is Jane.  My brother Chillon says both.  Henrietta calls me Janey.'

The creature appeared dead flesh to goads.  But the name of her sister-
in-law on her lips returned the stroke neatly.  She spared him one whip,
to cut him with another.

'You have not informed me which of these names you prefer.'

'Oh, my husband, it is as you shall please.'

Fleetwood smartened the trot of his team, and there was a to-do with the
rakish leaders.

Fairies of a malignant humour in former days used to punish the
unhappiest of the naughty men who were not favourites, by suddenly
planting a hump on their backs.  Off the bedevilled wretches pranced,
and they kicked, they snorted, whinnied, rolled, galloped, outflying the
wind, but not the dismal rider.  Marriage is our incubus now.  No
explanation is offered of why we are afflicted; we have simply offended,
or some one absent has offended, and we are handy.  The spiteful hag of
power ties a wife to us; perhaps for the reason, that we behaved in the
spirit of a better time by being chivalrously honourable.  Wives are just
as inexplicable curses, just as ineradicable and astonishing as humps
imposed on shapely backs.

Fleetwood lashed his horses until Carinthia's low cry of entreaty rose to
surprise.  That stung him.

'Leave the coachman to his devices: we have an appointment and must keep
it,' he said.

'They go so willingly.'

'Good beasts, in their way.'

'I do not like the whip.'

'I have the same objection.'

They were on the level of the vale, going along a road between farms and
mansions, meadows and gardenplots and park-palings.  A strong warm wind
drove the pack of clouds over the tree-tops and charged at the branches.
English scenery, animating air; a rouse to the blood and the mind.
Carinthia did not ask for hues.  She had come to love of the dark land
with the warm lifting wind, the big trees and the hedges, and the stately
houses, and people requiring to be studied, who mean well and are warm
somewhere below, as chimneypots are, though they are so stiff.

English people dislike endearments, she had found.  It might be that her
husband disliked any show of fondness.  He would have to be studied very
much.  He was not like others, as Henrietta had warned her.  From
thinking of him fervidly, she was already past the marvel of the thought
that she called him husband.  At the same time, a curious intimation,
gathered she knew not whence, of the word 'husband' on a young wife's
lips as being a foreign sound in England, advised her to withhold it.
His behaviour was instructing her.

'Are you weather-wise?--able to tell when the clouds will hold off or
pelt,' he said, to be very civil to a neighbour.

She collected her understanding, apparently; treating a conversational
run of the tongue as a question to be pondered; and the horses paid for
it.  Ordinarily he was gentle with his beasts.  He lashed at her in his
heart for perverting the humanest of men.

'Father was,' she replied.

'Oh!  I have heard of him.'

Her face lightened.  'Father had a great name in England.'

'The Old Buccaneer, I think.'

'I do not know.  He was a seaman of the navy, like Admiral Fakenham is.
Weather at sea, weather on the mountains, he could foretell it always.
He wrote a book; I have a copy you will read.  It is a book of Maxims.
He often speaks of the weather.  English weather and women, he says.
But not my mother.  My mother he stood aside by herself--pas capricieuse
du tout!  Because she would be out in the weather and brave the weather.
She rode, she swam, best of any woman.  If she could have known you, what
pleasure for me!  Mother learnt to read mountain weather from father.
I did it too.  But sometimes on the high fields' upper snows it is very
surprising.  Father has been caught.  Here the cloud is down near the
earth and the strong wind keeps the rain from falling.  How long the wind
will blow I cannot guess.  But you love the mountains.  We spoke .  .  .
And mountains' adventures we both love.  I will talk French if you like,
for, I think, German you do not speak.  I may speak English better than
French; but I am afraid of my English with you.'

'Dear me!' quoth Fleetwood, and he murmured politely and cursorily,
attentive to his coachman business.  She had a voice that clove the noise
of the wheels, and she had a desire to talk--that was evident.  Talk of
her father set her prattling.  It became clear also to his not dishonest,
his impressionable mind, that her baby English might be natural.  Or she
was mildly playing on it, to give herself an air.

He had no remembrance of such baby English at Baden.  There, however,
she was in a state of enthusiasm--the sort of illuminated transparency
they show at the end of fireworks.  Mention of her old scapegrace of a
father lit her up again.  The girl there and the girl here were no doubt
the same.  It could not be said that she had duped him; he had done it
for himself--acted on by a particular agency.  This creature had not the
capacity to dupe.  He had armed a bluntwitted young woman with his
idiocy, and she had dealt the stroke; different in scarce a degree by
nature from other young women of prey.

But her look at times, and now and then her voice, gave sign that she
counted on befooling him as well, to reconcile him to his bondage.  The
calculation was excessive.  No woman had done it yet.  Idiocy plunged him
the step which reawakened understanding; and to keep his whole mind alert
on guard against any sort of satisfaction with his bargain, he frankly
referred to the cause.  Not female arts, but nature's impulses, it was
his passion for the wondrous in the look of a woman's face, the new
morning of the idea of women in the look, and the peep into imaginary
novel character, did the trick of enslaving him.  Call it idiocy.  Such
it was.  Once acknowledged, it is not likely to recur.  An implacable
reason sits in its place, with a keen blade for efforts to carry the
imposture further afield or make it agreeable.  Yet, after giving his
word to Lord Levellier, he had prodded himself to think the burden of
this wild young woman might be absurdly tolerable and a laugh at the
world.

A solicitude for the animal was marked by his inquiry 'You are not hungry
yet?'

'Oh no, not yet,' said she, oddly enlivened.

They had a hamper and were independent of stoppages for provision, he
informed her.  What more delightful?  cried her look, seeing the first
mid-day's rest and meal with Chillon on the walk over the mountain from
their empty home.

She could get up enthusiasm for a stocked hamper!  And when told of some
business that drew him to a meadow they were nearing, she said she would
be glad to help, if she could.  'I learn quickly, I know.'

His head acquiesced.  The daughter of the Old Buccaneer might learn the
business quickly, perhaps; a singularly cutting smile was on his tight
lips, in memory of a desire he had as a boy to join hands with an
Amazonian damsel and be out over the world for adventures, comrade and
bride as one.  Here the creature sat.  Life is the burlesque of young
dreams; or they precipitate us on the roar and grin of a recognized beast
world.

The devil possessing him gnawed so furiously that a partial mitigation of
the pain was afforded by sight of waving hats on a hill-rise of the road.
He flourished his whip.  The hats continued at wind-mill work.  It
signified brisk news to him, and prospect of glee to propitiate any
number of devils.

'You will want a maid to attend on you,' he said.

She replied: 'I am not used to attendance on me.  Henrietta's maid would
help.  I did not want her.  I had no maid at home.  I can do for myself.
Father and mother liked me to be very independent.'

He supposed he would have to hear her spelling her words out next.

The hill-top was gained; twenty paces of pretty trotting brought up the
coach beside an inn porch, in the style of the finish dear to whips, and
even imperative upon them, if they love their art.  Two gentlemen stood
in the road, and a young woman at the inn door; a dark-haired girl of an
anxious countenance.  Her puckers vanished at some signal from inside the
coach.

'All right, Madge; nothing to fear,' Fleetwood called to her, and she
curtseyed.

He alighted, saying to her, before he spoke to his friends: 'I've brought
him safe; had him under my eye the last four and twenty hours.  He'll do
the trick to-day.  You don't bet?'

'Oh!  my lord, no.'

'Help the lady down.  Out with you, Ines!'

The light-legged barge-faced man touched ground capering.  He was greeted
'Kit' by the pair of gentlemen, who shook hands with him, after he had
faintly simulated the challenge to a jig with Madge.  She flounced from
him, holding her arms up to the lady.  Landlord, landlady, and hostler
besought the lady to stay for the fixing of a ladder.  Carinthia stepped,
leaped, and entered the inn, Fleetwood remarking:

'We are very independent, Chummy Potts.'

'Cordy bally, by Jove!' Potts cried.  But the moment after this
disengaged ejaculation, he was taken with a bewilderment.  'At the
Opera?' he questioned of his perplexity.

'No, sir, not at the Opera,' Fleetwood rejoined.  'The lady's last public
appearance was at the altar.'

'Sort of a suspicion of having seen her somewhere.  Left her husband
behind, has she?'

'You see: she has gone in.'

The scoring of a proposition of Euclid on the forehead of Potts amused
him and the other gentleman, who was hailed 'Mallard!' and cared nothing
for problems involving the female of man when such work was to the fore
as the pugilistic encounter of the Earl of Fleetwood's chosen Kit Ines,
with Lord Brailstone's unbeaten and well-backed Ben Todds.

Ines had done pretty things from the age of seventeen to his twenty-third
year.  Remarkably clever things they were, to be called great in the
annals of the Ring.  The point, however, was, that the pockets of his
backers had seriously felt his latest fight.  He received a dog's licking
at the hands of Lummy Phelps, his inferior in skill, fighting two to one
of the odds; and all because of his fatal addiction to the breaking of
his trainer's imposed fast in liquids on, the night before the battle.
Right through his training, up to that hour, the rascal was devout; the
majority's money rattled all on the snug safe side.  And how did he get
at the bottle?  His trainers never could say.  But what made him turn
himself into a headlong ass, when he had only to wait a night to sit
among friends and worshippers drinking off his tumbler upon tumbler with
the honours?  It was past his wits to explain.  Endurance of his
privation had snapped in him; or else, which is more likely, this Genius
of the Ring was tempted by his genius on the summit of his perfected
powers to believe the battle his own, and celebrate it, as became a
victor despising the drubbed antagonist.

In any case, he drank, and a minor man gave him the dog's licking..
'Went into it puffy, came out of it bunged,' the chronicle resounding
over England ran.  Old England read of an 'eyeless carcase' heroically
stepping up to time for three rounds of mashing punishment.  If he had
won the day after all, the country would have been electrified.  It
sympathized on the side of his backers too much to do more than nod a
short approval of his fortitude.  To sink with flag flying is next to
sinking the enemy.  There was talk of a girl present at the fight, and of
how she received the eyeless, almost faceless, carcase of her sweetheart
Kit, and carried him away in a little donkey-cart, comfortably cushioned
to meet disaster.  This petty incident drew the attention of the Earl of
Fleetwood, then beginning to be known as the diamond of uncounted facets,
patron of the pick of all departments of manly activity in England.

The devotion of the girl Madge to her sweetheart was really a fine story.
Fleetwood touched on it to Mr. Mallard, speaking of it like the gentleman
he could be, while Chumley Potts wagged impatient acquiescence in a
romantic episode of the Ring, that kept the talk from the hotter theme.

'Money's Bank of England to-day, you think?' he interposed, and had his
answer after Mallard had said:

'The girl 's rather good-looking, too.'

'You may double your bets, Chummy.  I had the fellow to his tea at my
dinner-table yesterday evening; locked him in his bedroom, and had him
up and out for a morning spin at six.  His trainer, Flipper's on the
field, drove from Esslemont at nine, confident as trumps.'

'Deuce of a good-looking girl,' Potts could now afford to say; and he
sang out: 'Feel fit, lucky dog?'

'Concert pitch!' was the declaration of Kit Ives.

'How about Lord Brailstone's man?'

'Female partner in a quadrille, sir.'

'Ah!' Potts doated on his limbs with a butcher's eye for prize joints.

'Cock-sure has crowed low by sunset,' Mallard observed.

Fleetwood offered him to take his bets.

'You're heavy on it with Brailstone?' said Mallard.

'Three thousand.'

'I'd back you for your luck blindfold.'

A ruffle of sourness shot over the features of the earl, and was noticed
by both eager betters, who exchanged a glance.

Potts inspected his watch, and said half aloud: 'Liver, ten to one!  That
never meant bad luck--except bad to act on.  We slept here last night,
you know.  It 's a mile and a quarter from the Royal Sovereign to the
field of glory.  Pretty well time to start.  Brailstone has a drive of a
couple of miles.  Coaches from London down by this time.  Abrane's dead
on Ben Todds, any odds.  Poor old Braney!  "Steady man, Todds."  Backs
him because he's a "respectable citizen,"--don't drink.  A prize-fighter
total abstainer has no spurts.  Old Braney's branded for the losing side.
You might bet against Braney blindfold, Mallard.  How long shall you take
to polish him off, Kit Ines?'

The opponent of Ben Todds calculated.

'Well, sir, steady Benny ought to be satisfied with his dose in, say,
about forty minutes.  Maybe he won't own to it before an hour and ten.
He's got a proud English stomach.'

'Shall we be late?' Potts asked.

'Jump in,' Fleetwood said to his man.  'We may be five minutes after
time, Chummy.  I had a longer drive, and had to get married on the way,
and--ah, here they are!'

'Lady coming?'

'I fancy she sticks to the coach; I don't know her tastes.  Madge must
see her through it, that's positive.'

Potts deferred his astonishment at the things he was hearing and seeing,
which were only Fleetwood's riddles.  The fight and the bets rang every
other matter out of his head.  He beheld the lady, who had come down from
the coach like a columbine, mount it like Bean-stalk Jack.  Madge was not
half so clever, and required a hand at her elbow.

After, giving hurried directions to Rundles, the landlord of the Royal
Sovereign, Fleetwood took the reins, and all three gentlemen touched hats
to the curtseying figure of Mrs. Rundles.

'You have heard, I dare say--it's an English scene,' he spoke, partly
turning his face, to Carinthia; 'particularly select to-day.  Their
Majesties might look on, as the Caesars did in Rome.  Pity we can't
persuade them.  They ought to set the fashion.  Here we have the English
people at their grandest, in prime condition, if they were not drunk
overnight; and dogged, perfectly awake, magnanimous, all for fair play;
fine fellows, upon my word.  A little blood, of course.'

But the daughter of the Old Buccaneer would have inherited a tenderness
for the sight of blood.  She should make a natural Lady Patroness of
England's National Sports.  We might turn her to that purpose; wander
over England with a tail of shouting riff-raft; have exhibitions, join
in them, display our accomplishments; issue challenges to fence, shoot,
walk, run, box, in time: the creature has muscle.  It's one way of
crowning a freak; we follow the direction, since the deed done can't
be undone; and a precious poetical life, too!  You may get as royally
intoxicated on swipes as on choice wine; win a name for yourself as
the husband of such a wife; a name in sporting journals and shilling
biographies: quite a revival of the Peerage they have begun to rail at!

'I would not wish to leave you,' said Carinthia.

'You have chosen,' said Fleetwood.




CHAPTER XVI

IN WHICH THE BRIDE FROM FOREIGN PARTS IS GIVEN A TASTE OF OLD ENGLAND

Cheers at an open gate of a field saluted the familiar scarlet of the
Earl of Fleetwood's coach in Kentish land.  They were chorister cheers,
the spontaneous ringing out of English country hearts in homage to the
nobleman who brightened the heaviness of life on English land with a
spectacle of the noble art distinguishing their fathers.  He drove along
over muffling turf; ploughboys and blue butcher-boys, and smocked old
men, with an approach to a hundred-weight on their heels, at the trot to
right and left; all hoping for an occasional sight of the jewel called
Kitty, that he carried inside.  Kitty was there.

Kitty's eyes are shut.  Think of that: cradled innocence and angels'
dreams and the whole of the hymn just before ding-dong-bang on noses and
jaws!  That means confidence?  Looks like it.  But Kitty's not asleep you
try him.  He's only quiet because he has got to undergo great exertion.
Last fight he was knocked out of time, because he went into it honest
drunk, they tell.  And the earl took him up, to give him a chance of
recovering his good name, and that's Christian.  But the earl, he knows
a man as well as a horse.  He's one to follow.  Go to a fayte down at
Esslemont, you won't forget your day.  See there, he's brought a lady on
the top o' the coach.  That seems for to signify he don't expect it's
going to be much of a bloody business.  But there's no accounting.
Anyhow, Broadfield 'll have a name in the papers for Sunday reading.
In comes t' other lord's coach.  They've timed it together closes they
have.

They were pronounced to be both the right sort of noblemen for the
country.  Lord Brailstone's blue coach rattled through an eastern gate to
the corner of the thirty-acre meadow, where Lord Fleetwood had drawn up,
a toss from the ring.  The meeting of the blue and scarlet coaches drew
forth Old England's thunders; and when the costly treasures contained in
them popped out heads, the moment was delirious.  Kit Ines came after his
head on a bound.  Ben Todds was ostentatiously deliberate: his party said
he was no dancing-master.  He stepped out, grave as a barge emerging from
a lock, though alive to the hurrahs of supporters and punctilious in
returning the formal portion of his rival's too roguish nod.  Their look
was sharp into the eyes, just an instant.

Brailstone and Fleetwood jumped to the grass and met, talking and
laughing, precise upon points of business, otherwise cordial:
plenipotentiaries of great powers, whom they have set in motion and
bind to the ceremonial opening steps, according to the rules of civilized
warfare.  They had a short colloquy with newspaper reporters;--
an absolutely fair, square, upright fight of Britons was to be
chronicled.  Captain Abrane, a tower in the crowd, registered bets
whenever he could.  Curricles, gigs, carts, pony-traps, boys on ponies,
a swarm on legs, flowed to the central point and huddled there.

Was either champion born in Kent?  An audacious boy proclaimed Kit
Ines a man of Kent.  Why, of course he was! and that was why the Earl
of Fleetwood backed our cocky Kitty, and means to land him on the top of
his profession.  Ben Todds was shuffled aside; as one of their Londoners,
destitute of county savour.

All very well, but have a spy at Benny Todds.  Who looks the square man?
And hear what that big gentleman of the other lord's party says.  A
gentleman of his height and weight has a right to his opinion.  He 's
dead against Kit Ines: it's fists, not feet, he says, 'll do it to-day;
stamina, he says.  Benny has got the stamina.

Todds' possession of the stamina, and the grand voice of Captain Abrane,
and the Father Christmas, roast-beef-of-Old England face of the umpire
declared to be on the side of Lord Brailstone's colour blue, darkened
the star of Kit Ines till a characteristic piece of behaviour was espied.
He dashed his cap into the ring and followed it, with the lightest of
vaults across the ropes.  There he was, the first in the ring: and that
stands for promise of first blow, first blood, first flat knock-down,
and last to cry for quarter.  His pair of seconds were soon after him.
Fleetwood mounted his box.

'Is it to fight?' said Carinthia.

'To see which is the master.'

'They fight to see?'

'Generally until one or the other can't see.  You are not obliged to see
it; you can be driven away if you wish.'

'I will be here, if you are here.'

'You choose it.'

Fleetwood leaned over to Chumley Potts on the turf.  'Abrane's ruining
himself.'

Potts frankly hoped that his friend might be doing so.  'Todds is jolly
well backed.  He's in prime condition.  He's the favourite of the knowing
ones.'

'You wouldn't have the odds, if he weren't.'

'No; but the odds are like ten per cent.: they conjure the gale, and be
hanged,' said Potts; he swore at his betting mania, which destroyed the
pleasure of the show he loved.

All in the ring were shaking hands.  Shots of a desire to question and
comment sped through Carinthia's veins and hurt her.  She had gathered
that she spoke foolishly to her husband's ear, so she kept her mouth
shut, though the unanswered of her inquisitive ignorance in the strange
land pricked painfully at her bosom.  She heard the girl behind her say:
'Our colours!' when the colour scarlet unwound with Lord Brailstone's
blue was tied to the stake: and her husband nodded; he smiled; he liked
to hear the girl.

Potts climbed up, crying: 'Toilets complete!  Now for paws out, and then
at it, my hearties!'

Choice of corners under the leaden low cloud counted for little.  A
signal was given; a man outside the ring eyed a watch, raised a hand; the
two umpires were on foot in their places; the pair of opposing seconds
hurried out cheery or bolt-business words to their men; and the champions
advanced to the scratch.  Todds first, by the courtesy of Ines, whose
decorous control of his legs at a weighty moment was rightly read by his
party.

Their hands grasped firmly: thereupon becoming fists of a hostile couple
in position.  And simply to learn which of us two is the better man!  Or
in other words, with four simple fists to compass a patent fact and stand
it on the historic pedestal, with a little red writing underneath: you
never can patent a fact without it. But mark the differences of this kind
of contention from all other--especially the Parliamentary: this is
positive, it has a beginning and an end; and it is good-humoured from
beginning to end; trial of skill, trial of stamina; Nature and Art; Old
English; which made us what we are; and no rancours, no vows of
vengeance; the beaten man of the two bowing to the bit of history he has
helped to make.

Kittites had need to be confident in the skill of their lither lad.  His
facer looked granite.  Fronting that mass, Kit you might--not to lash
about for comparisons--call a bundle of bamboo.  Ay, but well knitted,
springy, alive every inch of him; crafty, too, as you will soon bear
witness.  He knows he has got his task, and he's the man to do it.

There was wary sparring, and mirrors watched them.

'Bigger fellow: but have no fear,' the earl said over his shoulder to
Madge.

She said in return: 'Oh, I don't know, I'm praying.'

Kit was now on his toes, all himself, like one who has found the key.
He feinted.  Quick as lightning, he landed a bolt on Ben's jib, just at
the toll-bar of the bridge, between the eyes, and was off, out of reach,
elastic; Ben's counter fell short by a couple of inches.  Cheers for
first blow.

The earl clucked to Madge.  Her gaze at the ring was a sullen intensity.

Will you believe it?--Ben received a second spanking cracker on the
spectacles-seat: neat indeed; and, poor payment for the compliment, he
managed to dig a drive at the ribs.  As much of that game as may suit
you, sturdy Ben!  But hear the shout, and behold!

First blood to Kit Ines!  That tell-tale nose of old Ben's has mounted
the Earl of Fleetwood's colours, and all his party are looking
Brailstone-blue.

'So far!' said Fleetwood.  His grooms took an indication: the hamper was
unfastened; sandwiches were handed.  Carinthia held one; she tried to
nibble, in obedience to her husband's example.  Madge refused a bite of
food.

Hearing Carinthia say to her: 'I hope he will not be beaten, I hope, I
hope,' she made answer: 'You are very good, Miss'; and the young lady
flushed.

Gentlemen below were talking up to the earl.  A Kentish squire of an
estate neighbouring Esslemont introduced a Welsh squire he had driven to
see the fun, by the name of Mr. Owain Wythan, a neighbour of the earl's
down in Wales.  Refreshments were offered.  Carinthia submissively sipped
the sparkling wine, which stings the lips when they are indisposed to it.
The voice of the girl Madge rang on the tightened chords of her breast.
Madge had said she was praying: and to pray was all that could be done by
two women.  Her husband could laugh loudly with Mr. Potts and the other
gentlemen and the strangers.  He was quite sure the man he supported
would win; he might have means of knowing.  Carinthia clung to his bare
words, for the sake of the girl.

A roaring peal went up from the circle of combat.  Kit had it this time.
Attacking Ben's peepers, he was bent on defending his own, and he caught
a bodyblow that sent him hopping back to his pair of seconds, five clear
hops to the rear, like a smashed surge-wave off the rock.  He was
respectful for the remainder of the round.  But hammering at the system
he had formed, in the very next round he dropped from a tremendous
repetition of the blow, and lay flat as a turbot.  The bets against him
had simultaneously a see-saw rise.

'Bellows, he appears to have none,' was the comment of Chumley Potts.

'Now for training, Chummy!' said Lord Fleetwood.

'Chummy!' signifying a crow over Potts, rang out of the hollows of
Captain Abrane on Lord Brailstone's coach.

Carinthia put a hand behind her to Madge.  It was grasped, in gratitude
for sympathy or in feminine politeness.  The girl murmured: 'I've seen
worse.'  She was not speaking to ears.

Lord Fleetwood sat watch in hand.  'Up,' he said; and, as if hearing him,
Kit rose from the ministering second's knee.  He walked stiffly, squared
after the fashion of a man taught caution.  Ben made play.  They rounded
the ring, giving and taking.  Ben rushed, and had an emollient; spouted
again and was corked; again, and received a neat red-waxen stopper.  He
would not be denied at Kit's door, found him at home and hugged him.  Kit
got himself to grass, after a spell of heavy fibbing, Ben's game.

It did him no great harm; it might be taken for an enlivener; he was dead
on his favourite spot the ensuing round, played postman on it.  So
cleverly, easily, dancingly did he perform the double knock and the
retreat, that Chumley Potts was moved to forget his wagers and exclaim:
'Racket-ball, by Jove!'

'If he doesn't let the fellow fib the wind out of him,' Mallard addressed
his own crab eyeballs.

Lord Fleetwood heard and said coolly: 'Tightstrung.  I kept him fasting
since he earned his breakfast.  You don't wind an empty rascal fit for
action.  A sword through the lungs won't kill when there's no air in
them.'

That was printed in the 'Few Words before the Encounter', in the Book Of
MAXIMS FOR MEN.  Carinthia, hearing everything her husband uttered,
burned to remind him of the similarity between his opinions and her
father's.

She was learning, that for some reason, allusions to her father were not
acceptable.  She squeezed the hand of Madge, and felt a pressure, like a
scream, telling her the girl's heart was with the fight beneath them.
She thought it natural for her.  She wished she could continue looking as
intently.  She looked because her husband looked.  The dark hills and
clouds curtaining the run of the stretch of fields relieved her sight.

The clouds went their way; the hills were solid, but like a blue smoke;
the scene here made them very distant and strange.  Those two men were
still hitting, not hating one another; only to gratify a number of
unintelligible people and win a success.  But the earth and sky seemed to
say, What is the glory?  They were insensible to it, as they are not--
they are never insensible to noble grounds of strife.  They bless the
spot, they light lamps on it; they put it into books of history, make it
holy, if the cause was a noble one or a good one.

Or supposing both those men loved the girl, who loved one of them!  Then
would Carinthia be less reluctantly interested in their blows.

Her infant logic stumbled on for a reason while she repressed the torture
the scene was becoming, as though a reason could be found by her
submissive observation of it.  And she was right in believing that a
reason for the scene must or should exist.  Only, like other bewildered
instinctive believers, she could not summon the great universe or a
life's experience to unfold it.  Her one consolation was in squeezing the
hand of the girl from time to time.

Not stealthily done, it was not objected to by the husband whose eye was
on all.  But the persistence in doing it sank her from the benignity of
her station to the girl's level: it was conduct much too raw, and grated
on the deed of the man who had given her his name.

Madge pleased him better.  She had the right to be excited, and she was
very little demonstrative.  She had--well, in justice, the couple of them
had, only she had it more--the tone of the women who can be screwed to
witness a spill of blood, peculiarly catching to hear;--a tone of every
string in them snapped except the silver string.  Catching to hear?  It
is worth a stretching of them on the rack to hear that low buzz-hum of
their inner breast .  .  .  By heaven!  we have them at their best when
they sing that note.

His watch was near an hour of the contest, and Brailstone's man had
scored first knock-down blow, a particularly clean floorer.  Thinking of
that, he was cheered by hearing Chummy Potts, whose opinions he despised,
cry out to Abrane:--

'Yeast to him!'  For the face of Todds was visibly swelling to the ripest
of plums from Kit's deliveries.

Down he went.  He had the sturdy legs which are no legs to a clean blow.
Odds were offered against him.

'Oh! pretty play with your right, Kit!' exclaimed Mallard, as Kit fetched
his man an ugly stroke on the round of the waist behind, and the crowd
sent up the name of the great organs affected: a sickener of a stroke, if
dealt soundly.  It meant more than 4 showed.  Kit was now for taking
liberties.  Light as ever on his pins, he now and then varied his
attentions to the yeasty part, delivering a wakener in unexpected
quarters: masterly as the skilled cook's carving of a joint with hungry
guests for admirers.

'Eh, Madge?' the earl said.

She kept her sight fixed, replying: 'Yes, I think .  .  .'  Carinthia
joined with her: 'I must believe it that he will: but will the other man,
poor man, submit?  I entreat him to put away his pride.  It is his--oh,
poor man!'

Ben was having it hot and fast on a torso physiognomy.

The voices of these alien women thrilled the fray and were a Bardic harp
to Lord Fleetwood.

He dropped a pleasant word on the heads in the curricle.

Mr. Owain Wythan looked up.  'Worthy of Theocritus.  It's the Boxing Twin
and the Bembrycian giant.  The style of each.  To the letter!'

'Kit is assiduously fastening Ben's blinkers,' Potts remarked.

He explained to the incomprehensible lady he fancied he had somewhere
seen, that the battle might be known as near the finish by the behaviour
on board Lord Brailstone's coach.

'It's like Foreign Affaits and the Stock Exchange,' he said to the more
intelligent males.  'If I want to know exactly how the country stands, I
turn to the Money Article in the papers.  That's a barometrical
certainty.  No use inquiring abroad.  Look at old Rufus Abrane.  I see
the state of the fight on the old fellow's mug.  He hasn't a bet left in
him!'

'Captain Mountain--Rufus Mus!' cried Lord Fleetwood, and laughed at the
penetrative portrait Woodseer's epigram sketched; he had a desire for the
presence of the singular vagabond.

The Rufus Mus in the Captain Mountain exposed his view of the encounter,
by growing stiller, apparently growing smaller, without a squeak, like
the entrapped; and profoundly contemplative, after the style of the
absolutely detached, who foresee the fatal crash, and are calculating,
far ahead of events, the means for meeting their personal losses.

The close of the battle was on the visage of Rufus Abrane fifteen minutes
before that Elgin marble under red paint in the ring sat on the knee of a
succouring seconder, mopped, rubbed, dram-primed, puppy-peeping,
inconsolably comforted, preparatory to the resumption of the great-coat
he had so hopefully cast from his shoulders.  Not downcast by any means.
Like an old Roman, the man of the sheer hulk with purple eyemounds found
his legs to do the manful thing, show that there was no bad blood, stand
equal to all forms.  Ben Todds, if ever man in Old England, looked the
picture you might label 'Bellyful,' it was remarked.  Kit Ines had an
appearance of springy readiness to lead off again.  So they faced on the
opening step of their march into English History.

Vanquisher and vanquished shook hands, engaged in a parting rally of
good-humoured banter; the beaten man said his handsome word; the best man
capped it with a compliment to him.  They drink of different cups to-day.
Both will drink of one cup in the day to come.  But the day went too
clearly to crown the light and the tight and the right man of the two,
for moralizing to wag its tail at the end.  Oldsters and youngsters
agreed to that.  Science had done it: happy the backers of Science!  Not
one of them alluded to the philosophical 'hundred years hence.'  For when
England, thanks to a spirited pair of our young noblemen, has exhibited
one of her characteristic performances consummately, Philosophy is bidden
fly; she is a foreign bird.




CHAPTER XVII

RECORDS A SHADOW CONTEST CLOSE ON THE FOREGOING

Kit Ines cocked an eye at Madge, in the midst of the congratulations and
the paeans pumping his arms.  As he had been little mauled, he could
present a face to her, expecting a wreath of smiles for the victor.

What are we to think of the contrarious young woman who, when he lay
beaten, drove him off the field and was all tenderness and devotion?
She bobbed her head, hardly more than a trifle pleased, one might say.
Just like females.  They're riddles, not worth spelling.  Then, drunk
I'll get to-night, my pretty dear!  the man muttered, soured by her
inopportune staidness, as an opponent's bruisings could never have
rendered him.

She smiled a lively beam in answer to the earl; 'Oh yes I 'm glad.  It's
your doing, my lord.'  Him it was that she thanked, and for the moment
prized most.  The female riddle is hard to read, because it is compounded
of sensations, and they rouse and appeal to the similar cockatrices in
us, which either hiss back or coil upon themselves.  She admired Kit Ines
for his valour: she hated that ruinous and besotting drink.  It flung
skeletons of a married couple on the wall of the future.  Nevertheless
her love had been all maternal to him when he lay chastised and disgraced
on account of his vice.  Pity had done it.  Pity not being stirred, her
admiration of the hero declared victorious, whose fortunes in uncertainty
had stopped the beating of her heart, was eclipsed by gratitude toward
his preserver, and a sentiment eclipsed becomes temporarily coldish,
against our wish and our efforts, in a way to astonish; making her think
that she cannot hold two sentiments at a time; when it is but the fact
that she is unable to keep the two equally warm.

Carinthia said to her: 'He is brave.'

'Oh yes, he's brave,' Madge assented.

Lord Brailstone, flourishing his whip, cried out: 'At Canleys to-night?'

The earl nodded: 'I shall be there.'

'You, too, Chummy?' came from Abrane.

'To see you dance,' Potts rejoined, and mumbled

'But will he dance!  Old Braney's down on his luck; he's a specimen of a
fellow emptier and not lighter.  And won't be till supper-time.  But, I
say, Fleet, how the deuce?--funny sort of proceeding!--You haven't
introduced me.'

'The lady bears my name, Mr. Chumley Potts.'

With a bow to the lady's profile and a mention of a glimpse at Baden,
Potts ejaculated: 'It happened this morning?'

'You allude to the marriage.  It happened this morning.'

'How do I get to Canleys?'

'I drive you.  Another team from the Esslemont stables is waiting at the
Royal.'

'You stay at Canleys?'

'No.'

'No?  Oh!  Funny, upon my word.  Though I don't know why not--except that
people .  .  .'

'Count your winnings, Chummy.'

Fleetwood remarked to his bride: 'Our friend has the habit of
soliloquizing in company.  I forgot to tell you of an appointment of mine
at a place called Canleys, about twenty miles or more from here.  I gave
my word, so I keep it.  The landlady at the inn, Mrs. Rundles, motherly
kind of woman; she will be attentive.  They don't cook badly, for an
English inn, I have heard.  Madge here will act as your lady's-maid for
the time.  You will find her serviceable; she's a bruiser's lass and
something above it. Ines informed me, Madge, you were going to friends of
yours at the Wells.  You will stay at the Royal and wait on this lady,
who bears my name.  You understand?--A girl I can trust for courage, if
the article is in request,' he resumed to his bride; and talked generally
of the inn and the management of it, and its favoured position outside
the village and contiguous to the river, upon which it subsisted.

Carinthia had heard.  She was more than ever the stunned young woman she
had been since her mounting of the coach, between the village church and
Lekkatts.

She said not a word.  Why should she?  her object was won.  Give her
that, and a woman's tongue will consent to rest.  The dreaded weapon
rest, also when she is kept spinning by the whip.  She gives out a
pleasant hum, too.  Her complexion must be pronounced dull in repose.
A bride on her travels with an aspect of wet chalk, rather helps to
scare mankind from marriage: which may be good or bad; but she reflects a
sicklier hue on the captured Chessman calling her his own.  Let her shine
in privacy.

Fleetwood drew up at the Royal Sovereign, whereof the reigning monarch,
in blue uniform on the signboard, curtseyed to his equally windy
subjects; and a small congregation of the aged, and some cripples and
infants, greeted the patron of Old England's manfullest display, cheering
at news of the fight, brought them by many little runners.

'Your box has been conveyed to your room,' he said to his bride.

She bowed.  This time she descended the coach by the aid of the ladder.

Ines, victorious in battle, had scant notice from his love.  'Yes, I 'm
glad,' and she passed him to follow her newly constituted mistress.  His
pride was dashed, all the foam of the first draw on the top of him blown
off, as he figuratively explained the cause of his gloom to the earl.
'I drink and I gets a licking--that girl nurses and cossets me.  I don't
drink and I whops my man--she shows me her back.  Ain't it encouragement,
my lord?'

'You ought to know them by this time, you dolt,' returned his patron,
and complimented him on his bearing in the fight.  'You shall have your
two hundred, and something will be added.  Hold handy here till I mount.
I start in ten minutes.'

Whether to speak a polite adieu to the bride, whose absurd position
she had brought on her own head, was debated for half a minute.  He
considered that the wet chalk-quarry of a beauty had at all events the
merit of not being a creature to make scenes.  He went up to the sitting-
room.  If she was not there, he would leave his excuses.

She was there, and seated; neither crying, nor smiling, nor pointedly
serious in any way, not conventionally at her ease either.  And so
clearly was he impressed by her transparency in simplicity of expression,
that he took without a spurn at it the picture of a woman half drained
of her blood, veiling the wound.  And a young woman, a stranger to
suffering: perhaps--as the creatures do looking for the usual flummery
tenderness, what they call happiness; wondering at the absence of it and
the shifty ghost of a husband she has got by floundering into the bog
known as Marriage.  She would have it, and here she was!

He entered the situation and was possessed by the shivering delicacy
of it.  Surface emotions were not seen on her.  She might be a creature
with a soul.  Here and there the thing has been found in women.  It is
priceless when found, and she could not be acting.  One might swear the
creature had no power to act.

She spoke without offence, the simplest of words, affected no
solicitudes, put on no gilt smiles, wore no reproaches: spoke to him as
if so it happened--he had necessarily a journey to perform.  One could
see all the while big drops falling from the wound within.  One could
hear it in her voice.  Imagine a crack of the string at the bow's deep
stress.  Or imagine the bow paralyzed at the moment of the deepest
sounding.  And yet the voice did not waver.  She had now the richness of
tone carrying on a music through silence.

Well, then, at least, he had not been the utterly duped fool he thought
himself since the consent was pledged to wed her.

More, she had beauty--of its kind.  Or splendour or grandeur, was the
term for it.  But it bore no name.  None of her qualities--if they were
qualities--had a name.  She stood with a dignity that the word did not
express.  She endured meekly, when there was no meekness.  Pain breathed
out of her, and not a sign of pain was visible.  She had, under his
present observation of her, beauty, with the lines of her face breaking
in revolt from beauty--or requiring a superterrestrial illumination to
show the harmony.  He, as he now saw, had erred grossly in supposing her
insensitive, and therefore slow of a woman's understanding.  She drew the
breath of pain through the lips: red lips and well cut.  Her brown eyes
were tearless, not alluring or beseeching or repelling; they did but
look, much like the skies opening high aloof on a wreck of storm.  Her
reddish hair-chestnut, if you will--let fall a skein over one of the
rugged brows, and softened the ruggedness by making it wilder, as if a
great bird were winging across a shoulder of the mountain ridges.
Conceived of the mountains, built in their image, the face partook
alternately of mountain terror or splendour; wholly, he remembered,
of the splendour when her blood ran warm.  No longer the chalk-quarry
face,--its paleness now was that of night Alps beneath a moon chasing the
shadows.

She might be casting her spells again.

'You remember I told you,' he said, 'I have given my word--I don't break
it--to be at a Ball.  Your uncle was urgent to have the ceremony over.
These clashes occur.  The people here--I have spoken of that: people of
good repute for attention to guests.  I am uncertain of the time .  .  .
we have all to learn to wait.  So then, good-bye till we meet.'

He was experiencing a novel nip of torment, of just the degree which
takes a partial appeasement from the inflicting of it, and calls up a
loathed compassion.  She might have been in his arms for a step, though
she would not have been the better loved.

He was allowed his escape, bearing with him enough of husband to execrate
another enslaving pledge of his word, that begat a frenzy to wreak some
caresses on the creature's intolerably haunting image.  Of course, he
could not return to her.  How would she receive him?  There was no salt
in the thought of it; she was too submissive.

However, there would be fun with Chummy Potts on the drive to Canleys;
fun with Rufus Abrane at Mrs. Cowper Quillett's; and with the Countess
Livia, smothered, struggling, fighting for life with the title of
Dowager.  A desire for unbridled fun had hold of any amount of it, to
excess in any direction.  And though this cloud as a dry tongue after
much wine craves water, glimpses of his tramp's walk with a fellow tramp
on a different road, enjoying strangely healthy vagabond sensations and
vast ideas; brought the vagrant philosopher refreshfully to his mind:
chiefly for the reason that while in Woodseer's company he had hardly
suffered a stroke of pain from the thought of Henrietta.  She was now a
married woman, he was a married man by the register.  Stronger proof of
the maddest of worlds could not be furnished.

Sane in so mad a world, a man is your flabby citizen among outlaws, good
for plucking.  Fun, at any cost, is the one object worth a shot in such a
world.  And the fun is not to stop.  If it does, we are likely to be got
hold of, and lugged away to the altar--the terminus.  That foul disaster
has happened, through our having temporarily yielded to a fit of the
dumps and treated a mad world's lunatic issue with some seriousness.  But
fun shall be had with the aid of His Highness below.  The madder the
world, the madder the fun.  And the mixing in it of another element,
which it has to beguile us--romance--is not at all bad cookery.  Poetic
romance is delusion--a tale of a Corsair; a poet's brain, a bottle of
gin, and a theatrical wardrobe.  Comic romance is about us everywhere,
alive for the tapping.

A daughter of the Old Buccaneer should participate in it by right of
birth: she would expect it in order to feel herself perfectly at home.
Then, be sure, she finds an English tongue and prattles away as merrily
as she does when her old scapegrace of a father is the theme.  Son-in-law
to him!  But the path of wisdom runs in the line of facts, and to have
wild fun and romance on this pantomime path, instead of kicking to break
away from it, we follow things conceived by the genius of the situation,
for the delectation of the fair Countess of Fleetwood and the earl, her
delighted husband, quite in the spirit of the Old Buccaneer, father of
the bride.

Carinthia sat beside the fire, seeing nothing in the room or on the road.
Up in her bedchamber, the girl Madge was at her window.  She saw Lord
Fleetwood standing alone, laughing, it seemed, at some thought; he threw
up his head.  Was it a newly married man leaving his bride and laughing?
The bride was a dear lady, fit for better than to be driven to look on at
a prize-fight--a terrible scene to a lady.  She was left solitary: and
this her wedding day?  The earl had said it, he had said she bore his
name, spoke of coming from the altar, and the lady had blushed to hear
herself called Miss.  The pressure of her hand was warm with Madge: her
situation roused the fervid latent sisterhood in the breast of women.

Before he mounted the coach, Lord Fleetwood talked to Kit Ives.  He
pointed at an upper window, seemed to be issuing directions.  Kit nodded;
he understood it, whatever it was.  You might have said, a pair of
burglars.  The girl ran downstairs to bid her lover good-bye and show him
she really rejoiced in his victory.  Kit came to her saying: 'Given my
word of honour I won't make a beast of myself to-night.  Got to watch
over you and your lady.'

Lord Fleetwood started his fresh team, casting no glance at the windows
of the room where his bride was.  He and the gentlemen on the coach were
laughing.

His leaving of his young bride to herself this day was classed among the
murky flashes which distinguished the deeds of noblemen.  But his
laughter on leaving her stamped it a cruelty; of the kind that plain
mortals, who can be monsters, commit.  Madge conceived a pretext for
going into the presence of her mistress, whose attitude was the same as
when she first sat in the chair.  The lady smiled and said: 'He is not
hurt much?'  She thought for them about her.

The girl's, heart of sympathy thumped, and her hero became a very minute
object.  He had spoken previously of the making or not making a beast of
himself; without inflicting a picture of the beast.  His words took shape
now, and in consequence a little self-pity began to move.  It stirred to
swell the great wave of pity for the lady, that was in her bosom.  'Oh,
he!' she said, and extinguished the thought of him; and at once her
under-lip was shivering, her eyes filled and poured.

Carinthia rose anxiously.  The girl dropped at her feet.  'You have been
so good to me to-day, my lady!  so good to me to-day!  I can't help it--
I don't often just for this moment; I've been excited.  Oh, he's well, he
will do; he's nothing.  You say "poor child!"  But I'm not; it's only.
excitement.  I do long to serve you the best I can.'

She stood up in obedience and had the arms of her young mistress pressing
her.  Tears also were streaming from Carinthia's eyes.  Heartily she
thanked the girl for the excuse to cry.

They were two women.  On the road to Canleys, the coach conveying men
spouted with the lusty anecdote, relieved of the interdict of a
tyrannical sex.




CHAPTER XVIII

DOWN WHITECHAPEL WAY

Contention begets contention in a land of the pirate races.  Gigs were
at high rival speed along the road from the battle-field to London.
They were the electrical wires of the time for an expectant population
bursting to have report of so thundering an event as the encounter of two
champion light weights, nursed and backed by a pair of gallant young
noblemen, pick of the whole row of coronets above.  London panted gaping
and the gigs flew with the meat to fill it.

Chumley Potts offered Ambrose Mallard fair odds that the neat little trap
of the chief sporting journal, which had a reputation to maintain, would
be over one or other of the bridges crossing the Thames first.  Mallard
had been struck by the neat little trap of an impudent new and lower-
priced journal, which had a reputation to gain.  He took the proffered
odds, on the cry as of a cracker splitting.  Enormous difficulties in
regard to the testimony and the verifications were discussed; they were
overcome.  Potts was ready for any amount of trouble; Mallard the same.
There was clearly a race.  There would consequently be a record.  Visits
to the offices of those papers, perhaps half a day at the south end of
London or on Westminster bridge, examining witnesses, corner shopmen,
watermen, and the like, would or should satisfactorily establish the
disputed point.

Fleetwood had his fun; insomuch that he laughed himself into a sentiment
of humaneness toward the couple of donkeys and forgot his contempt of
them.  Their gamblings and their bets increased his number of dependents;
and imbeciles were preferable to dolts or the dry gilt figures of the
circle he had to move in.  Matter for some astonishment had been
furnished to the latter this day; and would cause an icy Signor stare
and rather an angry Signora flutter.  A characteristic of that upper
circle, as he knew it, is, that the good are dull, the vicious very bad.
They had nothing to please him but manners.  Elsewhere this land is a
land of no manners.  Take it and make the most of it, then, for its
quality of brute honesty: which is found to flourish best in the British
prize-ring.

His irony landed him there.  It struck the country a ringing blow.  But
it struck an almost effacing one at the life of the young nobleman of
boundless wealth, whose highest renown was the being a patron of
prizefighters.  Husband of the daughter of the Old Buccaneer as well!
perchance as a result.  That philosopher tramp named her 'beautiful
Gorgon.'  She has no beauty; and as for Gorgon, the creature has a look
of timid softness in waiting behind her rocky eyes.  A barbaric damsel
beginning to nibble at civilization, is nearer the mark; and ought she to
be discouraged?

Fleetwood's wrath with his position warned him against the dupery of any
such alcove thoughts.  For his wrath revenged him, and he feared the
being stripped of it, lest a certain fund of his own softness, that he
knew of; though few did, should pull him to the creature's feet.  She
belonged to him indeed; so he might put her to the trial of whether she
had a heart and personal charm, without the ceremony of wooing--which,
in his case, tempted to the feeling desperately earnest and becoming
enslaved.  He speculated upon her eyelids and lips, and her voice, when
melting, as women do in their different ways; here and there with an
execrable--perhaps pardonable--art; one or two divinely.  The vision drew
him to a headlong plunge and swim of the amorous mind, occupying a
minute, filling an era.  He corrected the feebleness, and at the same
time threw a practical coachman's glance on peculiarities of the road,
requiring some knowledge of it if traversed backward at a whipping pace
on a moonless night.  The drive from Canleys to the Royal Sovereign could
be done by good pacers in an hour and a half, little more--with Ives and
the stables ready, and some astonishment in a certain unseen chamber.
Fleetwood chuckled at a vision of romantic devilry--perfectly legitimate
too.  Something, more to inflict than enjoy, was due to him.

He did, not phrase it, that a talk with the fellow Woodseer of his
mountains and his forests, and nature, philosophy, poetry, would have
been particularly healthy for him, almost as good as the good counsel be
needed and solicited none to give him.  It swept among his ruminations
while he pricked Potts and Mallard to supply his craving for satanical
fare.


Gower Woodseer; the mention of whom is a dejection to the venerable
source of our story, was then in the act of emerging from the Eastward
into the Southward of the line of Canterbury's pilgrims when they set
forth to worship, on his homeward course, after a walk of two days out of
Dover.  He descended London's borough, having exactly twopence halfpenny
for refreshment; following a term of prudent starvation, at the end of
the walk.  It is not a district seductive to the wayfarer's appetite;
as, for example, one may find the Jew's fry of fish in oil, inspiriting
the Shoreditch region, to be.  Nourishment is afforded, according to the
laws of England's genius in the arts of refection, at uninviting shops,
to the necessitated stomach.  A penn'orth of crumb of bread, assisted on
its laborious passage by a penn'orth of the rinsings of beer, left the
natural philosopher a ha'penny for dessert at the stall of an applewoman,
where he withstood an inclination toward the juicy fruit and chose nuts.
They extend a meal, as a grimace broadens the countenance, illusorily;
but they help to cheat an emptiness in time, where it is nearly as
offensive to our sensations as within us; and that prolonged occupation
of the jaws goes a length to persuade us we are filling.  All the better
when the substance is indigestible.  Tramps of the philosophical order,
who are the practically sagacious, prefer tough grain for the teeth.
Woodseer's munching of his nuts awakened to fond imagination the picture
of his father's dinner, seen one day and little envied: a small slice of
cold boiled mutton-flesh in a crescent of white fat, with a lump of dry
bread beside the plate.

Thus he returned to the only home he had, not disheartened, and bearing
scenes that outvied London's print-shops for polychrome splendour, an
exultation to recall.  His condition, moreover, threw his father's life
and work into colour: the lean Whitechapel house of the minister among
the poor; the joy in the saving of souls, if he could persuade himself
that such good labour advanced: and at the fall of light, the pastime
task of bootmaking--a desireable occupation for a thinker.  Thought flies
best when the hands are easily busy.  Cobblers have excursive minds.
Their occasional rap at the pegs diversifies the stitchings and is often
happily timed to settle an internal argument.  Seek in a village for
information concerning the village or the state of mankind, you will be
less disappointed at the cobbler's than elsewhere, it has been said.

As Gower had anticipated, with lively feelings of pleasure, Mr. Woodseer
was at the wonted corner of his back room, on the stool between two
tallow candleflames, leather scented strongly, when the wanderer stood
before him, in the image of a ball that has done with circling about a
stable point.

'Back?' the minister sang out at once, and his wrinkles gleamed:

Their hands grasped.

'Hungry, sir, rather.'

'To be sure, you are.  One can read it on your boots.  Mrs. Jones will
spread you a table.  How many miles to-day?  Show the soles.  They tell a
tale of wear.'

They had worn to resemble the thin-edged layers of still upper cloud
round the peep of coming sky.

'About forty odd to-day, sir.  They've done their hundreds of miles and
have now come to dock.  I 'll ask Mrs. Jones to bring me a plate here.'

Gower went to the housekeeper in the kitchen.  His father's front door
was unfastened by day; she had not set eyes on him yet, and Mr. Woodseer
murmured:

'Now she's got the boy.  There 's clasping and kissing.  He's all wild
Wales to her.'

The plate of meat was brought by Mary Jones with Gower beside her, and a
sniffle of her happiness audible.  She would not, although invited to
stay and burning to hear Gower, wait in the room where father and son had
to talk together after a separation, long to love's counting.  She was a
Welshwoman of the pure blood, therefore delicately mannered by nature.

'Yes, dear lad, tobacco helps you on to the marrow of your story, and I
too will blow the cloud,' said Mr. Woodseer, when the plate was pushed
aside and the pipe appeared.

So Gower's recital of his wanderings began, more puffs than speech at the
commencement.  He was alternately picturesque and sententious until he
reached Baden; there he became involved, from thinking of a revelation of
beauty in woman.

Mr. Woodseer rapped the leather on his block.

'A place where they have started public gambling, I am told.'

'We must look into all the corners of the world to know it, sir, and the
world has to be riddled or it riddles us.'

'Ah.  Did you ever tell a lie, Gower Woodseer?'

'I played.'

'You played.  The Lord be thanked you have kept your straight tongue!
The Lord can always enter a heart of truth.  Sin cannot dwell with it.
But you played for gain, and that was a licenced thieving; and that was a
backsliding; and there will have to be a climbing up.  And what that
means, your hold on truth will learn.  Touch sin and you accommodate
yourself to its vileness.  Ay, you love nature.  Nature is not anchorage
for vessels like men.  If you loved the Book you would float in harbour.
You played.  I do trust you lost.'

'You have your wish, sir.'

'To have won their money, Gower!  Rather starve.'

'I did.'

'Your reason for playing, poor lad?'

'The reason eludes reason.'

'Not in you.'

'Sight of the tables; an itch to try them--one's self as well; a notion
that the losers were playing wrong.  In fine, a bit of a whirl of a
medley of atoms; I can't explain it further.'

'Ah.  The tippler's fumes in his head!  Spotty business, Gower Woodseer.
"Lead us not into temptation" is worldly wisdom in addition to heavenly.'

After listening to an extended homily, with a general assent and
tobacco's phlegm, Gower replied to his father's 'You starved manfully?'
nodding: 'From Baden to Nancy.  An Alsatian cottager at times helped me
along, milk and bread.'

'Wholesome for body and for soul.'

'Entering Nancy I subscribed to the dictum of our first fathers, which
dogs would deliver, if they could speak: that there is no driver like
stomach: and I went head on to the College, saw the Principal: plea of
urgency.  No engagement possible, to teach either French or English.  But
he was inquisitive touching the urgency.  That was my chance.  The French
are humane when they are not suspicious of you.  They are generous, if
you put a light to their minds.  As I was dealing with a scholarly one,
I made use of such ornamental literary skill as I possessed, to prove
urgency.  He supplied me with bread, fruit, and wine.  In the end he
procured me pupils.  I lodged over a baker's shop.  I had food walks, and
learnt something of forestry there--a taking study.  When I had saved
enough to tramp it home, I said my adieux to that good friend and tramped
away, entering London with about the same amount in small coin as when I
entered Nancy.  A manner of exactly hitting the mark, that some would not
find so satisfactory as it is to me.'

The minister sighed.  'There comes in the "philosophy," I suppose.  When
will you understand, that this "philosophy" is only the passive of a
religious faith?  It seems to suit you gentlemen of the road while you
are young.  Work among the Whitechapel poor.  It would be a way for
discovering the shallows of your "philosophy" earlier.'

Gower asked him: 'Going badly here, sir?'

'Murders, robberies, misusage of women, and misconduct of women!--Drink,
in short: about the same amount.  Drink is their death's river, rolling
them on helpless as corpses, on to--may they find mercy!  I and a few
stand--it's in the tide we stand here, to stop them, pluck them out, make
life a bit sweet to them before the poor bodies go beneath.  But come!
all's not dark, we have our gleams.  I speak distressed by one of our
girls: a good girl, I believe; and the wilfullest that ever had command
of her legs.  A well-favoured girl!  You'll laugh, she has given her
heart to a prize-fighter.  Well, you can say, she might have chosen
worse.  He drinks, she hates it; she loves the man and hates his vice.
He swears amendment, is hiccupping at night; fights a match on the
morrow, and gets beaten out of formation.  No matter: whenever, wherever,
that man goes to his fight, that girl follows to nurse him after it.
He's her hero.  Women will have one, and it's their lottery.  You read of
such things; here we have it alive and walking.  I am led to think they
're an honest couple.  They come of established families.  Her mother was
out of Caermarthen; died under my ministration, saintly, forgiving the
drunkard.  You may remember the greengrocer, Tobias Winch?  He passed
away in shrieks for one drop.  I had to pitch my voice to the top notes
to get hearing for the hymn.  He was a reverent man, with the craving by
fits.  That should have been a lesson to Madge.'

'A little girl at the greengrocer's hard by?  She sold me apples; rather
pretty,' said Gower.

'A fine grown girl now--Madge Winch; a comely wench she is.  It breaks
her sister Sarah's heart.  They both manage the little shop; they make it
prosper in a small way; enough, and what need they more?  Then
Christopher Ines has on one of his matches.  Madge drives her cart out,
if it 's near town.  She's off down into Kent to-day by coach, Sarah
tells me.  A great nobleman patronizes Christopher; a Lord Fleetwood,
a lord of wealth.  And he must be thoughtful for these people: he sent
Sarah word that Christopher should not touch drink.  You may remember a
butcher Ines in the street next to us.  Christopher was a wild lad,
always at "best man" with every boy he met: went to sea--ran away.  He
returned a pugilist.  The girl will be nursing him now.  I have spoken to
her of him; and I trust to her; but I mourn her attachment to the man who
drinks.'

'The lord's name?' said Gower.

'Lord Fleetwood, Sarah named him.  And so it pleases him to spend his
money!'

'He has other tastes.  I know something of him, sir.  He promises to be a
patron of Literature as well.  His mother was a South Wales woman.'

'Could he be persuaded to publish a grand edition of the Triads?' Mr.
Woodseer said at once.

'No man more likely.'

'If you see him, suggest it.'

'Very little chance of my meeting him again.  But those Triads!  They're
in our blood.  They spring to tie knots in the head.  They push me to
condense my thoughts to a tight ball.  They were good for primitive
times: but they--or the trick of the mind engendered by them--trip my
steps along the lines of composition.  I produce pellets instead of
flowing sheets.  It'll come right.  At present I 'm so bent to pick and
perfect, polish my phrase, that I lose my survey.  As a consequence, my
vocabulary falters.'

'Ah,' Mr. Woodseer breathed and smote.  'This Literature is to be your
profession for the means of living?'

'Nothing else.  And I'm so low down in the market way of it, that I could
not count on twenty pounds per annum.  Fifty would give me standing, an
independent fifty.'

'To whom are you crying, Gower?'

'Not to gamble, you may be sure.'

'You have a home.'

'Good work of the head wants an easy conscience.  I've too much of you in
me for a comfortable pensioner.'

'Or is it not, that you have been living the gentleman out there, with
just a holiday title to it?'

Gower was hit by his father's thrust.  'I shall feel myself a pieman's
chuckpenny as long as I'm unproductive, now I 've come back and have to
own to a home,' he said.

Tea brought in by Mrs. Mary Jones rather brightened him until he
considered that the enlivenment was due to a purchase by money,
of which he was incapable, and he rejected it, like an honourable man.
Simultaneously, the state of depression threw critic shades on a prized
sentence or two among his recent confections.  It was rejected for the
best of reasons and the most discomforting: because it racked our
English; signifying, that he had not yet learnt the right use of his
weapons.

He was in this wrestle, under a placid demeanour, for several days,
hearing the shouts of Whitechapel Kit's victory, and hearing of Sarah
Winch's anxiety on account of her sister Madge; unaffected by sounds of
joy or grief, in his effort to produce a supple English, with Baden's
Madonna for sole illumination of his darkness.  To her, to the
illimitable gold-mist of perspective and the innumerable images the
thought of her painted for him, he owed the lift which withdrew him from
contemplation of himself in a very disturbing stagnant pool of the
wastes; wherein often will strenuous youth, grown faint, behold a face
beneath a scroll inscribed Impostor.  All whose aim was high have spied
into that pool, and have seen the face.  His glorious lady would not let
it haunt him.

The spell she cast had likewise power to raise him clean out of a
neighbourhood hinting Erebus to the young man with thirst for air,
solitudes, and colour.  Scarce imaginable as she was, she reigned here,
in the idea of her, more fixedly than where she had been visible; as it
were, by right of her being celestially removed from the dismal place.
He was at the same time not insensible to his father's contented
ministrations among these homes of squalor; they pricked the curiosity,
which was in the youthful philosopher a form of admiration.  For his
father, like all Welshmen, loved the mountains.  Yet here he lived,
exhorting, ministering, aiding, supported up to high good cheer by some,
it seemed, superhuman backbone of uprightness;--his religious faith?
Well, if so, the thing might be studied.  But things of the frozen
senses, lean and hueless things, were as repellent to Gower's imagination
as his father's dishes to an epicure.  What he envied was, the worthy old
man's heart of feeling for others: his feeling at present for the girl
Sarah Winch and her sister Madge, who had not been heard of since she
started for the fight.  Mr. Woodseer had written to her relatives at the
Wells, receiving no consolatory answer.

He was relieved at last; and still a little perplexed.  Madge had
returned, he informed Gower.  She was well, she was well in health; he
had her assurances that she was not excited about herself.

'She has brought a lady with her, a great lady to lodge with her.  She
has brought the Countess of Fleetwood to lodge with her.'

Gower heard those words from his father; and his father repeated them.
To the prostrate worshipper of the Countess of Fleetwood, they were a
blow on the head; madness had set in here, was his first recovering
thought, or else a miracle had come to pass.  Or was it a sham Countess
of Fleetwood imposing upon the girl?  His father was to go and see the
great lady, at the greengrocer's shop; at her request, according to
Madge.  Conjectures shot their perishing tracks across a darkness that
deepened and made shipwreck of philosophy.  Was it the very Countess of
Fleetwood penitent for her dalliance with the gambling passion, in
feminine need of pastor's aid, having had report from Madge of this good
shepherd?  His father expressed a certain surprise; his countenance was
mild.  He considered it a merely strange occurrence.

Perhaps, in a crisis, a minister of religion is better armed than a
philosopher.  Gower would not own that, but he acknowledged the
evidences, and owned to envy; especially when he accompanied his father
to the greengrocer's shop, and Mr. Woodseer undisturbedly said:

'Here is the place.'  The small stuffed shop appeared to grow
portentously cavernous and waveringly illumined.




CHAPTER XIX

THE GIRL MADGE

Customers were at the counter of the shop, and these rational figures,
together with the piles of cabbages, the sacks of potatoes, the pale
small oranges here and there, the dominant smell of red herrings, denied
the lurking of an angelical presence behind them.

Sarah Winch and a boy served at the counter.  Sarah led the Mr. Woodseers
into a corner knocked off the shop and called a room.  Below the top bars
of a wizened grate was a chilly fire.  London's light came piecemeal
through a smut-streaked window.  If the wonderful was to occur, this was
the place to heighten it.

'My son may be an intruder,' Mr. Woodseer said.  'He is acquainted with a
Lord Fleetwood .  .  .'

'Madge will know, sir,' replied Sarah, and she sent up a shrill cry for
Madge from the foot of the stairs.

The girl ran down swiftly.  She entered listening to Sarah, looking at
Gower; to whom, after a bob and pained smile where reverence was owing,
she said, 'Can you tell me, sir, please, where we can find Lord Fleetwood
now?'

Gower was unable to tell.  Madge turned to Mr. Woodseer, saying soon
after: 'Oh, she won't mind; she'll be glad, if he knows Lord Fleetwood.
I'll fetch her.'

The moments were of the palpitating order for Gower, although his common
sense lectured the wildest of hearts for expecting such a possibility as
the presence of his lofty lady here.

And, of course, common sense proved to be right: the lady was quite
another.  But she struck on a sleeping day of his travels.  Her face was
not one to be forgotten, and to judge by her tremble of a smile, she
remembered him instantly.

They were soon conversing, each helping to paint the scene of the place
where they had met.

'Lord Fleetwood has married me,' she said.

Gower bent his head; all stood silent.

'May I?' said Madge to her.  'It is Lord Fleetwood's wedded wife, sir.
He drove her from her uncle's, on her wedding day, the day of a prize-
fight, where I was; he told me to wait on his lady at an inn there, as I
've done and will.  He drove away that evening, and he hasn't'--the
girl's black eyebrows worked: 'I've not seen him since.  He's a great
nobleman, yes.  He left his lady at the inn, expenses paid.  He left her
with no money.  She stayed on till her heart was breaking.  She has come
to London to find him.  She had to walk part of the way.  She has only a
change of linen we brought in a parcel.  She's a stranger to England: she
knows nobody in London.  She had no place to come to but this poor hole
of ours she 's so good as let welcome her.  We can't do better, and it 's
no use to be ashamed.  She 's not a lady to scorn poor people.'

The girl's voice hummed through Gower.

He said: 'Lord Fleetwood may not be in London,' and chafed at himself for
such a quaver.

'It's his house we want, sir, he has not been at his house in Kent.  We
want his London house.'

'My dear lady,' said Mr. Woodseer; 'it might be as well to communicate
the state of things to your family without delay.  My son will call at
any address you name; or if it is a country address, I can write the
items, with my assurances of your safety under my charge, in my house,
which I beg you to make your home.  My housekeeper is known to Sarah and
Madge for an excellent Christian woman.'

Carinthia replied: 'You are kind to me, sir.  I am grateful.  I have an
uncle; I would not disturb my uncle; he is inventing guns and he wishes
peace.  It is my husband I have come to find.  He did not leave me in
anger.'

She coloured.  With a dimple of tenderness at one cheek, looking from
Sarah to Madge, she said: 'I would not leave my friends; they are sisters
to me.'  Sarah, at these words, caught up her apron.  Madge did no more
than breathe deep and fast.

An unoccupied cold parlour in Mr. Woodseer's house that would be heated
for a guest, urged him to repeat his invitation, but he took the check
from Gower, who suggested the doubt of Mary Jones being so good an
attendant upon Lady Fleetwood as Madge.  'And Madge has to help in the
shop at times.'

Madge nodded, looked into the eyes of her mistress, which sanctioned her
saying: 'She will like it best here, she is my lady and I understand her
best.  My lady gives no trouble: she is hardy, she's not like other
ladies.  I and Sarah sleep together in the room next.  I can hear
anything she wants.  She takes us as if she was used to it.'

Sarah had to go to serve a customer.  Madge made pretence of pricking her
ears and followed into the shop.

'Your first visit to London is in ugly weather, Lady Fleetwood,' said
Gower.

'It is my first,' she answered.

How the marriage came about, how the separation, could not be asked and
was not related.

'Our district is not all London, my dear lady,' said Mr. Woodseer.
'Good hearts are here, as elsewhere, and as many, if one looks behind the
dirt.  I have found it since I laboured amongst them, now twenty years.
Unwashed human nature, though it is natural to us to wash, is the most
human, we find.'

Gower questioned the naturalness of human nature's desire to wash; and
they wrangled good-humouredly, Carinthia's eyes dwelling on them each in
turn; until Mr. Woodseer, pursuing the theme started by him to interest
her, spoke of consolations derived from his labours here, in exchange for
the loss of his mountains.  Her face lightened.

'You love the mountains?'

'I am a son of the mountains.'

'Ah, I love them!  Father called me a daughter of the mountains.  I was
born in the mountains.  I was leaving my mountains on the day, I think it
yesterday, when I met this gentleman who is your son.'

'A glorious day it was!' Gower exclaimed.

'It was a day of great glory for me,' said Carinthia.  'Your foot did not
pain you for long?'

'The length of two pipes.  You were with your brother.'

'With my brother.  My brother has married a most beautiful lady.  He is
now travelling his happy time--my Chillon !'

There came a radiance on her under-eyelids.  There was no weeping.

Struck by the contrast between the two simultaneous honeymoons, and a
vision of the high-spirited mountain girl, seen in this place a young
bride seeking her husband, Gower Woodseer could have performed that
unphilosophical part.  He had to shake himself.  She seemed really a
soaring bird brought down by the fowler.

Lord Fleetwood's manner of abandoning her was the mystery.

Gower stood waiting for her initiative, when the minister interposed:
'There are books, books of our titled people-the Peers, books of the
Peerage.  They would supply the address.  My son will discover where to
examine them.  He will find the address.  Most of the great noblemen have
a London house.'

'My husband has a house in London,' Carinthia said.

'I know him, to some degree,' said Gower.

She remarked: 'I have heard that you do.'

Her lips were shut, as to any hint at his treatment of her.

Gower went into the shop to speak with Madge.  The girl was talking in
the business tone to customers; she finished her commission hurriedly and
joined him on the pavement by the doorstep.  Her voice was like the
change for the swing of a door from street to temple.

'You've seen how brave she is, sir.  She has things to bear.  Never
cries, never frets.  Her marriage day--leastways .  .  .  I can't, no
girl can tell.  A great nobleman, yes.  She waited, believing in him;
she does.  She hasn't spoken to me of what she's had to bear.  I don't
know; I guess; I'm sure I'm right--and him a man!  Girls learn to know
men, call them gentlemen or sweeps.  She thinks she has only to meet him
to persuade him she 's fit to be loved by him.  She thinks of love.
Would he--our tongues are tied except among ourselves to a sister.
Leaves her by herself, with only me, after--it knocks me dumb!  Many a
man commits a murder wouldn't do that.  She could force him to--no, it
isn't a house she wants, she wants him.  He's her husband, Mr. Woodseer.
You will do what you can to help; I judge by your father.  I and Sarah
'll slave for her to be as comfortable--as we--can make her; we can't
give her what she 's used to.  I shall count the hours.'

'You sold me apples when your head was just above the counter,' said
Gower.

'Did I?--you won't lose time, sir?' she rejoined.  'Her box is down at
the beastly inn in Kent.  Kind people, I dare say; their bill was paid
any extent, they said.  And he might do as he liked in it--enter it like
a thief, if it pleased him, and off like one, and they no wiser.  She
walked to his big house Esslemont for news of him.  And I'm not a
snivelling wench either; but she speaks of him a way to make a girl
drink her tears, if they ain't to be let fall.'

'But you had a victory down there,' Gower hinted congratulations.

'Ah,' said she.

'Christopher Ines is all right now?'

'I've as good as lost my good name for Kit Ines, Mr. Woodseer.'

'Not with my dad, Madge.'

'The minister reads us at the heart.  Shall we hear the street of his
house in London before night?'

'I may be late.'

'I'll be up, any hour, for a rap at the shutters.  I want to take her to
the house early next morning.  She won't mind the distance.  She lies in
bed, her eyes shut or open, never sleeping, hears any mouse.  It
shouldn't go on, if we can do a thing to help.'

'I'm off,' said Gower, unwontedly vexed at his empty pocket, that could
not offer the means for conveyance to a couple of young women.

The dark-browed girl sent her straight eyes at him.  They pushed him to
hasten.  On second thoughts, he stopped and hailed her; he was moved to
confirm an impression of this girl's features.

His mind was directed to the business burning behind them, honestly
enough, as soon as he had them in sight again.

'I ought to have the address of some of her people, in case,' he said.

'She won't go to her uncle, I 'm sure of that,' said Madge.  'He 's a
lord and can't be worried.  It 's her husband to find first.'

'If he's to be found!--he's a lord, too.  Has she no other relatives or
friends?'

'She loves her brother.  He's an officer.  He's away on honeymoon.
There 's an admiral down Hampshire way, a place I've been near and seen.
I'd not have you go to any of them, sir, without trying all we can do to
find Lord Fleetwood.  It's Admiral Fakenham she speaks of; she's fond of
him.  She's not minded to bother any of her friends about herself.'

'I shall see you to-night,' said Gower, and set his face Westward,
remembering that his father had named Caermarthen as her mother's
birthplace.

Just in that tone of hers do Welshwomen talk of their country; of its
history, when at home, of its mountains, when exiled: and in a language
like hers, bare of superlatives to signify an ardour conveyed by the fire
of the breath.  Her quick devotion to a lady exciting enthusiasm through
admiring pity for the grace of a much-tried quiet sweetness, was
explained; apart from other reasons, feminine or hidden, which might
exist.  Only a Welsh girl would be so quick and all in it, with a voice
intimating a heated cauldron under her mouth.  None but a Welsh-blooded
girl, risking her good name to follow and nurse the man she considered a
hero, would carry her head to look virgin eyes as she did.  One could
swear to them, Gower thought.  Contact with her spirited him out of his
mooniness.

He had the Cymric and Celtic respect of character; which puts aside the
person's environments to face the soul.  He was also an impressionable
fellow among his fellows, a philosopher only at his leisure, in his
courted solitudes.  Getting away some strides from this girl of the
drilling voice,--the shudder-voice, he phrased it,--the lady for whom she
pleaded came clearer into his view and gradually absorbed him; though it
was an emulation with the girl Madge, of which he was a trifle conscious,
that drove him to do his work of service in the directest manner.  He
then fancied the girl had caught something of the tone of her lady: the
savage intensity or sincerity; and he brooded on Carinthia's position,
the mixture of the astounding and the woful in her misadventure.  One
could almost laugh at our human fate, to think of a drop off the radiant
mountain heights upon a Whitechapel greengrocer's shop, gathering the
title of countess midway.

But nothing of the ludicrous touched her; no, and if we bring reason to
scan our laugh at pure humanity, it is we who are in the place of the
ridiculous, for doing what reason disavows.  Had he not named her,
Carinthia, Saint and Martyr, from a first perusal of her face?  And Lord
Fleetwood had read and repeated it.  Lord Fleetwood had become the
instrument to martyrize her?  That might be; there was a hoard of bad
stuff in his composition besides the precious: and this was a nobleman
owning enormous wealth, who could vitiate himself by disposing of a
multitude of men and women to serve his will, a shifty will.  Wealth
creates the magician, and may breed the fiend within him.  In the hands
of a young man, wealth is an invitation to devilry.  Gower's idea of the
story of Carinthia inclined to charge Lord Fleetwood with every possible
false dealing.  He then quashed the charge, and decided to wait for
information.

At the second of the aristocratic Clubs of London's West, into which he
stepped like an easy member, the hall-porter did not examine his clothing
from German hat to boots, and gave him Lord Fleetwood's town address.
He could tell Madge at night by the door of the shuttered shop, that Lord
Fleetwood had gone down to Wales.

'It means her having to wait,' she said.  'The minister has been to the
coach-office, to order up her box from that inn.  He did it in his name;
they can't refuse; no money's owing.  She must have a change.  Sally has
fifteen pounds locked up in case of need.'

Sally's capacity and economy fetched the penniless philosopher a slap.

'You've taken to this lady,' he said.

'She held my hand, while Kit Ines was at his work; and I was new to her,
and a prize-fighter's lass, they call me:--upon the top of that
nobleman's coach, where he made me sit, behind her, to see the fight;
and she his wedded lady that morning.  A queer groom.  He may keep Kit
Ines from drink, he's one of you men, and rides over anything in his way.
I can't speak about it; I could swear it before a judge, from what I
know.  Those Rundles at that inn don't hear anything it suits him to do.
All the people down in those parts are slaves to him.  And I thought he
was a real St. George before,--yes, ready I was to kiss the ground his
feet crossed.  If you could, it's Chinningfold near where Admiral
Fakenham lives, down Hampshire way.  Her friends ought to hear what's
happened to her.  They'll find her in a queer place.  She might go to the
minister's.  I believe she's happier with us girls.'

Gower pledged his word to start for Chinningfold early as the light next
day.  He liked the girl the better, in an amicable fashion, now that his
nerves had got free of the transient spell of her kettle tone--the hardly
varied one note of a heart boiling with sisterly devotion to a misused
stranger of her sex;--and, after the way of his race, imagination sprang
up in him, at the heels of the quieted senses, releasing him from the
personal and physical to grasp the general situation and place the
protagonist foremost.

He thought of Carinthia, with full vision of her.  Some wrong had been
done, or some violation of the right, to guess from the girl Madge's
molten words in avoidance of the very words.  It implied--though it might
be but one of Love's shrewder discords--such suspected traitorous dealing
of a man with their sister woman as makes the world of women all woman
toward her.  They can be that, and their being so illuminates their
hidden sentiments in relation to the mastering male, whom they uphold.

But our uninformed philosopher was merely picking up scraps of sheddings
outside the dark wood of the mystery they were to him, and playing
imagination upon them.  This primary element of his nature soon enthroned
his chosen lady above their tangled obscurities.  Beneath her tranquil
beams, with the rapture of the knowledge that her name on earth was
Livia, he threaded East London's thoroughfares,--on a morning when day
and night were made one by fog, to journey down to Chinningfold, by
coach, in the service of the younger Countess of Fleetwood, whose right
to the title he did not doubt, though it directed surprise movements at
his understanding from time to time.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Cock-sure has crowed low by sunset
Drink is their death's river, rolling them on helpless
Father and she were aware of one another without conversing
Fun, at any cost, is the one object worth a shot
He was the prisoner of his word
Heartily she thanked the girl for the excuse to cry
Hearts that make one soul do not separately count their gifts
Life is the burlesque of young dreams
Make a girl  drink her tears, if they ain't to be let fall
On a morning when day and night were made one by fog
Poetic romance is delusion
Push me to condense my thoughts to a tight ball
She endured meekly, when there was no meekness
She seemed really a soaring bird brought down by the fowler
She stood with a dignity that the word did not express
There is no driver like stomach
Touch sin and you accommodate yourself to its vileness
You played for gain, and that was a licenced thieving




End of this Project Gutenberg Etext of The Amazing Marriage, v2
by George Meredith






THE AMAZING MARRIAGE

By GEORGE MEREDITH

1895



BOOK 3.

XX.       STUDIES IN FOG, GOUT, AN OLD SEAMAN, A LOVELY SERPENT, AND THE
          MORAL EFFECTS THAT MAY COME OF A BORROWED SHIRT
XXI.      IN WHICH WE HAVE FURTHER GLIMPSES OF THE WONDROUS MECHANISM OF
          OUR YOUNGER MAN
XXII.     A RIGHT-MINDED GREAT LADY
XXIII.    IN DAME GOSSIP'S VEIN
XXIV.     A KIDNAPPING AND NO GREAT HARM
XXV.      THE PHILOSOPHER MAN OF ACTION
XXVI.     AFTER SOME FENCING THE DAME PASSES OUR GUARD
XXVII.    WE DESCEND INTO A STEAMER'S ENGINE-ROOM
XXVIII.   BY CONCESSIONS TO MISTRESS GOSSIP A FURTHER INTRUSION IS
          AVERTED



CHAPTER XX

STUDIES IN FOG, GOUT, AN OLD SEAMAN, A LOVELY SERPENT, AND THE MORAL
EFFECTS THAT MAY COME OF A BORROWED SHIRT

Money of his father's enabled Gower to take the coach; and studies in
fog, from the specked brown to the woolly white, and the dripping torn,
were proposed to the traveller, whose preference of Nature's face did not
arrest his observation of her domino and petticoats; across which blank
sheets he curiously read backward, that he journeyed by the aid of his
father's hard-earned, ungrudged piece of gold.  Without it, he would have
been useless in this case of need.  The philosopher could starve with
equanimity, and be the stronger.  But one had, it seemed here clearly, to
put on harness and trudge along a line, if the unhappy were to have one's
help.  Gradual experiences of his business among his fellows were
teaching an exercised mind to learn in regions where minds unexercised
were doctorial giants beside it.

The study of gout was offered at Chinningfold.  Admiral Fakenham's butler
refused at first to take a name to his master.  Gower persisted, stating
the business of his mission; and in spite of the very suspicious glib
good English spoken by a man wearing such a hat and suit, the butler was
induced to consult Mrs. Carthew.

She sprang up alarmed.  After having seen the young lady happily married
and off with her lordly young husband, the arrival of a messenger from
the bride gave a stir the wrong way to her flowing recollections; the
scenes and incidents she had smothered under her love of the comfortable
stood forth appallingly.  The messenger, the butler said, was no
gentleman.  She inspected Gower and heard him speak.  An anomaly had come
to the house; for he had the language of a gentleman, the appearance of a
nondescript; he looked indifferent, he spoke sympathetically; and he was
frank as soon as the butler was out of hearing.  In return for the
compliment, she invited him to her sitting-room.  The story of the young
countess, whom she had seen driven away by her husband from the church in
a coach and four, as being now destitute, praying to see her friends, in
the Whitechapel of London--the noted haunt of thieves and outcasts,
bankrupts and the abandoned; set her asking for the first time, who was
the man with dreadful countenance inside the coach?  A previously
disregarded horror of a man.  She went trembling to the admiral, though
his health was delicate, his temper excitable.  It was, she considered,
an occasion for braving the doctor's interdict.

Gower was presently summoned to the chamber where Admiral Fakenham
reclined on cushions in an edifice of an arm-chair.  He told a plain
tale.  Its effect was to straighten the admiral's back, and enlarge in
grey glass a pair of sea-blue eyes.  And, 'What's that?  Whitechapel?'
the admiral exclaimed,--at high pitch, far above his understanding.
The particulars were repeated, whereupon the sick-room shook with,
'Greengrocer?' He stunned himself with another of the monstrous points in
his pet girl's honeymoon: 'A prizefight?'

To refresh a saving incredulity, he took a closer view of the messenger.
Gower's habiliments were those of the 'queer fish,' the admiral saw.  But
the meeting at Carlsruhe was recalled to him, and there was a worthy
effort to remember it.  'Prize-fight!--Greengrocer!  Whitechapel!' he
rang the changes rather more moderately; till, swelling and purpling, he
cried: 'Where's the husband?'

That was the emissary's question likewise.

'If I could have found him, sir, I should not have troubled you.'

'Disappeared?  Plays the man of his word, then plays the madman!  Prize-
fight the first day of her honeymoon?  Good Lord!  Leaves her at the
inn?'

'She was left.'

'When was she left?'

'As soon as the fight was over--as far as I understand.'

The admiral showered briny masculine comments on that bridegroom.

'Her brother's travelling somewhere in the Pyrenees--married my daughter.
She has an uncle, a hermit.'  He became pale.  'I must do it.  The rascal
insults us all.  Flings her off the day he married her!  It 's a slap in
the face to all of us.  You are acquainted with the lady, sir.  Would you
call her a red-haired girl?'

'Red-gold of the ballads; chestnut-brown, with threads of fire.'

'She has the eyes for a man to swear by.  I feel the loss of her, I can
tell you.  She was wine and no penalty to me.  Is she much broken under
it?--if I 'm to credit .  .  .  I suppose I must.  It floors me.'

Admiral Baldwin's frosty stare returned on him.  Gower caught an image of
it, as comparable, without much straining, to an Arctic region smitten by
the beams.

'Nothing breaks her courage,' he said.

'To be sure, my poor dear!  Who could have guessed when she left my house
she was on her way to a prizefight and a greengrocer's in Whitechapel.
But the dog's not mad, though his bite 's bad; he 's an eccentric
mongrel.  He wants the whip; ought to have had it regularly from his
first breeching.  He shall whistle for her when he repents; and he will,
mark me.  This gout here will be having a snap at the vitals if I don't
start to-night.  Oblige me, half a minute.'

The admiral stretched his hand for an arm to give support, stood, and
dropped into the chair, signifying a fit of giddiness in the word 'Head.'

Before the stupor had passed, Mrs. Carthew entered, anxious lest the
admittance of a messenger of evil to her invalid should have been an
error of judgement.  The butler had argued it with her.  She belonged to
the list of persons appointed to cut life's thread when it strains, their
general kindness being so liable to misdirection.

Gower left the room and went into the garden.  He had never seen a death;
and the admiral's peculiar pallor intimated events proper to days of cold
mist and a dripping stillness.  How we go, was the question among his
problems:--if we are to go!  his youthful frame insistingly added.

The fog down a wet laurel-walk contracted his mind with the chilling of
his blood, and he felt that he would have to see the thing if he was to
believe in it.  Of course he believed, but life throbbed rebelliously,
and a picture of a desk near a lively fire-grate, books and pen and
paper, and a piece of writing to be approved of by the Hesper of ladies,
held ground with a pathetic heroism against the inevitable.  He got his
wits to the front by walking faster; and then thought of the young
countess and the friend she might be about to lose.  She could number her
friends on her fingers.  Admiral Fakenham's exclamations of the name of
the place where she now was, conveyed an inky idea of the fall she had
undergone.  Counting her absent brother, with himself, his father, and
the two Whitechapel girls, it certainly was an unexampled fall, to say of
her, that they and those two girls had become by the twist of
circumstances the most serviceable of her friends.

Her husband was the unriddled riddle we have in the wealthy young lord,--
burning to possess, and making, tatters of all he grasped, the moment it
was his own.  Glints of the devilish had shot from him at the
gamingtables,--fine haunts for the study of our lower man.  He could be
magnificent in generosity; he had little humaneness.  He coveted beauty
in women hungrily, and seemed to be born hostile to them; or so Gower
judged by the light of the later evidence on unconsidered antecedent
observations of him.  Why marry her to cast her off instantly?  The crude
philosopher asked it as helplessly as the admiral.  And, further, what
did the girl Madge mean by the drop of her voice to a hum of enforced
endurance under injury, like the furnace behind an iron door?  Older men
might have understood, as he was aware; he might have guessed, only he
had the habit of scattering meditation upon the game of hawk and fowl.

Dame Gossip boils.  Her one idea of animation is to have her dramatis
persona in violent motion, always the biggest foremost; and, indeed, that
is the way to make them credible, for the wind they raise and the
succession of collisions.  The fault of the method is, that they do not
instruct; so the breath is out of them before they are put aside; for the
uninstructive are the humanly deficient: they remain with us like the
tolerated old aristocracy, which may not govern, and is but socially
seductive.  The deuteragonist or secondary person can at times tell us
more of them than circumstances at furious heat will help them to reveal;
and the Dame will have him only as an index-post.  Hence her endless
ejaculations over the mystery of Life, the inscrutability of character,
--in a plain world, in the midst of such readable people!  To preserve
Romance (we exchange a sky for a ceiling if we let it go), we must be
inside the heads of our people as well as the hearts, more than shaking
the kaleidoscope of hurried spectacles, in days of a growing activity of
the head.

Gower Woodseer could not know that he was drawn on to fortune and the
sight of his Hesper by Admiral Fakenham's order that the visitor was to
stay at his house until he should be able to quit his bed, and journey
with him to London, doctor or no doctor.  The doctor would not hear of
it.  The admiral threatened it every night for the morning, every morning
for the night; and Gower had to submit to postponements balefully
affecting his linen.  Remonstrance was not to be thought of; for at a
mere show of reluctance the courtly admiral flushed, frowned, and beat
the bed where he lay, a gouty volcano.  Gower's one shirt was passing
through the various complexions, and had approached the Nubian on its way
to negro.  His natural candour checked the downward course.  He mentioned
to Mrs. Carthew, with incidental gravity, on a morning at breakfast, that
this article of his attire 'was beginning to resemble London snow.'  She
was amused; she promised him a change more resembling country snow.
'It will save me from buttoning so high up,' he said, as he thanked her.
She then remembered the daily increase of stiffness in his figure: and a
reflection upon his patient waiting, and simpleness, and lexicographer
speech to expose his minor needs, touched her unused sense of humour on
the side where it is tender in women, from being motherly.

In consequence, she spoke of him with a pleading warmth to the Countess
Livia, who had come down to see the admiral 'concerning an absurd but
annoying rumour running over London.'  Gower was out for a walk.  He knew
of the affair, Mrs. Carthew said, for an introduction to her excuses of
his clothing.

'But I know the man,' said Livia.  'Lord Fleetwood picked him up
somewhere, and brought him to us.  Clever: Why, is he here?'

'He is here, sent to the admiral, as I understand, my lady.'

'Sent by whom?'

Having but a weak vocabulary to defend a delicate position, Mrs. Carthew
stuttered into evasions, after the way of ill-armed persons; and naming
herself a stranger to the circumstances, she feebly suggested that the
admiral ought not to be disturbed before the doctor's next visit; Mr.
Woodseer had been allowed to sit by his bed yesterday only for ten
minutes, to divert him with his talk.  She protected in this wretched
manner the poor gentleman she sacrificed and emitted such a smell of
secresy, that Livia wrote three words on her card, for it to be taken to
Admiral Baldwin at once.  Mrs. Carthew supplicated faintly; she was
unheeded.

The Countess of Fleetwood mounted the stairs--to descend them with the
knowledge of her being the Dowager Countess of Fleetwood!  Henrietta had
spoken of the Countess of Fleetwood's hatred of the title of Dowager.
But when Lady Fleetwood had the fact from the admiral, would she forbear
to excite him?  If she repudiated it, she would provoke him to fire 'one
of his broadsides,'--as they said in the family, to assert its and that
might exhaust him; and there was peril in that.  And who was guilty?
Mrs. Carthew confessed her guilt, asking how it could have been avoided.
She made appeal to Gower on his return, transfixing him.

Not only is he no philosopher who has an idol, he has to learn that he
cannot think rationally; his due sense of weight and measure is lost, the
choice of his thoughts as well.  He was in the house with his devoutly,
simply worshipped, pearl of women, and his whole mind fell to work
without ado upon the extravagant height of the admiral's shirt-collar
cutting his ears.  The very beating of his heart was perplexed to know
whether it was for rapture or annoyance.  As a result he was but
histrionically master of himself when the Countess Livia or the nimbus of
the lady appeared in the room.

She received his bow; she directed Mrs. Carthew to have the doctor
summoned immediately.  The remorseful woman flew.

'Admiral Fakenham is very ill, Mr. Woodseer, he has had distracting news.
Oh, no, the messenger is not blamed.  You are Lord Fleetwood's friend and
will not allow him to be prejudged.  He will be in town shortly.  I know
him well, you know him; and could you hear him accused of cruelty--and to
a woman?  He is the soul of chivalry.  So, in his way, is the admiral.
If he were only more patient!  Let us wait for Lord Fleetwood's version.
I am certain it will satisfy me.  The admiral wishes you to step up to
him.  Be very quiet; you will be; consent to everything.  I was unaware
of his condition: the things I heard were incredible.  I hope the doctor
will not delay.  Now go.  Beg to retire soon.'

Livia spoke under her breath; she had fears.

Admiral Baldwin lay in his bed, submitting to a nurse-woman-sign of
extreme exhaustion.  He plucked strength from the sight of Gower and
bundled the woman out of the room, muttering: 'Kill myself?  Not half so
quick as they'd do it.  I can't rest for that Whitechapel of yours.
Please fetch pen and paper: it's a letter.'

The letter began, 'Dear Lady Arpington.'

The dictation of it came in starts.  Atone moment it seemed as if life's
ending shook the curtains on our stage and were about to lift.  An old
friend in the reader of the letter would need no excuse for its jerky
brevity.  It said that his pet girl, Miss Kirby, was married to the Earl
of Fleetwood in the first week of last month, and was now to be found at
a shop No. 45 Longways, Whitechapel; that the writer was ill, unable to
stir; that he would be in London within eight-and-forty hours at
furthest.  He begged Lady Arpington to send down to the place and have
the young countess fetched to her, and keep her until he came.

Admiral Baldwin sat up to sign the letter.

'Yes, and write "miracles happen when the devil's abroad"--done it !' he
said, sinking back.  'Now seal, you'll find wax--the ring at my watch-
chain.'

He sighed, as it were the sound of his very last; he lay like a sleeper
twitched by a dream.  There had been a scene with Livia.  The dictating
of the letter took his remainder of strength out of him.

Gower called in the nurse, and went downstairs.  He wanted the address of
Lady Arpington's town house.

'You have a letter for her?' said Livia, and held her hand for it in a
way not to be withstood.

'There's no superscription,' he remarked.

'I will see to that, Mr. Woodseer.'

'I fancy I am bound, Lady Fleetwood.'

'By no means.'  She touched his arm.  'You are Lord Fleetwood's friend.'

A slight convulsion of the frame struck the admiral's shirt-collar at his
ears; it virtually prostrated him under foot of a lady so benign in
overlooking the spectacle he presented.  Still, he considered; he had
wits alive enough, just to perceive a duty.

'The letter was entrusted to me, Lady Fleetwood.'

'You are afraid to entrust it to the post?'

'I was thinking of delivering it myself in town.'

'You will entrust it to me.'

'Anything on earth of my own.'

'The treasure would be valued.  This you confide to my care.'

'It is important.'

'No.'

'Indeed it is.'

'Say that it is, then.  It is quite safe with me.  It may be important
that it should not be delivered.  Are you not Lord Fleetwood's friend?
Lady Arpington is not so very, very prominent in the list with you and
me.  Besides, I don't think she has come to town yet.  She generally sees
out the end of the hunting season.  Leave the letter to me: it shall go.
You, with your keen observation missing nothing, have seen that my uncle
has not his whole judgement at present.  There are two sides to a case.
Lord Fleetwood's friend will know that it would be unfair to offer him up
to his enemies while he is absent.  Things going favourably here, I drive
back to town to-morrow, and I hope you will accept a seat in my
carriage.'

He delivered his courtliest; he was riding on cloud.

They talked of Baden.  His honourable surrender of her defeated purse was
a subject for gentle humour with her, venturesome compliment with him.
He spoke well; and though his hands were clean of Sir Meeson Corby's
reproach of them, the caricature of presentable men blushed absurdly and
seemed uneasy in his monstrous collar.  The touching of him again would
not be required to set him pacing to her steps.  His hang of the head
testified to the unerring stamp of a likeness Captain Abrane could affix
with a stroke: he looked the fiddler over his bow, playing wonderfully to
conceal the crack of a string.  The merit of being one of her army of
admirers was accorded to him.  The letter to Lady Arpington was retained.

Gower deferred the further mention of the letter until a visit to the
admiral's chamber should furnish an excuse; and he had to wait for it.
Admiral Baldwin's condition was becoming ominous.  He sent messages
downstairs by the doctor, forbidding his guest's departure until they two
could make the journey together next day.  The tortured and blissful
young man, stripped of his borrowed philosopher's cloak, hung conscience-
ridden in this delicious bower, which was perceptibly an antechamber of
the vaults, offering him the study he thirsted for, shrank from, and
mixed with his cup of amorous worship.




CHAPTER XXI

IN WHICH WE HAVE FURTHER GLIMPSES OF THE WONDROUS MECHANISM OF OUR
YOUNGER MAN

The report of Admiral Baldwin Fakenham as having died in the arms of a
stranger visiting the house, hit nearer the mark than usual.  He yielded
his last breath as Gower Woodseer was lowering him to his pillow, shortly
after a husky whisper of the letter to Lady Arpington; and that was one
of Gower's crucial trials.  It condemned him, for the pacifying of a
dying man, to the murmur and shuffle, which was a lie; and the lie burnt
him, contributed to the brand on his race.  He and his father upheld a
solitary bare staff, where the Cambrian flag had flown, before their
people had been trampled in mire, to do as the worms.  His loathing of
any shadow of the lie was a protest on behalf of Welsh blood against an
English charge, besides the passion for spiritual cleanliness: without
which was no comprehension, therefore no enjoyment, of Nature possible to
him.  For Nature is the Truth.

He begged the countess to let him have the letter; he held to the
petition, with supplications; he spoke of his pledged word, his honour;
and her countenance did not deny to such an object as she beheld the
right to a sense of honour.  'We all have the sentiment, I hope, Mr.
Woodseer,' she said, stupefying the worshipper, who did not see it
manifested.  There was a look of gentle intimacy, expressive of common
grounds between them, accompanying the dead words.  Mistress of the
letter, and the letter safe under lock, the admiral dead, she had not to
bestow a touch of her hand on his coatsleeve in declining to return it.
A face languidly and benevolently querulous was bent on him, when he,
so clever a man, resumed his very silly petition.

She was moon out of cloud at a change of the theme.  Gower journeyed to
London without the letter, intoxicated, and conscious of poison;
enamoured of it, and straining for health.  He had to reflect at the
journey's end, that he had picked up nothing on the road, neither a thing
observed nor a thing imagined; he was a troubled pool instead of a
flowing river.

The best help to health for him was a day in his father's house.  We are
perpetually at our comparisons of ourselves with others; and they are
mostly profitless; but the man carrying his religious light, to light the
darkest ways of his fellows, and keeping good cheer, as though the heart
of him ran a mountain water through the grimy region, plucked at Gower
with an envy to resemble him in practice.  His philosophy, too,
reproached him for being outshone.  Apart from his philosophy, he stood
confessed a bankrupt; and it had dwindled to near extinction.  Adoration
of a woman takes the breath out of philosophy.  And if one had only to
say sheer donkey, he consenting to be driven by her!  One has to say
worse in this case; for the words are, liar and traitor.

Carinthia's attitude toward his father conduced to his emulous respect
for the old man, below whom, and indeed below the roadway of ordinary
principles hedged with dull texts, he had strangely fallen.  The sight of
her lashed him.  She made it her business or it was her pleasure to go
the rounds beside Mr. Woodseer visiting his poor people.  She spoke of
the scenes she witnessed, and threw no stress on the wretchedness, having
only the wish to assist in ministering.  Probably the great wretchedness
bubbling over the place blunted her feeling of loss at the word of
Admiral Baldwin's end; her bosom sprang up: 'He was next to father,'
was all she said; and she soon reverted to this and that house of the
lodgings of poverty.  She had descended on the world.  There was of
course a world outside Whitechapel, but Whitechapel was hot about her;
the nests of misery, the sharp note of want in the air, tricks of an
urchin who had amused her.

As to the place itself, she had no judgement to pronounce, except that:
'They have no mornings here'; and the childish remark set her quivering
on her heights, like one seen through a tear, in Gower's memory.  Scarce
anything of her hungry impatience to meet her husband was visible: she
had come to London to meet him; she hoped to meet him soon: before her
brother's return, she could have added.  She mentioned the goodness of
Sarah Winch in not allowing that she was a burden to support.  Money and
its uses had impressed her; the quantity possessed by some, the utter
need of it for the first of human purposes by others.  Her speech was not
of so halting or foreign an English.  She grew rapidly wherever she was
planted.

Speculation on the conduct of her husband, empty as it might be, was
necessitated in Gower.  He pursued it, and listened to his father
similarly at work: 'A young lady fit for any station, the kindest of
souls, a born charitable human creature, void of pride, near in all she
--does and thinks to the Shaping Hand, why should her husband forsake her
on the day of their nuptials.

She is most gracious; the simplicity of an infant.  Can you imagine the
doing of an injury by a man to a woman like her?'

Then it was that Gower screwed himself to say:

'Yes, I can imagine it, I'm doing it myself.  I shall be doing it till
I've written a letter and paid a visit.'

He took a meditative stride or two in the room, thinking without
revulsion of the Countess Livia under a similitude of the bell of the
plant henbane, and that his father had immunity from temptation because
of the insensibility to beauty.  Out of which he passed to the writing of
the letter to Lord Fleetwood, informing his lordship that he intended
immediately to deliver a message to the Marchioness of Arpington from
Admiral Baldwin Fakenham, in relation to the Countess of Fleetwood.  A
duty was easily done by Gower when he had surmounted the task of
conceiving his resolution to do it; and this task, involving an offence
to the Lady Livia and intrusion of his name on a nobleman's recollection,
ranked next in severity to the chopping off of his fingers by a man
suspecting them of the bite of rabies.

An interview with Lady Arpington was granted him the following day.

She was a florid, aquiline, loud-voiced lady, evidently having no seat
for her wonderments, after his account of the origin of his acquaintance
with the admiral had quieted her suspicions.  The world had only to stand
beside her, and it would hear what she had heard.  She rushed to the
conclusion that Lord Fleetwood had married a person of no family.

'Really, really, that young man's freaks appear designed for the express
purpose of heightening our amazement!' she exclaimed.  'He won't easily
get beyond a wife in the east of London, at a shop; but there's no
knowing.  Any wish of Admiral Baldwin Fakenham's I hold sacred.  At least
I can see for myself.  You can't tell me more of the facts?  If Lord
Fleetwood's in town, I will call him here at once.  I will drive down to
this address you give me.  She is a civil person?'

'Her breeding is perfect,' said Gower.

'Perfect breeding, you say?' Lady Arpington was reduced to a murmur.
She considered the speaker: his outlandish garb, his unprotesting self-
possession.  He spoke good English by habit, her ear told her.  She was
of an eminence to judge of a man impartially, even to the sufferance of
an opinion from him, on a subject that lesser ladies would have denied to
his clothing.  Outwardly simple, naturally frank, though a tangle of the
complexities inwardly, he was a touchstone for true aristocracy, as the
humblest who bear the main elements of it must be.  Certain humorous
turns in his conversation won him an amicable smile when he bowed to
leave: they were the needed finish of a favourable impression.

One day later the earl arrived in town, read Gower Woodseer's brief
words, and received the consequently expected summons, couched in a great
lady's plain imperative.  She was connected with his family on the
paternal side.

He went obediently; not unwillingly, let the deputed historian of the
Marriage, turning over documents, here say.  He went to Lady Arpington
disposed for marital humaneness and jog-trot harmony, by condescension;
equivalent to a submitting to the drone of an incessant psalm at the drum
of the ear.  He was, in fact, rather more than inclined that way.  When
very young, at the age of thirteen, a mood of religious fervour had
spiritualized the dulness of Protestant pew and pulpit for him.  Another
fit of it, in the Roman Catholic direction, had proposed, during his
latest dilemma, to relieve him of the burden of his pledged word.  He had
plunged for a short space into the rapturous contemplation of a monastic
life--'the clean soul for the macerated flesh,' as that fellow Woodseer
said once: and such as his friend, the Roman Catholic Lord Feltre,
moodily talked of getting in his intervals.  He had gone down to a young
and novel trial establishment of English penitents in the forest of a
Midland county, and had watched and envied, and seen the escape from a
lifelong bondage to the 'beautiful Gorgon,' under cover of a white
flannel frock.  The world pulled hard, and he gave his body into chains
of a woman, to redeem his word.

But there was a plea on behalf of this woman.  The life she offered
might have psalmic iteration; the dead monotony of it in prospect did,
nevertheless, exorcise a devil.  Carinthia promised, it might seem to
chase and keep the black beast out of him permanently, as she could,
he now conceived: for since the day of the marriage with her, the devil
inhabiting him had at least been easier, 'up in a corner.'

He held an individual memory of his bride, rose-veiled, secret to them
both, that made them one, by subduing him.  For it was a charm; an actual
feminine, an unanticipated personal, charm; past reach of tongue to name,
wordless in thought.  There, among the folds of the incense vapours of
our heart's holy of holies, it hung; and it was rare, it was distinctive
of her, and alluring, if one consented to melt to it, and accepted for
compensation the exorcising of a devil.

Oh, but no mere devil by title!--a very devil.  It was alert and frisky,
flushing, filling the thin cold idea of Henrietta at a thought; and in
the thought it made Carinthia's intimate charm appear as no better than a
thing to enrich a beggar, while he knew that kings could never command
the charm.  Not love, only the bathing in Henrietta's incomparable beauty
and the desire to be, desire to have been, the casket of it, broke the
world to tempest and lightnings at a view of Henrietta the married woman
--married to the brother of the woman calling him husband:--'It is my
husband.'  The young tyrant of wealth could have avowed that he did not
love Henrietta; but not the less was he in the swing of a whirlwind at
the hint of her loving the man she had married.  Did she?  It might be
tried.

She?  That Henrietta is one of the creatures who love pleasure, love
flattery, love their beauty: they cannot love a man.  Or the love is a
ship that will not sail a sea.

Now, if the fact were declared and attested, if her shallowness were seen
proved, one might get free of the devil she plants in the breast.
Absolutely to despise her would be release, and it would allow of his
tasting Carinthia's charm, reluctantly acknowledged; not 'money of the
country' beside that golden Henrietta's.

Yet who can say?--women are such deceptions.  Often their fairest,
apparently sweetest, when brought to the keenest of the tests, are
graceless; or worse, artificially consonant; in either instance barren of
the poetic.  Thousands of the confidently expectant among men have been
unbewitched; a lamentable process; and the grimly reticent and the loudly
discursive are equally eloquent of the pretty general disillusion.  How
they loathe and tear the mask of the sham attraction that snatched them
to the hag yoke, and fell away to show its grisly horrors within the
round of the month, if not the second enumeration of twelve by the clock!
Fleetwood had heard certain candid seniors talk, delivering their minds
in superior appreciation of unpretentious boor wenches, nature's
products, not esteemed by him.  Well, of a truth, she--'Red Hair and
Rugged Brows,' as the fellow Woodseer had called her, in alternation with
'Mountain Face to Sun'--she at the unveiling was gentle, surpassingly;
graceful in the furnace of the trial.  She wore through the critic ordeal
his burning sensitiveness to grace and delicacy cast about a woman, and
was rather better than not withered by it.

On the borders between maidenly and wifely, she, a thing of flesh like
other daughters of earth, had impressed her sceptical lord, inclining to
contempt of her and detestation of his bargain, as a flitting hue,
ethereal, a transfiguration of earthliness in the core of the earthly
furnace.  And how?--but that it must have been the naked shining forth of
her character, startled to show itself:--'It is my husband':--it must
have been love.

The love that they versify, and strum on guitars, and go crazy over, and
end by roaring at as the delusion; this common bloom of the ripeness of a
season; this would never have utterly captured a sceptic, to vanquish him
in his mastery, snare him in her surrender.  It must have been the
veritable passion: a flame kept alive by vestal ministrants in the
yewwood of the forest of Old Romance; planted only in the breasts of very
favourite maidens.  Love had eyes, love had a voice that night,-love was
the explicable magic lifting terrestrial to seraphic.  Though, true, she
had not Henrietta's golden smoothness of beauty.  Henrietta, illumined
with such a love, would outdo all legends, all dreams of the tale of
love.  Would she?  For credulous men she would be golden coin of the
currency.  She would not have a particular wild flavour: charm as of the
running doe that has taken a dart and rolls an eye to burst the hunter's
heart with pity.

Fleetwood went his way to Lady Arpington almost complacently, having
fought and laid his wilder self.  He might be likened to the doctor's
patient entering the chemist's shop, with a prescription for a drug of
healing virtue, upon which the palate is as little consulted as a
robustious lollypop boy in the household of ceremonial parents, who have
rung for the troop of their orderly domestics to sit in a row and hearken
the intonation of good words.




CHAPTER XXII

A RIGHT-MINDED GREAT LADY

The bow, the welcome, and the introductory remarks passed rapidly as the
pull at two sides of a curtain opening on a scene that stiffens
courtliness to hard attention.

After the names of Admiral Baldwin and 'the Mr. Woodseer,' the name of
Whitechapel was mentioned by Lady Arpington.  It might have been the name
of any other place.

'Ah, so far, then, I have to instruct you,' she said, observing the young
earl.  'I drove down there yesterday.  I saw the lady calling herself
Countess of Fleetwood.  By right?  She was a Miss Kirby.'

'She has the right,' Fleetwood said, standing well up out of a discharge
of musketry.

'Marriage not contested.  You knew of her being in that place?--I can't
describe it.'

'Your ladyship will pardon me?'

London's frontier of barbarism was named for him again, and in a tone to
penetrate.

He refrained from putting the question of how she had come there.

As iron as he looked, he said: 'She stays there by choice.'

The great lady tapped her foot on the floor.

'You are not acquainted with the district.'

'One of my men comes out of it.'

'The coming out of it !  .  .  .  However, I understand her story, that
she travelled from a village inn, where she had been left-without
resources.  She waited weeks; I forget how many.  She has a description
of maid in attendance on her.  She came to London to find her husband.
You were at the mines, we heard.  Her one desire is to meet her husband.
But, goodness!  Fleetwood, why do you frown?  You acknowledge the
marriage, she has the name of the church; she was married out of that old
Lord Levellier's house.  You drove her--I won't repeat the flighty
business.  You left her, and she did her best to follow you.  Will the
young men of our time not learn that life is no longer a game when they
have a woman for partner in the match!

You don't complain of her flavour of a foreign manner?  She can't be so
very .  .  .  Admiral Baldwin's daughter has married her brother; and he
is a military officer.  She has germs of breeding, wants only a little
rub of the world to smooth her.  Speak to the point:--do you meet her
here?  Do you refuse?'

'At present?  I do.'

'Something has to be done.'

'She was bound to stay where I left her.'

'You are bound to provide for her becomingly.'

'Provision shall be made, of course.'

'The story will .  .  .  unless--and quickly, too.'

I know, I know!'

Fleetwood had the clang of all the bells of London chiming Whitechapel at
him in his head, and he betrayed the irritated tyrant ready to decree
fire and sword, for the defence or solace of his tender sensibilities.

The black flash flew.

'It 's a thing to mend as well as one can,' Lady Arpington said.  'I am
not inquisitive: you had your reasons or chose to act without any.  Get
her away from that place.  She won't come to me unless it 's to meet her
husband.  Ah, well, temper does not solve your problem; husband you are,
if you married her.  We'll leave the husband undiscussed: with this
reserve, that it seems to me men are now beginning to play the
misunderstood.'

'I hope they know themselves better,' said Fleetwood; and he begged for
the name and number of the house in the Whitechapel street, where she who
was discernibly his enemy, and the deadliest of enemies, had now her
dwelling.

Her immediate rush to that place, the fixing of herself there for an
assault on him, was a move worthy the daughter of the rascal Old
Buccaneer; it compelled to urgent measures.  He, as he felt horribly in
pencilling her address, acted under compulsion; and a woman prodded the
goad.  Her mask of ingenuousness was flung away for a look of craft,
which could be power; and with her changed aspect his tolerance changed
to hatred.

'A shop,' Lady Arpington explained for his better direction: 'potatoes,
vegetable stuff.  Honest people, I am to believe.  She is indifferent to
her food, she says.  She works, helping one of their ministers--one of
their denominations: heaven knows what they call themselves!  Anything to
escape from the Church!  She's likely to become a Methodist.  With Lord
Feltre proselytizing for his Papist creed, Lord Pitscrew a declared
Mohammedan, we shall have a pretty English aristocracy in time.  Well,
she may claim to belong to it now.  She would not be persuaded against
visitations to pestiferous hovels.  What else is there to do in such a
place?  She goes about catching diseases to avoid bilious melancholy in
the dark back room of a small greengrocer's shop in Whitechapel.  There--
you have the word for the Countess of Fleetwood's present address.'

It drenched him with ridicule.

'I am indebted to your ladyship for the information,' he said, and
maintained his rigidity.

The great lady stiffened.

'I am obliged to ask you whether you intend to act on it at once.  The
admiral has gone; I am in some sort deputed as a guardian to her, and I
warn you--very well, very well.  In your own interests, it will be.  If
she is left there another two or three days, the name of the place will
stick to her.'

'She has baptized herself with it already, I imagine,' said Fleetwood.
'She will have Esslemont to live in.'

'There will be more than one to speak as to that.  You should know her.'

'I do not know her.'

'You married her.'

'The circumstances are admitted.'

'If I may hazard a guess, she is unlikely to come to terms without a
previous interview.  She is bent on meeting you.'

'I am to be subjected to further annoyance, or she will take the name of
the place she at present inhabits, and bombard me with it.  Those are the
terms.'

'She has a brother living, I remind you.'

'State the deduction, if you please, my lady.'

'She is not of 'a totally inferior family.'

'She had a father famous over England as the Old Buccaneer, and is a
diligent reader of his book of MAXIMS FOR MEN.'

'Dear me!  Then Kirby--Captain Kirby!  I remember.  That's her origin,
is it?' the great lady cried, illumined.  'My mother used to talk of the
Cressett scandal.  Old Lady Arpington, too.  At any rate, it ended in
their union--the formalities were properly respected, as soon as they
could be.'

'I am unaware.'

'I detest such a tone of speaking.  Speaking as you do now--married to
the daughter?  You are not yourself, Lord Fleetwood.'

'Quite, ma'am, let me assure you.  Otherwise the Kirby-Cressetts would be
dictating to me from the muzzle of one of the old rapscallion's Maxims.
They will learn that I am myself.'

'You don't improve as you proceed.  I tell you this, you'll not have me
for a friend.  You have your troops of satellites; but take it as equal
to a prophecy, you won't have London with you; and you'll hear of Lord
Fleetwood and his Whitechapel Countess till your ears ache.'

The preluding box on them reddened him.

'She will have the offer of Esslemont.'

'Undertake to persuade her in person.'

'I have spoken on that head.'

'Well, I may be mistaken,--I fancied it before I knew of the pair she
springs from: you won't get her consent to anything without your
consenting to meet her.  Surely it's the manlier way.  It might be
settled for to-morrow, here, in this room.  She prays to meet you.'

With an indicated gesture of 'Save me from it,' Fleetwood bowed.

He left no friend thinking over the riddle of his conduct.  She was a
loud-voiced lady, given to strike out phrases.  The 'Whitechapel
Countess' of the wealthiest nobleman of his day was heard by her on
London's wagging tongue.  She considered also that he ought at least have
propitiated her; he was in the position requiring of him to do something
of the kind, and he had shown instead the dogged pride which calls for a
whip.  Fool as he must have been to go and commit himself to marriage
with a girl of whom he knew nothing or little, the assumption of pride
belonged to the order of impudent disguises intolerable to behold and
not, in a modern manner, castigate.

Notwithstanding a dislike of the Dowager Countess of Fleetwood, Lady
Arpington paid Livia an afternoon visit; and added thereby to the stock
of her knowledge and the grounds of her disapprobation.

Down in Whitechapel, it was known to the Winch girls and the Woodseers
that Captain Kirby and his wife had spent the bitterest of hours in
vainly striving to break their immoveable sister's will to remain there.

At the tea-time of simple people, who make it a meal, Gower's appetite
for the home-made bread of Mary Jones was checked by the bearer of a
short note from Lord Fleetwood.  The half-dozen lines were cordial,
breathing of their walk in the Austrian highlands, and naming a renowned
city hotel for dinner that day, the hour seven, the reply yes or no by
messenger.

'But we are man to man, so there's no "No" between us two,' the note
said, reviving a scene of rosy crag and pine forest, where there had been
philosophical fun over the appropriate sexes of those our most important
fighting-ultimately, we will hope, to be united-syllables, and the when
for men, the when for women, to select the one of them as their weapon.

Under the circumstances, Gower thought such a piece of writing to him
magnanimous.

'It may be the solution,' his father remarked.

Both had the desire; and Gower's reply was the yes, our brave male word,
supposed to be not so compromising to men in the employment of it as a
form of acquiescence rather than insistent pressure.




CHAPTER XXIII

IN DAME GOSSIP'S VEIN

Right soon the London pot began to bubble.  There was a marriage.

'There are marriages by the thousand every day of the year that is not
consecrated to prayer for the forgiveness of our sins,' the Old
Buccaneer, writing it with simple intent, says, by way of preface to a
series of Maxims for men who contemplate acceptance of the yoke.

This was a marriage high as the firmament over common occurrences, black
as Erebus to confound; it involved the wreck of expectations, disastrous
eclipse of a sovereign luminary in the splendour of his rise, Phaethon's
descent to the Shades through a smoking and a crackling world.  Asserted
here, verified there, the rumour gathered volume, and from a serpent of
vapour resolved to sturdy concrete before it was tangible.  Contradiction
retired into corners, only to be swept out of them.  For this marriage,
abominable to hear of, was of so wonderful a sort, that the story filled
the mind, and the discrediting of the story threatened the great world's
cranium with a vacuity yet more monstrously abominable.

For he, the planet Croesus of his time, recently, scarce later than last
night, a glorious object of the mid-heavens above the market, has been
enveloped, caught, gobbled up by one of the nameless little witches
riding after dusk the way of the wind on broomsticks-by one of them!
She caught him like a fly in the hand off a pane of glass, gobbled him
with the customary facility of a pecking pullet.

But was the planet Croesus of his time a young man to be so caught, so
gobbled?

There is the mystery of it.  On his coming of age, that young man gave
sign of his having a city head.  He put his guardians deliberately aside,
had his lawyers and bailiffs and stewards thoroughly under control:
managed a particularly difficult step-mother; escaped the snares of her
lovely cousin; and drove his team of sycophants exactly the road he chose
to go and no other.  He had a will.

The world accounted him wildish?

Always from his own offset, to his own ends.  Never for another's
dictation or beguilement.  Never for a woman.  He was born with a
suspicion of the sex.  Poetry decorated women, he said, to lime and
drag men in the foulest ruts of prose.

We are to believe he has been effectively captured?

It is positively a marriage; he admits it.

Where celebrated?

There we are at hoodman-blind for the moment.  Three counties claim the
church; two ends of London.

She is not a person of society, lineage?

Nor of beauty.  She is a witch; ordinarily petticoated and not squeaking
like a shrew-mouse in her flights, but not a whit less a moon-shade
witch.  The kind is famous.  Fairy tales and terrible romances tell of
her; she is just as much at home in life, and springs usually from the
mire to enthral our knightliest.  Is it a popular hero?  She has him,
sooner or later.  A planet Croesus?  He falls to her.

That is, if his people fail to attach him in legal bonds to a damsel of a
corresponding birth on the day when he is breeched.

Small is her need to be young--especially if it is the man who is very
young.  She is the created among women armed with the deadly instinct for
the motive force in men, and shameless to attract it.  Self-respecting
women treat men as their tamed housemates.  She blows the horn of the
wild old forest, irresistible to the animal.  O the droop of the eyelids,
the curve of a lip, the rustle of silks, the much heart, the neat ankle;
and the sparkling agreement, the reserve--the motherly feminine petition
that she may retain her own small petted babe of an opinion, legitimate
or not, by permission of superior authority!--proof at once of her
intelligence and her appreciativeness.  Her infinitesimal spells are
seen; yet, despite experience, the magnetism in their repulsive display
is barely apprehended by sedate observers until the astounding capture is
proclaimed.  It is visible enough then:--and O men!  O morals!  If she
can but trick the smallest bit in stooping, she has the pick of men.

Our present sample shows her to be young: she is young and a foreigner.
Mr. Chumley Potts vouches for it.  Speaks foreign English.  He thinks her
more ninny than knave: she is the tool of a wily plotter, picked up off
the highway road by Lord Fleetwood as soon as he had her in his eye.
Sir Meeson Corby wrings his frilled hands to depict the horror of the
hands of that tramp the young lord had her from.  They afflict him
malariously still.  The man, he says, the man as well was an infatuation,
because he talks like a Dictionary Cheap Jack, and may have had an
education and dropped into vagrancy, owing to indiscretions.  Lord
Fleetwood ran about in Germany repeating his remarks.  But the man is
really an accomplished violinist, we hear.  She dances the tambourine
business.  A sister of the man, perhaps, if we must be charitable.  They
are, some say, a couple of Hungarian gypsies Lord F. found at a show and
brought over to England, and soon had it on his conscience that he ought
to marry her, like the Quixote of honour that he is; which is equal to
saying crazy, as there is no doubt his mother was.

The marriage is no longer disputable; poor Lady Fleetwood, whatever her
faults as a step-mother, does no longer deny the celebration of a
marriage; though she might reasonably discredit any such story if he,
on the evening of the date of the wedding day, was at a Ball, seen by her
at the supper-table; though it is admitted he left the Ball-room at
night.  But the next day he certainly was in his place among the Peers
and voted against the Government, and then went down to his estates in
Wales, being an excellent holder of the reins, whether on the coach box
or over the cash box.

More and more wonderful, we hear that he drove his bride straight from
the church to the field of a prizefight, arranged for her special
delectation.  She doats on seeing blood-shed and drinking champagne.
Young Mr. Mallard is our authority; and he says, she enjoyed it, and
cheered the victor for being her husband's man.  And after the shocking
exhibition, good-bye; the Countess of Fleetwood was left sole occupant of
a wayside inn, and may have learnt in her solitude that she would have
been wise to feign disgust; for men to the smallest degree cultivated are
unable to pardon a want of delicacy in a woman who has chosen them, as
they are taught to think by their having chosen her.

So talked, so twittered, piped and croaked the London world over the
early rumours of the marriage, this Amazing Marriage; which it got to be
called, from the number of items flocking to swell the wonder.

Ravens ravening by night, poised peregrines by day, provision-merchants
for the dispensing of dainty scraps to tickle the ears, to arm the
tongues, to explode reputations, those great ladies, the Ladies Endor,
Eldritch, and Cowry, fateful three of their period, avenged and scourged
both innocence and naughtiness; innocence, on the whole, the least, when
their withering suspicion of it had hunted the unhappy thing to the bank
of Ophelia's ditch.  Mallard and Chumley Potts, Captain Abrane, Sir
Meeson Corby, Lord Brailstone, were plucked at and rattled, put to the
blush, by a pursuit of inquiries conducted with beaks.  High-nosed dames
will surpass eminent judges in their temerity on the border-line where
Ahem sounds the warning note to curtained decency.  The courtly M. de St.
Ombre had to stand confused.  He, however, gave another version of
Captain Abrane's 'fiddler,' and precipitated the great ladies into the
reflection, that French gentlemen, since the execrable French Revolution,
have lost their proper sense of the distinctions of Class.  Homme
d'esprit, applied to a roving adventurer, a scarce other than vagabond,
was either an undiscriminating epithet or else a further example of the
French deficiency in humour.

Dexterous contriver, he undoubtedly is.  Lady Cowry has it from Sir
Meeson Corby, who had it from the poor dowager, that Lord Fleetwood has
installed the man in his house and sits at the opposite end of his table;
fished him up from Whitechapel, where the countess is left serving
oranges at a small fruit-shop.  With her own eyes, Lady Arpington saw her
there; and she can't be got to leave the place unless her husband drives
his coach down to fetch her.  That he declines to do; so she remains the
Whitechapel Countess, all on her hind heels against the offer of a
shilling of her husband's money, if she 's not to bring him to his knees;
and goes about at night with a low Methodist singing hymns along those
dreadful streets, while Lord Fleetwood gives gorgeous entertainments.
One signal from the man he has hired, and he stops drinking--he will stop
speaking as soon as the man's mouth is open.  He is under a complete
fascination, attributable, some say, to passes of the hands, which the
man won't wash lest he should weaken their influence.

For it cannot be simply his violin playing.  They say he was a pupil of
a master of the dark art in Germany, and can practise on us to make us
think his commonest utterances extraordinarily acute and precious.  Lord
Fleetwood runs round quoting him to everybody, quite ridiculously.  But
the man's influence is sufficient to induce his patron to drive down and
fetch the Whitechapel Countess home in state, as she insists--if the man
wishes it.  Depend upon it he is the key of the mystery.

Totally the contrary, Lady Arpington declares! the man is a learned man,
formerly a Professor of English Literature in a German University, and no
connection of the Whitechapel Countess whatever, a chance acquaintance at
the most.  He operates on Lord Fleetwood with doses of German philosophy;
otherwise, a harmless creature; and has consented to wash and dress.  It
is my lord who has had the chief influence.  And the Countess Livia now
backs him in maintaining that there is nowhere a more honest young man to
be found.  She may have her reasons.

As for the Whitechapel Countess .  .  .  the whole story of the Old
Buccaneer and Countess Fanny was retold, and it formed a terrific halo,
presage of rains and hurricane tempest, over the girl the young earl had
incomprehensibly espoused to discard.  Those two had a son and a daughter
born aboard:--in wedlock, we trust.  The girl may be as wild a one as the
mother.  She has a will as determined as her husband's.  She is offered
Esslemont, the earl's Kentish mansion, for a residence, and she will none
of it until she has him down in the east of London on his knees to
entreat her.  The injury was deep on one side or the other.  It may be
almost surely prophesied that the two will never come together.  Will
either of them deal the stroke for freedom?  And which is the likelier?

Meanwhile Lord Fleetwood and his Whitechapel Countess composed the laugh
of London.  Straightway Invention, the violent propagator, sprang from
his shades at a call of the great world's appetite for more, and, rushing
upon stationary Fact, supplied the required.  Marvel upon marvel was
recounted.  The mixed origin of the singular issue could not be examined,
where all was increasingly funny.

Always the shout for more produced it.  She and her band of Whitechapel
boys were about in ambush to waylay the earl wherever he went.  She stood
knocking at his door through a whole night.  He dared not lug her before
a magistrate for fear of exposure.  Once, riding in the park with a troop
of friends he had a young woman pointed out to him, and her finger was
levelled, and she cried: 'There is the English nobleman who marries a
girl and leaves her to go selling cabbages!'

He left town for the Island, and beheld his yacht sailing the Solent:--
my lady the countess was on board!  A pair of Tyrolese minstrels in the
square kindled his enthusiasm at one of his dinners; he sent them a
sovereign; their humble, hearty thanks were returned to him in the name
of Die Grafin von Fleetwood.

The Ladies Endor, Eldritch, and Cowry sifted their best.  They let pass
incredible stories: among others, that she had sent cards to the nobility
and gentry of the West End of London, offering to deliver sacks of
potatoes by newly-established donkey-cart at the doors of their
residences, at so much per sack, bills quarterly; with the postscript,
Vive L'aristocratie!  Their informant had seen a card, and the stamp of
the Fleetwood dragoncrest was on it.

He has enemies, was variously said of the persecuted nobleman.  But it
was nothing worse than the parasite that he had.  This was the parasite's
gentle treason.  He found it an easy road to humour; it pricked the slug
fancy in him to stir and curl; gave him occasion to bundle and bustle his
patron kindly.  Abrane, Potts, Mallard, and Sir Meeson Corby were
personages during the town's excitement, besought for having something to
say.  Petrels of the sea of tattle, they were buoyed by the hubbub they
created, and felt the tipsy happiness of being certain to rouse the laugh
wherever they alighted.  Sir Meeson Corby, important to himself in an
eminent degree, enjoyed the novel sense of his importance with his
fellows.  They crowded round the bore who had scattered them.

He traced the miserable catastrophe in the earl's fortunes to the cunning
of the rascal now sponging on Fleetwood and trying to dress like a
gentleman: a convicted tramp, elevated by the caprice of the young
nobleman he was plotting to ruin.  Sir Meeson quoted Captain Abrane's
latest effort to hit the dirty object's name, by calling him 'Fleetwood's
Mr. Woodlouse.'  And was the rascal a sorcerer?  Sir Meeson spoke of him
in the hearing of the Countess Livia, and she, previously echoing his
disgust, corrected him sharply, and said: 'I begin to be of Russett's
opinion, that his fault is his honesty.'  The rascal had won or partly
won the empress of her sex!  This Lady Livia, haughtiest and most
fastidious of our younger great dames, had become the indulgent critic of
the tramp's borrowed plumes!  Nay, she would not listen to a depreciatory
word on him from her cousin Henrietta Kirby-Levellier.

Perhaps, after all, of all places for an encounter between the Earl of
Fleetwood and the countess, those vulgar Gardens across the water, long
since abandoned by the Fashion, were the most suitable.  Thither one fair
June night, for the sake of showing the dowager countess and her
beautiful cousin, the French nobleman, Sir Meeson Corby, and others, what
were the pleasures of the London lower orders, my lord had the whim to
conduct them,--merely a parade of observation once round;--the ladies
veiled, the gentlemen with sticks, and two servants following, one of
whom, dressed in quiet black, like the peacefullest of parsons, was my
lord's pugilist, Christopher Ives.

Now, here we come to history: though you will remember what History is.

The party walked round the Gardens unmolested nor have we grounds for
supposing they assumed airs of state in the style of a previous
generation.  Only, as it happened, a gentleman of the party was a wag; no
less than the famous, well-seasoned John Rose Mackrell, bent on amusing
Mrs. Kirby-Levellier, to hear her lovely laughter; and his wit and his
anecdotes, both inexhaustible, proved, as he said, 'that a dried fish is
no stale fish, and a smoky flavour to an old chimney story will often
render it more piquant to the taste than one jumping fresh off the
incident.'  His exact meaning in 'smoky flavour' we are not to know; but
whether that M. de St. Ombre should witness the effect of English humour
upon them, or that the ladies could permit themselves to laugh, their
voices accompanied the gentlemen in silvery volleys.  There had been
'Mackrell' at Fleetwood's dinner-table; which was then a way of saying
that dry throats made no count of the quantity of champagne imbibed,
owing to the fits Rose Mackrell caused.  However, there was loud laughter
as they strolled, and it was noticed; and Fleetwood crying out,
'Mackrell!  Mackrell!' in delighted repudiation of the wag's last sally,
the cry of 'Hooray, Mackrell !' was caught up by the crowd.  They were
not the primary offenders, for loud laughter in an isolated party is bad
breeding; but they had not the plea of a copious dinner.

So this affair began; inoffensively at the start, for my lord was good-
humoured about it.

Kit Ines, of the mercurial legs, must now give impromptu display of his
dancing.  He seized a partner, in the manner of a Roman the Sabine, sure
of pleasing his patron; and the maid, passing from surprise to merriment,
entered the quadrille perforce, all giggles, not without emulation, for
she likewise had the passion for the dance.  Whereby it befell that the
pair footed in a way to gather observant spectators; and if it had not
been that the man from whom the maid was willy-nilly snatched, conceived
resentment, things might have passed comfortably; for Kit's quips and
cuts and high capers, and the Sunday gravity of the barge face while the
legs were at their impish trickery, double motion to the music, won the
crowd to cheer.  They conjectured him to be a British sailor.  But the
destituted man said, sailor or no sailor,--bos'en be hanged!  he should
pay for his whistle.

Honourably at the close of the quadrille, Kit brought her back; none the
worse for it, he boldly affirmed, and he thanked the man for the short
loan of her.--The man had an itch to strike.  Choosing rather to be
struck first, he vented nasty remarks.  My lord spoke to Kit and moved
on.  At the moment of the step, Rose Mackrell uttered something, a
waggery of some sort, heard to be forgotten, but of such instantaneous
effect, that the prompt and immoderate laugh succeeding it might
reasonably be taken for a fling of scorn at himself, by an injured man.
They were a party; he therefore proceeded to make one, appealing to
English sentiment and right feeling.  The blameless and repentant maid
plucked at his coat to keep him from dogging the heels of the gentlemen.
Fun was promised; consequently the crowd waxed.

'My lord,' had been let fall by Kit Ines.  Conjoined to 'Mackrell,' it
rang finely, and a trumpeting of 'Lord Mackrell' resounded.  Lord
Mackrell was asked for 'more capers and not so much sauce.'  Various fish
took part in his title of nobility.  The wag Mackrell continuing to be
discreetly silent, and Kit Ines acting as a pacific rearguard, the crowd
fell in love with their display of English humour, disposed to the surly
satisfaction of a big street dog that has been appeased by a smaller
one's total cessation of growls.

All might have gone well but for the sudden appearance of two figures of
young women on the scene.  They fronted the advance of the procession.
They wanted to have a word with Lord Mackrell.  Not a bit of it--he won't
listen, turns away; and one of the pair slips round him.  It's regular
imploring: 'my lord! my lord!'

O you naughty Surrey melodram villain of a Lord Mackrell!  Listen to the
young woman, you Mackrell, or you'll get Billingsgate!  Here's Mr. Jig-
and-Reel behind here, says she's done him!  By Gosh!  What's up now?

One of the young ladies of the party ahead had rushed up to the young
woman dodging to stand in Lord Mackrell's way.  The crowd pressed to see.
Kit Ines and his mate shouldered them off.  They performed an envelopment
of the gentlemen and ladies, including the two young women.  Kit left his
mate and ran to the young woman hitherto the quieter of the two.  He
rattled at her.  But she had a tongue of her own and rattled it at him.
What did she say?

Merely to hear, for no other reason,' a peace-loving crowd of clerks and
tradesmen, workmen and their girls, young aspirants to the professions,
night-larks of different classes, both sexes, there in that place for
simple entertainment, animated simply by the spirit of English humour,
contracted, so closing upon the Mackrell party as to seem threatening to
the most orderly and apprehensive member of it, who was the baronet, Sir
Meeson Corby.

He was a man for the constables in town emergencies, and he shouted.
'Cock Robin crowing' provoked a jolly round of barking chaff.  The noise
in a dense ring drew Fleetwood's temper.  He gave the word to Kit Ines,
and immediately two men dropped; a dozen staggered unhit.  The fists
worked right and left; such a clearing of ground was never seen for
sickle or scythe.  And it was taken respectfully; for Science proclaimed
her venerable self in the style and the perfect sufficiency of the
strokes.  A bruiser delivered them.  No shame to back away before a
bruiser.  There was rather an admiring envy of the party claiming the
nimble champion on their side, until the very moderate lot of the
Mackrells went stepping forward along the strewn path with sticks
pointed.

If they had walked it like gentlemen, they would have been allowed to get
through.  An aggressive minority, and with Cock Robin squealing for
constables in the midst, is that insolent upstart thing which howls to
have a lesson.  The sticks were fallen on; bump came the mass.  Kit Ines
had to fight his way back to his mate, and the couple scoured a clearish
ring, but the gentlemen were at short thrusts, affable in tone, to cheer
the spirits of the ladies:--'All right, my friend, you're a trifle
mistaken, it 's my stick, not yours.'  Therewith the wrestle for the
stick.

The one stick not pointed was wrenched from the grasp of Sir Meeson
Corby; and by a woman, the young woman who had accosted my lord; not a
common young woman either, as she appeared when beseeching him.  Her
stature rose to battle heights: she made play with Sir Meeson Corby's
ebony stick, using it in one hand as a dwarf quarterstaff to flail the
sconces, then to dash the point at faces; and she being a woman, a girl,
perhaps a lady, her cool warrior method of cleaving way, without so much
as tightening her lips, was found notable; and to this degree (vouched
for by Rose Mackrell, who heard it), that a fellow, rubbing his head,
cried: 'Damn it all, she's clever, though!'  She took her station beside
Lord Fleetwood.

He had been as cool as she, or almost.  Now he was maddened; she defended
him, she warded and thrust for him, only for him, to save him a touch;
unasked, undesired, detested for the box on his ears of to-morrow's
public mockery, as she would be, overwhelming him with ridicule.  Have
you seen the kick and tug at the straps of the mettled pony in stables
that betrays the mishandling of him by his groom?  Something so did
Fleetwood plunge and dart to be free of her, and his desperate soul cried
out on her sticking to him like a plaster!

Welcome were the constables.  His guineas winked at their chief, as fair
women convey their meanings, with no motion of eyelids; and the officers
of the law knew the voice habituated to command, and answered two words
of his: 'Right, my lord,' smelling my lord in the unerring manner of
those days.  My lord's party were escorted to the gates, not a little
jeered; though they by no means had the worst of the tussle.  But the
puffing indignation of Sir Meesan Corby over his battered hat and torn
frill and buttons plucked from his coat, and his threat of the
magistrates, excited the crowd to derisive yells.

My lord spoke something to his man, handing his purse.

The ladies were spared the hearing of bad language.  They, according to
the joint testimony of M. de St. Ombre and Mr. Rose Mackrell, comported
themselves throughout as became the daughters of a warrior race.  Both
gentlemen were emphatic to praise the unknown Britomart who had done such
gallant service with Sir Meeson's ebony wand.  He was beginning to fuss
vociferously about the loss of the stick--a family stick, goldheaded, the
family crest on it, priceless to the family--when Mrs. Kirby-Levellier
handed it to him inside the coach.

'But where is she?' M. de St.  Ombre said, and took the hint of Livia's
touch on his arm in the dark.

At the silence following the question, Mr. Rose Mackrell murmured, 'Ah!'

He and the French gentleman understood that there might have been a
manifestation of the notorious Whitechapel Countess.

They were two; and a slower-witted third was travelling to his ideas on
the subject.  Three men, witnesses of a remarkable incident in connection
with a boiling topic of current scandal,--glaringly illustrative of it,
moreover,--were unlikely to keep close tongues, even if they had been
sworn to secresy.  Fleetwood knew it, and he scorned to solicit them; an
exaction of their idle vows would be merely the humiliation of himself.
So he tossed his dignity to recklessness, as the ultraconvivial give the
last wink of reason to the wine-cup.  Persecuted as he was, nothing
remained for him but the nether-sublime of a statuesque desperation.

That was his feeling; and his way of cloaking it under light sallies at
Sir Meeson and easy chat with Henrietta made it visible to her, from its
being the contrary of what the world might expect a proud young nobleman
to exhibit.  She pitied him: she had done him some wrong.  She read into
him, too, as none else could.  Seeing the solitary tortures behind the
pleasant social mask, she was drawn to partake of them; and the mask
seemed pathetic.  She longed to speak a word in sympathy or relieve her
bosom of tears.  Carinthia had sunk herself, was unpardonable, hardly
mentionable.  Any of the tales told of her might be credited after this!
The incorrigible cause of humiliation for everybody connected with her
pictured, at a word of her name, the crowd pressing and the London world
acting audience.  Livia spoke the name when they had reached their house
and were alone.  Henrietta responded with the imperceptible shrug which
is more eloquent than a cry to tell of the most monstrous of loads.  My
lord, it was thought by the ladies, had directed his man to convey her
safely to her chosen home, whence she might be expected very soon to be
issuing and striking the gong of London again.




CHAPTER XXIV

A KIDNAPPING AND NO GREAT HARM

Ladies who have the pride of delicate breeding are not more than rather
violently hurled back on the fortress it is, when one or other of the
gross mishaps of circumstance may subject them to a shock: and this
happening in the presence of gentlemen, they are sustained by the within
and the without to keep a smooth countenance, however severe their
affliction.  Men of heroic nerve decline similarly to let explosions
shake them, though earth be shaken.  Dragged into the monstrous grotesque
of the scene at the Gardens, Livia and Henrietta went through the ordeal,
masking any signs that they were stripped for a flagellation.  Only, the
fair cousins were unable to perceive a comic element in the scene: and if
the world was for laughing, as their instant apprehension foresaw it, the
world was an ignoble beast.  They did not discuss Carinthia's latest
craziness at night, hardly alluded to it while they were in the
interjectory state.

Henrietta was Livia's guest, her husband having hurried away to Vienna:
'To get money!  money!' her angry bluntness explained his absence, and
dealt its blow at the sudden astounding poverty into which they had
fallen.  She was compelled to practise an excessive, an incredible
economy:--'think of the smallest trifles!' so that her Chillon travelled
unaccompanied, they were separated.  Her iterations upon money were the
vile constraint of an awakened interest and wonderment at its powers.
She, the romantic Riette, banner of chivalry, reader of poetry, struck a
line between poor and rich in her talk of people, and classed herself
with the fallen and pinched; she harped on her slender means, on the
enforced calculations preceding purchases, on the living in lodgings;
and that miserly Lord Levellier's indebtedness to Chillon--large sums!
and Chillon's praiseworthy resolve to pay the creditors of her father's
estate; and of how he travelled like a common man, in consequence of the
money he had given Janey--weakly, for her obstinacy was past endurance;
but her brother would not leave her penniless, and penniless she had been
for weeks, because of her stubborn resistance to the earl--quite
unreasonably, whether right or wrong--in the foul retreat she had chosen;
apparently with a notion that the horror of it was her vantage ground
against him: and though a single sign of submission would place the
richest purse in England at her disposal.  'She refuses Esslemont!  She
insists on his meeting her!  No child could be so witless.  Let him be
the one chiefly or entirely to blame, she might show a little tact--for
her brother's sake!  She loves her brother?  No: deaf to him, to me, to
every consideration except her blind will.'

Here was the skeleton of the love match, earlier than Livia had expected.

It refreshed a phlegmatic lady's disposition for prophecy.  Lovers
abruptly tossed between wind and wave may still be lovers, she knew: but
they are, or the weaker of the two is, hard upon any third person who
tugs at them for subsistence or existence.  The condition, if they are
much beaten about, prepares true lovers, through their mutual tenderness,
to be bitterly misanthropical.

Livia supposed the novel economic pinches to be the cause of Henrietta's
unwonted harsh judgement of her sister-in-law's misconduct, or the crude
expression of it.  She could not guess that Carinthia's unhappiness in
marriage was a spectre over the married happiness of the pair fretted by
the conscience which told them they had come together by doing much to
bring it to pass.  Henrietta could see herself less the culprit when she
blamed Carinthia in another's hearing.

After some repose, the cousins treated their horrible misadventure as a
piece of history.  Livia was cool; she had not a husband involved in it,
as Henrietta had; and London's hoarse laugh surely coming on them, spared
her the dread Henrietta suffered, that Chillon would hear; the most
sensitive of men on any matter touching his family.

'And now a sister added to the list!  Will there be names, Livia?'

'The newspapers!' Livia's shoulders rose.

'We ought to have sworn the gentlemen to silence.'

'M. de St. Ombre is a tomb until he writes his Memoirs.  I hold Sir
Meeson under lock.  But a spiced incident, a notorious couple,--an
anecdotal witness to the scene,--could you expect Mr. Rose Mackrell to
contain it?  The sacredest of oaths, my dear!'

That relentless force impelling an anecdotist to slaughter families for
the amusement of dinner-tables, was brought home to Henrietta by her
prospect of being a victim; and Livia reminding her of the excessive
laughter at Rose Mackrell's anecdotes overnight, she bemoaned her having
consented to go to those Gardens in mourning.

'How could Janey possibly have heard of the project to go?

'You went to please Russett, he to please you, and that wild-cat to
please herself,' said Livia.  'She haunts his door, I suppose, and
follows him, like a running footman.  Every step she takes widens the
breach.  He keeps his temper, yes, keeps his temper as he keeps his word,
and one morning it breaks loose, and all that's done has to be undone.
It will bemust.  That extravaganza, as she is called, is fatal, dogs him
with burlesque--of all men!'

'Why not consent to meet her once, Chillon asks.'

'You are asking Russett to yield an inch on demand, and to a woman.'

'My husband would yield to a woman what he would refuse to all the men in
Europe and America,' said Henrietta; and she enjoyed her thrill of
allegiance to her chivalrous lord and courtier.

'No very extraordinary specimen of a newly married man, who has won the
Beauty of England and America for his wife-at some cost to some people,'
Livia rejoined.

There came a moisture on the eyelashes of the emotional young woman, from
a touch of compassion for the wealthy man who had wished to call her
wife, and was condemned by her rejection of him to call another woman
wife, to be wifeless in wedding her, despite his wealth.

She thinks he loves her; it is pitiable, but she thinks it--after the
treatment she has had.  She begs to see him once.'

'And subdue him with a fit of weeping,' Livia was moved to say by sight
of the tear she hated.  'It would harden Russett--on other eyes, too!
Salt-water drops are like the forced agony scenes in a play: they bring
down the curtain, they don't win the critics.  I heard her "my husband"
and saw his face.'

'You didn't hear a whimper with it,' Henrietta said.  'She's a mountain
girl, not your city madam on the boards.  Chillon and I had her by each
hand, implored her to leave that impossible Whitechapel, and she
trembled, not a drop was shed by her.  I can almost fancy privation and
squalor have no terrors for Janey.  She sings to the people down there,
nurses them.  She might be occupying Esslemont--our dream of an English
home!  She is the destruction of the idea of romantic in connection with
the name of marriage.  I talk like a simpleton.  Janey upsets us all.
My lord was only--a little queer before he knew her: His Mr. Woodseer may
be encouraging her.  You tell me the creature has a salary from him equal
to your jointure.'

'Be civil to the man while it lasts,' Livia said, attentive to a
degradation of tone--in her cousin, formerly of supreme self-containment.

The beautiful young woman was reminded of her holiday in town.
She brightened, and the little that it was, and the meanness of the
satisfaction, darkened her.  Envy of the lucky adventurer Mr. Woodseer,
on her husband's behalf, grew horridly conscious for being reproved.  So
she plucked resolution to enjoy her holiday and forget the contrasts of
life-palaces running profusion, lodgings hammered by duns; the pinch of
poverty distracting every simple look inside or out.  There was no end to
it; for her husband's chivalrous honour forced him to undertake the
payment of her father's heavy debts.  He was right and admirable, it
could not be contested; but the prospect for them was a grinding gloom,
an unrelieved drag, as of a coach at night on an interminable uphill
flinty road.

These were her sensations, and she found it diverting to be admired;
admired by many while she knew herself to be absorbed in the possession
of her by one.  It bestowed the before and after of her marriage.  She
felt she was really, had rapidly become, the young woman of the world,
armed with a husband, to take the flatteries of men for the needed
diversion they brought.  None moved her; none could come near to touching
the happy insensibility of a wife who adored her husband, wrote to him
daily, thought of him by the minute.  Her former worshippers were
numerous at Livia's receptions; Lord Fleetwood, Lord Brailstone, and the
rest.  Odd to reflect on--they were the insubstantial but coveted wealth
of the woman fallen upon poverty, ignoble poverty!  She could not
discard her wealth.  She wrote amusingly of them, and fully, vivacious
descriptions, to Chillon; hardly so much writing to him as entering her
heart's barred citadel, where he resided at his ease, heard everything
that befell about her.  If she dwelt on Lord Fleetwood's kindness in
providing entertainments, her object was to mollify Chillon's anger in
some degree.  She was doing her utmost to gratify him, 'for the purpose
of paving a way to plead Janey's case.'  She was almost persuading
herself she was enjoying the remarks of his friend, confidant, secretary,
or what not, Livia's worshipper, Mr. Woodseer, 'who does as he wills with
my lord; directs his charities, his pleasures, his opinions, all because
he is believed to have wonderful ideas and be wonderfully honest.'
Henrietta wrote: 'Situation unchanged.  Janey still At that place'; and
before the letter was posted, she and Livia had heard from Gower Woodseer
of the reported disappearance of the Countess of Fleetwood and her maid.
Gower's father had walked up from Whitechapel, bearing news of it to the
earl, she said.

'And the earl is much disturbed?' was Livia's inquiry.

'He has driven down with my father,' Gower said carelessly, ambiguously
in the sound.

Troubled enough to desire the show of a corresponding trouble, Henrietta
read at their faces.

'May it not be--down there--a real danger?'

The drama, he could inform her, was only too naked down there for
disappearances to be common.

'Will it be published that she is missing?'

'She has her maid with her, a stout-hearted girl.  Both have courage.
I don't think we need take measures just yet.'

'Not before it is public property?'

Henrietta could have bitten her tongue for laying her open to the censure
implied in his muteness.  Janey perverted her.

Women were an illegible manuscript, and ladies a closed book of the
binding, to this raw philosopher, or he would not so coldly have judged
the young wife, anxious on her husband's account, that they might escape
another scorching.  He carried away his impression.

Livia listened to a remark on his want of manners.

'Russett puts it to the credit of his honesty,' she said.  'Honesty is
everything with us at present.  The man has made his honesty an excellent
speculation.  He puts a piece on zero and the bank hands him a sackful.
We may think we have won him to serve us, up comes his honesty.  That's
how we have Lady Arpington mixed in it--too long a tale.  But be guided
by me; condescend a little.'

'My dear!  my whole mind is upon that unhappy girl.  It would break
Chillon's heart.'

Livia pished.  'There are letters we read before we crack the seal.  She
is out of that ditch, and it suits Russett that she should be.  He's not
often so patient.  A woman foot to foot against his will--I see him
throwing high stakes.  Tyrants are brutal; and really she provokes him
enough.  You needn't be alarmed about the treatment she 'll meet.  He
won't let her beat him, be sure.'

Neither Livia nor Gower wondered at the clearing of the mystery, before
it went to swell the scandal.  A young nobleman of ready power, quick
temper, few scruples, and a taxed forbearance, was not likely to stand
thwarted and goaded-and by a woman.  Lord Fleetwood acted his part,
inscrutable as the blank of a locked door.  He could not conceal that he
was behind the door.




CHAPTER XXV

THE PHILOSOPHER MAN OF ACTION

Gower's bedroom window looked over the shrubs of the square, and as his
form of revolt from a city life was to be up and out with the sparrows in
the early flutter of morning, for a stretch of the legs where grass was
green and trees were not enclosed, he rarely saw a figure below when he
stood dressing.  Now there appeared a petticoated one stationary against
the rails, with her face lifted.  She fronted the house, and while he
speculated abstractedly, recognition rushed on him.  He was down and
across the roadway at leaps.

'It's Madge here!'

The girl panted for her voice.

'Mr. Woodseer, I'm glad; I thought I should have to wait hours.  She's
safe.'

'Where?'

'Will you come, sir?'

'Step ahead.'

Madge set forth to north of the square.

He judged of the well-favoured girl that she could steer her way through
cities: mouth and brows were a warning to challenger pirate craft of a
vessel carrying guns; and the red lips kept their firm line when they
yielded to the pressure for speech.

'It's a distance.  She's quite safe, no harm; she's a prisoner; she's
well fed; she's not ill treated.'

'You 're out?'

'That's as it happens.  I'm lucky in seeing you early.  He don't mean to
hurt her; he won't be beaten.  All she asks is ten minutes with him.  If
he would!--he won't.  She didn't mean to do him offence t' other night in
that place--you've heard.  Kit Ines told me he was on duty there--going.
She couldn't help speaking when she had eyes on her husband.  She kisses
the ground of his footsoles, you may say, let him be ever so unkind.  She
and I were crossing to the corner of Roper Street a rainy night, on way
to Mile End, away down to one of your father's families, Mother Davis and
her sick daughter and the little ones, and close under the public-house
Goat and Beard we were seized on and hustled into a covered carriage that
was there, and they drove sharp.  She 's not one to scream.  We weren't
frightened.  We both made the same guess.  They drove us to the house she
's locked in, and me, too, up till three o'clock this morning.'

'You've seen nobody, Madge?'

'He 's fixed she 's to leave London, Mr. Woodseer.  I've seen Kit Ines.
And she 's to have one of the big houses to her use.  I guessed Kit Ines
was his broom.  He defends it because he has his money to make--and be a
dirty broom for a fortune!  But any woman's sure of decent handling with
Kit Ines--not to speak of lady.  He and a mate guard the house.  An old
woman cooks.'

'He guards the house, and he gave you a pass?'

'Not he.  His pride's his obedience to his "paytron"--he calls his
master, and won't hear that name abused.  We are on the first floor; all
the lower doors are locked day and night.  New Street, not much
neighbours; she wouldn't cry out of the window.  She 's to be let free if
she'll leave London.'

'You jumped it!'

'If I'd broke a leg, Mr. Kit Ines would have had to go to his drams.  It
wasn't very high; and a flower-bed underneath.  My mistress wanted to be
the one.  She has to be careful.  She taught me how to jump down not to
hurt.  She makes you feel you can do anything.  I had a bother to get her
to let me and be quiet herself.  She's not one to put it upon others,
you'll learn.  When I was down I felt like a stick in the ground and sat
till I had my feet, she at the window waiting; and I started for you.
She kissed her hand.  I was to come to you, and then your father, you
nowhere seen.  I wasn't spoken to.  I know empty London.'

'Kit Ines was left sleeping in the house?'

'Snoring, I dare say: He don't drink on duty.'

'He must be kept on duty.'

'Drink or that kind of duty, it's a poor choice.'

'You'll take him in charge, Madge.'

'I've got a mistress to look after.'

'You've warmed to her.'

'That's not new; Mr. Woodseer.  I do trust you, and you his friend.  But
you are the minister's son, and any man not a great nobleman must have
some heart for her.  You'll learn.  He kills her so because she's fond of
him--loves him, however he strikes.  No, not like a dog, as men say of
us.  She'd die for him this night, need were.  Live with her, you won't
find many men match her for brave; and she's good.  My Sally calls her a
Bible saint.  I could tell you stories of her goodness, short the time
though she's been down our way.  And better there for her than at that
inn he left her at to pine and watch the Royal Sovereign come swing come
smirk in sailor blue and star to meet the rain--would make anybody
disrespect Royalty or else go mad!  He's a great nobleman, he can't buy
what she's ready to give; and if he thinks he breaks her will now, it's
because she thinks she's obeying a higher than him, or no lord alive and
Kit Ines to back him 'd hold her.  Women want a priest to speak to men
certain times.  I wish I dared; we have to bite our tongues.  He's master
now, but, as I believe God's above, if he plays her false, he's the one
to be brought to shame.  I talk.'

'Talk on, Madge,' said Gower, to whom the girl's short-syllabled run of
the lips was a mountain rill compared with London park waters.

'You won't let him hurry her off where she'll eat her heart for never
seeing him again?  She prays to be near him, if she's not to see him.'

'She speaks in that way?'

'I get it by bits.  I'm with her so, it's as good as if I was inside her.
She can't obey when it goes the wrong way of her heart to him.'

'Love and wisdom won't pull together, and they part company for good at
the church door,' said Gower.  'This matrimony's a bad business.'

Madge hummed a moan of assent.  'And my poor Sally 'll have to marry.
I can't leave my mistress while she wants me, and Sally can't be alone.
It seems we take a step and harm's done, though it's the right step we
take.'

'It seems to me you've engaged yourself to follow Sally's lead, Madge.'

'Girls' minds turn corners, Mr. Woodseer.'

He passed the remark.  What it was that girls' minds occasionally or
habitually did, or whether they had minds to turn, or whether they took
their whims for minds, were untroubled questions with a young man
studying abstract and adoring surface nature too exclusively to be aware
of the manifestation of her spirit in the flesh, as it is not revealed so
much by men.  However, she had a voice and a face that led him to be
thoughtful over her devotedness to her mistress, after nearly losing her
character for the prize-fighter, and he had to thank her for invigorating
him.  His disposition was to muse and fall slack, helpless to a friend.
Here walked a creature exactly the contrary.  He listened to the steps of
the dissimilar pair on the detonating pavement, and eyed a church clock
shining to the sun.

She was sure of the direction: 'Out Camden way, where the murder was.'

They walked at a brisk pace, conversing or not.

'Tired?  You must be,' he said.

'Not when I'm hot to do a thing.'

'There's the word of the thoroughbred!'

'You don't tire, sir,' said she.  'Sally and I see you stalking out for
the open country in the still of the morning.  She thinks you look pale
for want of food, and ought to have some one put a biscuit into your
pocket overnight.'

'Who'd have guessed I was under motherly observation!'

'You shouldn't go so long empty, if you listen to trainers.'

'Capital doctors, no doubt.  But I get a fine appetite.'

'You may grind the edge too sharp.'

He was about to be astonished, and reflected that she had grounds for her
sagacity.  His next thought plunged him into contempt for Kit Ines, on
account of the fellow's lapses to sottishness.  But there would be no
contempt of Kit Ines in a tussle with him.  Nor could one funk the tussle
and play cur, if Kit's engaged young woman were looking on.  We get to
our courage or the show of it by queer screws.

Contemplative over these matters, the philosopher transformed to man of
action heard Madge say she read directions in London by churches, and
presently exclaiming disdainfully, and yet relieved, 'Spooner Villas,'
she turned down a row of small detached houses facing a brickfield, that
had just contributed to the erection of them, and threatened the big city
with further defacements.

Madge pointed to the marks of her jump, deep in flower-bed earth under an
open window.

Gower measured the height with sensational shanks.

She smote at the door.  Carinthia nodded from her window.  Close upon
that, Kit Ines came bounding to the parlour window; he spied and stared.
Gower was known to him as the earl's paymaster; so he went to the passage
and flung the door open, blocking the way.

'Any commands, your honour?'

'You bring the countess to my lord immediately,' said Gower.

Kit swallowed his mouthful of surprise in a second look at Madge and the
ploughed garden-bed beneath the chamber window.

'Are the orders written, sir?'

'To me?--for me to deliver to you?--for you to do my lord's bidding?
Where's your head?'

Kit's finger-nails travelled up to it.  Madge pushed past him.
She and her mistress, and Kit's mate, and the old woman receiving the
word for a cup of tea, were soon in the passage.  Kit's mate had a ready
obedience for his pay, nothing else,--no counsel at all, not a suggestion
to a head knocked to a pudding by Madge's jump and my lord's paymaster
here upon the scene.

'My lady was to go down Wales way, sir.'

'That may be ordered after.'

'I 'm to take my lady to my lord?' and, 'Does it mean my lady wants a
fly?' Kit asked, and harked back on whether Madge had seen my lord.

'At five in the morning?--don't sham donkey with me,' said Gower.

The business looked inclined to be leaky, but which the way for proving
himself other than a donkey puzzled Kit: so much so, that a shove made
him partly grateful.  Madge's clever countermove had stunned his
judgement.  He was besides acting subordinate to his patron's paymaster;
and by the luck of it, no voice of woman interposed.  The countess and
her maid stood by like a disinterested couple.  Why be suspicious, if he
was to keep the countess, in sight?  She was a nice lady, and he
preferred her good opinion.  She was brave, and he did her homage.  It
might be, my lord had got himself round to the idea of thanking her for
saving his nob that night, and his way was to send and have her up, to
tell her he forgave her, after the style of lords.  Gower pricked into
him by saying aside: 'Mad, I suppose, in case of a noise?' And he could
not answer quite manfully, lost his eyes and coloured.  Neighbours might
have required an explanation of shrieks, he confessed.  Men have
sometimes to do nasty work for their patrons.

They were afoot, walking at Carinthia's pace before half-past seven.
She would not hear of any conveyance.  She was cheerful, and, as it was
pitiful to see, enjoyed her walk.  Hearing of her brother's departure for
the Austrian capital, she sparkled.  Her snatches of speech were short
flights out of the meditation possessing her.  Gower noticed her easier
English, that came home to the perpetual student he was.  She made use of
some of his father's words, and had assimilated them mentally besides
appropriating them: the verbalizing of 'purpose,' then peculiar to his
father, for example.  She said, in reply to a hint from him: 'If my lord
will allow me an interview, I purpose to be obedient.'  No one could
imagine of her that she spoke broken-spiritedly.  Her obedience was to a
higher than a mortal lord: and Gower was touched to the quick through the
use of the word.

Contrasting her with Countess Livia and her cousin, the earl might think
her inferior on the one small, square compartment called by them the
world; but she carried the promise of growth, a character in expansion,
and she had at least natural grace, a deerlike step.  Although her
picturesqueness did not swarm on him with images illuminating night,
subduing day, like the Countess Livia's, it was marked, it could tower
and intermittently eclipse; and it was of the uplifting and healing kind
by comparison, not a delicious balefulness.

The bigger houses, larger shops, austere streets of private residences,
were observed by the recent inhabitant of Whitechapel.

'My lord lives in a square,' she said.

'We shall soon be there now,' he encouraged her, doubtful though the
issue appeared.

'It is a summer morning for the Ortler, the Gross-Glockner, the
Venediger,--all our Alps, Mr. Woodseer.'

'If we could fly!'

'We love them.'

'Why, then we beat a wing--yes.'

'For I have them when I want them to sight.  It is the feet are so
desirous.  I feel them so this morning, after prisonership.  I could not
have been driven to my lord.'

'I know the feeling,' said Gower; 'any movement of us not our own
impulse, hurries the body and deadens the mind.  And by the way, my dear
lady, I spoke of the earl's commands to this man behind us walking with
your Madge.  My father would accuse me of Jesuitry.  Ines mentioned
commands, and I took advantage of it.'

'I feared,' said Carinthia.  'I go for my chance.'

Gower had a thought of the smaller creature, greater by position, to whom
she was going for her chance.  He alluded to his experience of the earl's
kindness in relation to himself, from a belief in his 'honesty'; dotted
outlines of her husband's complex character, or unmixed and violently
opposing elements.

She remarked: 'I will try and learn.'

The name of the street of beautiful shops woke a happy smile on her
mouth.  'Father talked of it; my mother, too.  He has it written down in
his Book of Maxims.  When I was a girl, I dreamed of one day walking up
Bond Street.'

They stepped from the pavement and crossed the roadway for a side-street
leading to the square.  With the swift variation of her aspect at times,
her tone changed.

'We are near.  My lord will not be troubled by me.  He has only to meet
me.  There has been misunderstanding.  I have vexed him; I could not help
it.  I will go where he pleases after I have heard him give orders.  He
thinks me a frightful woman.  I am peaceful.'

Gower muttered her word 'misunderstanding.'  They were at the earl's
house door.  One tap at it, and the two applicants for admission would
probably be shot as far away from Lord Fleetwood as when they were on the
Styrian heights last autumn.  He delivered the tap, amused by the idea.
It was like a summons to a genie of doubtful service.

My lord was out riding in the park.

Only the footman appeared at that early hour, and his countenance was
blank whitewash as he stood rigid against the wall for the lady to pass.
Madge followed into the morning room; Ines remained in the hall, where he
could have the opening speech with his patron, and where he soon had
communication with the butler.

This official entered presently to Gower, presenting a loaded forehead.
A note addressed to Mrs. Kirby-Levellier at the Countess Livia's house
hard by was handed to him for instant despatch.  He signified a
deferential wish to speak.

'You can speak in the presence of the Countess of Fleetwood, Mr. Waytes,'
Gower said.

Waytes checked a bend of his shoulders.  He had not a word, and he turned
to send the note.  He was compelled to think that he saw a well-grown
young woman in the Whitechapel Countess.

Gower's note reached Henrietta on her descent to the breakfast-table.
She was, alone, and thrown into a torture of perplexity: for she wanted
advice as to the advice to be given to Janey, and Livia was an utterly
unprofitable person to consult in the case.  She thought of Lady
Arpington, not many doors distant.  Drinking one hasty cup of tea, she
sent for her bonnet, and hastened away to the great lady, whom she found
rising from breakfast with the marquis.

Lady Arpington read Gower's note.  She unburdened herself: 'Oh!  So it 's
no longer a bachelor's household!'

Henrietta heaved the biggest of sighs.  'I fear the poor dear may have
made matters worse.'

To which Lady Arpington said: 'Worse or better, my child!' and shrugged;
for the present situation strained to snapping.

She proposed to go forthwith, and give what support she could to the
Countess of Fleetwood.

They descended the steps of the house to the garden and the Green Park's
gravel walk up to Piccadilly.  There they had view of Lord Fleetwood on
horseback leisurely turning out of the main way's tide.  They saw him
alight at the mews.  As they entered the square, he was met some doors
from the south corner by his good or evil genius, whose influence with
him came next after the marriage in the amazement it caused, and was
perhaps to be explained by it; for the wealthiest of young noblemen
bestowing his name on an unknown girl, would be the one to make an absurd
adventurer his intimate.  Lord Fleetwood bent a listening head while Mr.
Gower Woodseer, apparently a good genius for the moment, spoke at his
ear.

How do we understand laughter at such a communication as he must be
hearing from the man?  Signs of a sharp laugh indicated either his cruel
levity or that his presumptuous favourite trifled--and the man's talk
could be droll, Lady Arpington knew: it had, she recollected angrily,
diverted her, and softened her to tolerate the intruder into regions from
which her class and her periods excluded the lowly born, except at the
dinner-tables of stale politics and tattered scandal.  Nevertheless, Lord
Fleetwood mounted the steps to his house door, still listening.  His
'Asmodeus,' on the tongue of the world, might be doing the part of Mentor
really.  The house door stood open.

Fleetwood said something to Gower; he swung round, beheld the ladies and
advanced to them, saluting.  'My dear Lady Arpington!  quite so, you
arrive opportunely.  When the enemy occupies the citadel, it's proper to
surrender.  Say, I beg, she can have the house, if she prefers it.  I
will fall back on Esslemont.  Arrangements for her convenience will be
made.  I thank you, by anticipation.'

His bow included Henrietta loosely.  Lady Arpington had exclaimed:
'Enemy, Fleetwood?' and Gower, in his ignorance of the smoothness of
aristocratic manners, expected a remonstrance; but Fleetwood was allowed
to go on, with his air of steely geniality and a decision, that his
friend imagined he could have broken down like an old partition board
under the kick of a sarcasm sharpening an appeal.

'Lord Fleetwood was on the point of going in,' he assured the great lady.

'Lord Fleetwood may regret his change of mind,' said she.  'The Countess
of Fleetwood will have my advice to keep her footing in this house.'

She and Henrietta sat alone with Carinthia for an hour.  Coming forth,
Lady Arpington ejaculated to herself: 'Villany somewhere!--You will do
well, Henrietta, to take up your quarters with her a day or two.  She can
hold her position a month.  Longer is past possibility.'

A shudder of the repulsion from men crept over the younger lady.  But she
was a warrior's daughter, and observed: 'My husband, her brother, will be
back before the month ends.'

'No need for hostilities to lighten our darkness,' Lady Arpington
rejoined.  'You know her?  trust her?'

'One cannot doubt her face.  She is my husband's sister.  Yes, I do trust
her.  I nail my flag to her cause.'

The flag was crimson, as it appeared on her cheeks; and that intimated a
further tale, though not of so dramatic an import as the cognizant short
survey of Carinthia had been.

These young women, with the new complications obtruded by them, irritated
a benevolent great governing lady, who had married off her daughters and
embraced her grandchildren, comfortably finishing that chapter; and
beheld now the apparition of the sex's ancient tripping foe, when
circumstances in themselves were quite enough to contend against on their
behalf.  It seemed to say, that nature's most burdened weaker must always
be beaten.  Despite Henrietta's advocacy and Carinthia's clear face, it
raised a spectral form of a suspicion, the more effective by reason of
the much required justification it fetched from the shades to plead
apologies for Lord Fleetwood's erratic, if not mad, and in any case ugly,
conduct.  What otherwise could be his excuse?  Such was his need of one,
that the wife he crushed had to be proposed for sacrifice, in the mind of
a lady tending strongly to side with her and condemn her husband.

Lady Arpington had counselled Carinthia to stay where she was, the Fates
having brought her there.  Henrietta was too generous to hesitate in her
choice between her husband's sister and the earl.  She removed from
Livia's house to Lord Fleetwood's.  My lord was at Esslemont two days;
then established his quarters at Scrope's hotel, five minutes' walk from
the wedded lady to whom the right to bear his title was granted, an
interview with him refused.  Such a squaring for the battle of spouses
had never--or not in mighty London--been seen since that old fight began.




CHAPTER XXVI

AFTER SOME FENCING THE DAME PASSES OUR GUARD

Dame Gossip at this present pass bursts to give us a review of the social
world siding for the earl or for his countess; and her parrot cry of
'John Rose Mackrell!' with her head's loose shake over the smack of her
lap, to convey the contemporaneous tipsy relish of the rich good things
he said on the subject of the contest, indicates the kind of intervention
it would be.

To save the story from having its vein tied, we may accept the reminder,
that he was the countess's voluble advocate at a period when her friends
were shy to speak of her.  After relating the Vauxhall Gardens episode in
burlesque Homeric during the freshness of the scandal, Rose Mackrell's
enthusiasm for the heroine of his humour set in.  He tracked her to her
parentage, which was new breath blown into the sunken tradition of some
Old Buccaneer and his Countess Fanny: and, a turn of great good luck
helping him to a copy of the book of the MAXIMS FOR MEN, he would quote
certain of the racier ones, passages of Captain John Peter Kirby's
personal adveres in various lands and waters illustrating the text, to
prove that the old warrior acted by the rule of his recommendations.
They had the repulsive attraction proper to rusty lumber swords and
truncehons that have tasted brains.  They wove no mild sort of halo for
the head of a shillelagh-flourishing Whitechapel Countess descended from
the writer and doer.

People were willing to believe in her jump of thirty feet or more off a
suburban house-top to escape durance, and her midnight storming of her
lord's town house, and ousting of him to go find his quarters at Scrope's
hotel.  He, too, had his band of pugilists, as it was known; and he might
have heightened a rageing scandal.  The nobleman forbore.  A woman's blow
gracefully taken adds a score of inches to our stature, floor us as it
may: we win the world's after-thoughts.  Rose Mackrell sketched the
earl;--always alert, smart, quick to meet a combination and protect a
dignity never obtruded, and in spite of himself the laugh of the town.
His humour flickered wildly round the ridiculous position of a prominent
young nobleman, whose bearing and character were foreign to a position of
ridicule.

Nevertheless, the earl's figure continuing to be classic sculpture, it
allied him with the aristocracy of martyrs, that burn and do not wince.
He propitiated none, and as he could not but suffer shrewdly, he gained
esteem enough to shine through the woman's pitiless drenching of him.
During his term at Scrope's hotel, the carousals there were quite old-
century and matter of discourse.  He had proved his return to sound sense
in the dismissal of 'the fiddler,' notoriously the woman's lieutenant, or
more; and nightly the revelry closed at the great gaming tables of St.
James's Street, while Whitechapel held the coroneted square, well on her
way to the Law courts, as Abrane and Potts reported; and positively so,
'clear case.'  That was the coming development and finale of the
Marriage.  London waited for it.

A rich man's easy smile over losses at play, merely taught his emulous
troop to feel themselves poor devils in the pocket.  But Fleetwood's
contempt of Sleep was a marvel, superhuman, and accused them of an
inferior vigour, hard for young men to admit by the example.  He never
went to bed.  Issuing from Fortune's hall-doors in the bright, lively,
summer morning, he mounted horse and was away to the hills.  Or he took
the arm of a Roman Catholic nobleman, Lord Feltre, and walked with him
from the green tables and the establishment's renowned dry still Sillery
to a Papist chapel.  As it was not known that he had given his word to
abjure his religion, the pious gamblers did no worse than spread an alarm
and quiet it, by the citation of his character for having a try at
everything.

Henrietta despatched at this period the following letter to Chillon:

'I am with Livia to-morrow.  Janey starts for Wales to-morrow morning, a
voluntary exile.  She pleaded to go back to that place where you had to
leave her, promising she would not come Westward; but was persuaded.
Lady Arpington approves.  The situation was getting too terribly
strained.  We met and passed my lord in the park.

'He was walking his horse-elegant cavalier that he is: would not look on
his wife.  A woman pulled by her collar should be passive; if she pulls
her way, she is treated as a dog.  I see nothing else in the intention of
poor Janey's last offence to him.  There is an opposite counsel, and he
can be eloquent, and he will be heard on her side.  How could she manage
the most wayward when she has not an idea of ordinary men!  But, my
husband, they have our tie between them; it may move him.  It subdues
her--and nothing else would have done that.  If she had been in England a
year before the marriage, she would, I think, have understood better how
to guide her steps and her tongue for his good pleasure.  She learns
daily, very quickly: observes, assimilates; she reads and has her
comments--would have shot far ahead of your Riette, with my advantages.

'Your uncle--but he will bear any charge on his conscience as long as he
can get the burden off his shoulders.  Do not fret, my own!  Reperuse the
above--you will see we have grounds for hope.

'He should have looked down on her!  No tears from her eyes, but her eyes
were tears.  She does not rank among beautiful women.  She has her
moments for outshining them--the loveliest of spectres!  She caught at my
heart.  I cannot forget her face looking up for him to look down.  A
great painter would have reproduced it, a great poet have rendered the
impression.  Nothing short of the greatest.  That is odd to say of one so
simple as she.  But when accidents call up her reserves, you see mountain
heights where mists were--she is actually glorified.  Her friend--I do
believe a friend--the Mr. Woodseer you are to remember meeting somewhere
--a sprained ankle--has a dozen similes ready for what she is when pain
or happiness vivify her.  Or, it may be, tender charity.  She says, that
if she feels for suffering people, it is because she is the child of
Chillon's mother.  In like manner Chillon is the son of Janey's father.

'Mr. Woodseer came every other evening.  Our only enlivenment.  Livia
followed her policy, in refusing to call.  We lived luxuriously; no
money, not enough for a box at the opera, though we yearned--you can
imagine.  Chapters of philosophy read out and expounded instead.  Janey
likes them.  He sets lessons to her queer maid--reading, writing,
pronunciation of English.  An inferior language to Welsh, for poetical
purposes, we are informed.  So Janey--determining to apply herself to
Welsh, and a chameleon Riette dreading that she will be taking a contrary
view of the honest souls--as she feels them to be--when again under
Livia's shadow.

'The message from Janey to Scrope's hotel was despatched half-an-hour
after we had driven in from the park; fruit of a brown meditation.  I
wrote it--third person--a single sentence.  Arrangements are made for her
to travel comfortably.  It is funny--the shops for her purchases of
clothes, necessaries, etc., are specified; she may order to any extent.
Not a shilling of money for her poor purse.  What can be the secret of
that?  He does nothing without an object.  To me, uniformly civil, no
irony, few compliments.  Livia writes, that I am commended for keeping
Janey company.  What can be the secret of a man scrupulously just with
one hand, and at the same time cruel with the other?  Mr. Woodseer says,
his wealth:--"More money than is required for their needs, men go into
harness to Plutus,"--if that is clever.

'I have written my husband--as Janey ceases to call her own; and it was
pretty and touching to hear her "my husband."--Oh!  a dull letter.  But
he is my husband though he keeps absent--to be longed for--he is my
husband still, my husband always.  Chillon is Henrietta's husband, the
world cries out, and when she is flattered she does the like, for then it
is not too presumptuous that she should name Henrietta Chillon's wife.
In my ears, husband has the sweeter sound.  It brings an angel from
overhead.  Will it bring him one-half hour sooner?  My love!  My dear!
If it did, I should be lisping "husband, husband, husband" from cock-crow
to owl's cry.  Livia thinks the word foolish, if not detestable.  She and
I have our different opinions.  She is for luxury.  I choose poverty and
my husband.  Poverty has its beauty, if my husband is the sun of it.
Elle radote.  She would not have written so dull a letter to her husband
if she had been at the opera last night, or listened to a distant street-
band.  No more--the next line would be bleeding.  He should have her
blood too, if that were her husband's--it would never be; but if it were
for his good in the smallest way.  Chillon's wish is to give his blood
for them he loves.  Never did woman try more to write worthily to her
absent lord and fall so miserably into the state of dripping babe from
bath on nurse's knee.  Cover me, my lord; and love, my cause for--no, my
excuse, my refuge from myself.  We are one?  Oh!  we are one!--and we
have been separated eight and twenty days.

                                   'HENRIETTA KIRBY-LEVELLIER.'

That was a letter for the husband and lover to receive in a foreign land
and be warmed.

The tidings of Carinthia washed him clean of the grimy district where
his waxen sister had developed her stubborn insensibility;--resembling
craziness, every perversion of the refinement demanded by young
Englishmen of their ladies; and it pacified him with the belief that she
was now at rest, the disturbed history of their father and mother at rest
as well; his conscience in relation to the marriage likewise at rest.
Chillon had a wife.  Her writing of the welcome to poverty stirred his
knowledge of his wife's nature.  Carinthia might bear it and harden to
flint; Henrietta was a butterfly for the golden rays.  His thoughts, all
his energies, were bent on the making of money to supply her need for the
pleasure she flew in--a butterfly's grub without it.  Accurately so did
the husband and lover read his wife--adoring her the more.

Her letter's embracing close was costly to them.  It hurried him to the
compromise of a debateable business, and he fell into the Austrian
Government's terms for the payment of the inheritance from his father;
calculating that--his sister's share deducted-money would be in hand to
pay pressing debts and enable Henrietta to live unworried by cares until
he should have squeezed debts, long due and increasing, out of the
miserly old lord, his uncle.  A prospect of supplies for twelve months,
counting the hack and carriage Henrietta had always been used to, seemed
about as far as it was required to look by the husband hastening homeward
to his wife's call.  Her letter was a call in the night.  Besides, there
were his yet untried Inventions.  The new gunpowder testing at Croridge
promised to provide Henrietta with many of the luxuries she could have
had, and had abandoned for his sake.  The new blasting powder and a
destructive shell might build her the palace she deserved.  His uncle
was, no doubt, his partner.  If, however, the profits were divided,
sufficient wealth was assured.  But his uncle remained a dubious image.
The husband and lover could enfold no positive prospect to suit his
wife's tastes beyond the twelve months.

We have Dame Gossip upon us.

--One minute let mention be of the excitement over Protestant England
when that rumour disseminated, telling of her wealthiest nobleman's visit
to a monastery, up in the peaks and snows; and of his dwelling among the
monks, and assisting in all their services day and night, hymning and
chanting, uttering not one word for one whole week: his Papistical
friend, Lord Feltre, with him, of course, after Jesuit arts had allured
him to that place of torrents and lightnings and canticles and demon
echoes, all as though expressly contrived for the horrifying of sinners
into penitence and confession and the monkish cowl up to life's end, not
to speak of the abjuration of worldly possessions and donation of them
into the keeping of the shaven brothers; when either they would have
settled a band of them here in our very midst, or they would have
impoverished--is not too strong a word--the country by taking the money's
worth of the mines, estates, mansions, freehold streets and squares of
our metropolis out of it without scruple; rejoicing so to bleed the
Protestant faith.  Underrate it now--then it was a truly justifiable
anxiety: insomuch that you heard people of station, eminent titled
persons, asking, like the commonest low Radicals, whether it was prudent
legislation to permit of the inheritance of such vast wealth by a young
man, little more than a boy, and noted for freaks.  And some declared it
could not be allowed for foreign monks to have a claim to inherit English
property.  There was a general consent, that if the Earl of Fleetwood
went to the extreme of making over his property to those monks, he should
be pronounced insane and incapable.  Ultimately the world was a little
pacified by hearing that a portion of it was entailed, Esslemont and the
Welsh mines.

So it might be; but what if he had no child!  The marriage amazing
everybody scarcely promised fruit, it was thought.  Countess Livia, much
besought for her opinion, scouted the possibility.  And Carinthia Jane
was proclaimed by John Rose Mackrell (to his dying day the poor gentleman
tried vainly to get the second syllable of his name accentuated) a young
woman who would outlive twice over the husband she had.  He said of his
name, it was destined to pass him down a dead fish in the nose of
posterity, and would affect his best jokes; which something has done, or
the present generation has lost the sense of genuine humour.

Thanks to him, the talk of the Whitechapel Countess again sprang up,
merrily as ever; and after her having become, as he said, 'a desiccated
celebrity,' she outdid cabinet ministers and naughty wives for a living
morsel in the world's mouth.  She was denounced by the patriotic party as
the cause of the earl's dalliance with Rome.

The earl, you are to know, was then coasting along the Mediterranean, on
board his beautiful schooner yacht, with his Lord Feltre, bound to make
an inspection of Syrian monasteries, and forget, if he could, the face of
all faces, another's possession by the law.

Those two lords, shut up together in a yacht, were advised by their
situation to be bosom friends, and they quarrelled violently, and were
reconciled, and they quarrelled again; they were explosive chemicals;
until the touch of dry land relieved them of what they really fancied the
spell of the Fiend.  For their argumentative topic during confinement was
Woman, when it was not Theology; and even off a yacht, those are subjects
to kindle the utmost hatred of dissension, if men are not perfectly
concordant.  They agreed upon land to banish any talk of Women or
Theology, where it would have been comparatively innocent; so they both
desiring to be doing the thing they had sworn they would not do, the
thoughts of both were fastened on one or the other interdicted subject.
They hardly spoke; they perceived in their longing minds, that the
imagined spell of, the Fiend was indeed the bile of the sea, secreted
thickly for want of exercise, and they both regretted the days and nights
of their angry controversies; unfit pilgrims of the Holy Land, they
owned.

To such effect, Lord Fleetwood wrote to Gower Woodseer, as though there
had been no breach between them, from Jerusalem, expressing the wish to
hear his cool wood-notes of the philosophy of Life, fresh drawn from
Nature's breast; and urgent for an answer, to be addressed to his hotel
at Southampton, that he might be greeted on his return home first by his
'friend Gower.'

He wrote in the month of January.  His arrival at Southampton was on the
thirteenth day of March; and there he opened a letter some weeks old, the
bearer of news which ought by rights to make husbands proudly happy.




CHAPTER XXVII

WE DESCEND INTO A STEAMER'S ENGINE-ROOM

Fleetwood had dropped his friend Lord Feltre at Ancona; his good fortune
was to be alone when the clang of bells rang through his head in the
reading of Gower's lines.  Other letters were opened: from the Countess
Livia, from Lady Arpington, from Captain Kirby-Levellier.  There was one
from his lawyers, informing him of their receipt of a communication dated
South Wales, December 11th, and signed Owain Wythan; to the effect, that
the birth of a son to the Earl of Fleetwood was registered on the day of
the date, with a copy of the document forwarded.

Livia scornfully stated the tattling world's 'latest.'  The captain was
as brief, in ordinary words, whose quick run to the stop could be taken
for a challenge of the eye.  It stamped the adversary's frown on
Fleetwood reading.  Lady Arpington was more politic; she wrote of
'a healthy boy,' and 'the healthy mother giving him breast,' this being
'the way for the rearing of strong men.'  She condescended to the
particulars, that she might touch him.

The earl had not been so reared: his mother was not the healthy mother.
One of his multitudinous, shifty, but ineradicable ambitions was to
exhibit an excellingly vigorous, tireless constitution.  He remembered
the needed refreshment of the sea-breezes aboard his yacht during the
week following the sleep-discarded nights at Scrope's and the green
tables.  For a week he hung to the smell of brine, in rapturous amity
with Feltre, until they yellowed, differed, wrangled, hated.

A powerful leaven was put into him by the tidings out of Wales.  Gower,
good fellow, had gone down to see the young mother three weeks after the
birth of her child.  She was already renewing her bloom.  She had
produced the boy in the world's early manner, lightly, without any of the
tragic modern hovering over death to give the life.  Gower compared it to
a 'flush of the vernal orchard after a day's drink of sunlight.'  That
was well: that was how it should be.  One loathes the idea of tortured
women.

The good fellow was perhaps absurdly poetical.  Still we must have poetry
to hallow this and other forms of energy: or say, if you like, the right
view of them impels to poetry.  Otherwise we are in the breeding yards,
among the litters and the farrows.  It is a question of looking down or
looking up.  If we are poor creatures--as we are if we do but feast and
gamble and beget--we shall run for a time with the dogs and come to the
finish of swine.  Better say, life is holy!  Why, then have we to thank
her who teaches it.

He gazed at the string of visions of the woman naming him husband, making
him a father: the imagined Carinthia--beautiful Gorgon, haggard Venus;
the Carinthia of the precipice tree-shoot; Carinthia of the ducal
dancing-hall; and she at the altar rails; she on the coach box; she
alternately softest of brides, doughtiest of Amazons.  A mate for the
caress, an electrical heroine, fronted him.

Yes, and she was Lord Fleetwood's wife, cracking sconces,--a demoiselle
Moll Flanders,--the world's Whitechapel Countess out for an airing,
infernally earnest about it, madly ludicrous; the schemer to catch his
word, the petticoated Shylock to bind him to the letter of it; now
persecuting, haunting him, now immoveable for obstinacy; malignant to
stay down in those vile slums and direct tons of sooty waters on his head
from its mains in the sight of London, causing the least histrionic of
men to behave as an actor.  He beheld her a skull with a lamp behind the
eyeholes.

But this woman was the woman who made him a father; she was the mother of
the heir of the House; and the boy she clasped and suckled as her boy was
his boy.  They met inseparably in that new life.

Truly, there could not be a woman of flesh so near to a likeness with the
beatific image of Feltre's worshipped Madonna!

The thought sparkled and darkened in Fleetwood's mind, as a star passing
into cloud.  For an uproarious world claimed the woman, jeered at all
allied with her; at her husband most, of course:--the punctilious noodle!
the golden jackass, tethered and goaded!  He had choice among the pick of
women: the daughter of the Old Buccaneer was preferred by the wiseacre
Coelebs.  She tricked him cunningly and struck a tremendous return blow
in producing her male infant.

By the way, was she actually born in wedlock?  Lord Levellier's
assurances regarding her origin were, by the calculation, a miser's
shuffles to clinch his bargain.  Assuming the representative of holy
motherhood to be a woman of illegitimate birth, the history of the House
to which the spotted woman gave an heir would suffer a jolt when touching
on her.  And altogether the history fumed rank vapours.  Imagine her boy
in his father's name a young collegian!  No commonly sensitive lad could
bear the gibes of the fellows raking at antecedents: Fleetwood would be
the name to start roars.  Smarting for his name, the earl chafed at the
boy's mother.  Her production of a man-child was the further and grosser
offence.

The world sat on him.  His confession to some degree of weakness, even to
folly, stung his pride of individuality so that he had to soothe the pain
by tearing himself from a thought of his folly's partner, shutting
himself up and away from her.  Then there was a cessation of annoyance,
flatteringly agreeable: which can come to us only of our having done the
right thing, young men will think.  He felt at once warmly with the
world, enjoyed the world's kind shelter, and in return for its eulogy of
his unprecedented attachment to the pledge of his word, admitted an
understanding of its laughter at the burlesque edition of a noble lady in
the person of the Whitechapel Countess.  The world sat on him heavily.

He recurred to Gower Woodseer's letter.

The pictures and images in it were not the principal matter,--the
impression had been deep.  A plain transcription of the young mother's
acts and words did more to portray her: the reader could supply
reflections.

Would her boy's father be very pleased to see him?  she had asked.

And she spoke of a fear that the father would try to take her boy from
her.

'Never that--you have my word!' Fleetwood said; and he nodded
consentingly over her next remark

'Not while I live, till he must go to school!'

The stubborn wife would be the last of women to sit and weep as a rifled
mother.

A child of the Countess Carinthia (he phrased it) would not be deficient
in will, nor would the youngster lack bravery.

For his part, comparison rushing at him and searching him, he owned that
he leaned on pride.  To think that he did, became a theme for pride.  The
mother had the primitive virtues, the father the developed: he was the
richer mine.  And besides, he was he, the unriddled, complex, individual
he; she was the plain barbarian survival, good for giving her offspring
bone, muscle, stout heart.

Shape the hypothesis of a fairer woman the mother of the heir to the
earldom.

Henrietta was analyzed in a glimpse.  Courage, animal healthfulness, she,
too, might--her husband not obstructing--transmit; and good looks, eyes
of the sapphire AEgean.  And therewith such pliability as the Mother of
Love requires of her servants.

Could that woman resist seductions?

Fleetwood's wrath with her for refusing him and inducing him in spite to
pledge his word elsewhere, haphazard, pricked a curiosity to know whether
the woman could be--and easily!  easily!  he wagered--led to make her
conduct warrant for his contempt of her.  Led,--that is, misled, you
might say, if you were pleading for a doll.  But it was necessary to bait
the pleasures for the woman, in order to have full view of the precious
fine fate one has escaped.  Also to get well rid of a sort of hectic in
the blood, which the woman's beauty has cast on that reflecting tide: a
fever-sign, where the fever has become quite emotionless and is merely
desirous for the stain of it to be washed out.  As this is not the desire
to possess or even to taste, contempt will do it.  When we know that the
weaver of the fascinations is purchasable, we toss her to the market
where men buy; and we walk released from vile subjection to one of the
female heap: subjection no longer, doubtless, and yet a stain of the past
flush, often colouring our reveries, creating active phantasms of a
passion absolutely extinct, if it ever was the veritable passion.

The plot--formless plot--to get release by the sacrifice or at least a
crucial temptation of the woman, that should wash his blood clean of her
image, had a shade of the devilish, he acknowledged; and the apology
offered no improvement of its aspect.  She might come out of the trial
triumphant.  And benefit for himself, even a small privilege, even the
pressure of her hand, he not only shrank from the thought of winning,-he
loathed the thought.  He was too delicate over the idea of the married
woman whom he fancied he loved in her maidenhood.  Others might press her
hand, lead her the dance: he simply wanted his release.  She had set him
on fire; he conceived a method for trampling the remaining sparks and
erasing stain and scars; that was all.  Henrietta rejected her wealthy
suitor: she might some day hence be seen crawling abjectly to wealth,
glad of a drink from the cup it holds, intoxicated with the draught.
An injured pride could animate his wealth to crave solace of such a
spectacle.

Devilish, if you like.  He had expiated the wickedness in Cistercian
seclusion.  His wife now drove him to sin again.

She had given him a son.  That fluted of home and honourable life.
She had her charm, known to him alone.

But how, supposing she did not rub him to bristle with fresh irritations,
how go to his wife while Henrietta held her throne?  Consideration was
due to her until she stumbled.  Enough if she wavered.  Almost enough is
she stood firm as a statue in the winds, and proved that the first page
of her was a false introduction.  The surprising apparition of a
beautiful woman with character; a lightly-thrilled, pleasure-loving woman
devoted to her husband or protected by her rightful self-esteem, would
loosen him creditably.  It had to be witnessed, for faith in it.  He
reverenced our legendary good women, and he bowed to noble deeds; and he
ascribed the former to poetical creativeness, the latter operated as a
scourging to his flesh to yield its demoniacal inmates.  Nothing of the
kind was doing at present.

Or stay: a studious re-perusal of Gower Woodseer's letter enriched a
little incident.  Fleetwood gave his wife her name of Carinthia when he
had read deliberately and caught the scene.

Mrs. Wythan down in Wales related it to Gower.  Carinthia and Madge,
trudging over the treeless hills, came on a birchen clump round a deep
hollow or gullypit; precipitous, the earl knew, he had peeped over the
edge in his infant days.  There at the bottom, in a foot or so of water,
they espied a lamb; and they rescued the poor beastie by going down to
it, one or both.  It must have been the mountain-footed one.  A man would
hesitate, spying below.  Fleetwood wondered how she had managed to climb
up, and carrying the lamb!  Down pitches Madge Winch to help--they did it
between them.  We who stand aloof admire stupidly.  To defend himself
from admiring, he condemned the two women for the risk they ran to save a
probably broken-legged little beast: and he escaped the melting mood by
forcing a sneer at the sort of stuff out of which popular ballads are
woven.  Carinthia was accused of letting her adventurous impulses and
sentimental female compassion swamp thought of a mother's duties.  If
both those women had broken their legs the child might have cried itself
into fits for the mother, there she would have remained.

Gower wrote in a language transparent of the act, addressed to a reader
whose memory was to be impregnated.  His reader would have flown away
from the simple occurrence on arabesques and modulated tones; and then
envisaging them critically, would have tossed his poor little story to
the winds, as a small thing magnified: with an object, being the next
thought about it.  He knew his Fleetwood so far.

His letter concluded: 'I am in a small Surrey village over a baker's
shop, rent eight shillings per week, a dame's infant school opposite my
window, miles of firwood, heath, and bracken openings, for the winged or
the nested fancies.  Love Nature, she makes you a lord of her boundless,
off any ten square feet of common earth.  I go through my illusions and
come always back on that good truth.  It says, beware of the world's
passion for flavours and spices.  Much tasted, they turn and bite the
biter.  My exemplars are the lately breeched youngsters with two pence in
their pockets for the gingerbread-nut booth on a fair day.  I learn more
from one of them than you can from the whole cavalcade of your attendant
Ixionides.'

Mounting the box of his coach for the drive to London, Fleetwood had the
new name for the parasitic and sham vital troop at his ears.

'My Ixionides!' he repeated, and did not scorn them so much as he
rejoiced to be enlightened by the title.  He craved the presence of the
magician who dropped illumination with a single word; wholesomer to think
of than the whole body of those Ixionides--not bad fellows, here and
there, he reflected, tolerantly, half laughing at some of their clownish
fun.  Gower Woodseer and he had not quarrelled?  No, they had merely
parted at one of the crossways.  The plebeian could teach that son of
the, genuflexions, Lord Feltre, a lesson in manners.  Woodseer was the
better comrade and director of routes.  Into the forest, up on the
heights; and free, not locked; and not parroting day and night, but quick
for all that the world has learnt and can tell, though two-thirds of it
be composed of Ixionides: that way lies wisdom, and his index was cut
that way.

Arrived in town, he ran over the headings of his letters, in no degree
anxious for a communication from Wales.  There was none.  Why none?

She might as well have scrawled her announcement of an event pleasing to
her, and, by the calculation, important to him, if not particularly
interesting.  The mother's wifeish lines would, perhaps, have been tested
in a furnace.  He smarted at the blank of any, of even two or three
formal words.  She sulked?  'I am not a fallen lamb!' he said.  Evidently
one had to be a shivering beast in trouble, to excite her to move a hand.

Through so slight a fissure as this piece of discontent cracked in him,
the crowd of his grievances with the woman rushed pell-mell, deluging
young shoots of sweeter feelings.  She sulked!  If that woman could not
get the command, he was to know her incapable of submission.  After
besmutting the name she had filched from him, she let him understand that
there was no intention to repent.  Possibly she meant war.  In which case
a man must fly, or stand assailed by the most intolerable of vulgar
farces;--to be compared to a pelting of one on the stage.

The time came for him to knock at doors and face his public.




CHAPTER XXVIII

BY CONCESSIONS TO MISTRESS GOSSIP A FURTHER INTRUSION IS AVERTED

Livia welcomed him, with commiserating inquiry behind her languid
eyelids.  'You have all the latest?' it said.

He struck on the burning matter.

'You wish to know the part you have to play, ma'am.'  'Tell me, Russett.'

'You will contradict nothing.'

Her eyebrows asked, 'It means?'

'You have authority from me to admit the facts.'

'They are facts?' she remarked.

'Women love teasing round certain facts, apparently; like the Law courts
over their pet cases.'

'But, Russett, will you listen?'

'Has the luck been civil of late?'

'I think of something else at present.  No, it has not.'

'Abrane?'

'Pray, attend to me.  No, not Abrane.'

'I believe you've all been cleared out in my absence.  St. Ombre?'

Her complexion varied.  'Mr. Ambrose Mallard has once or twice .  .  .
But let me beg you--the town is rageing with it.  My dear Russett, a bold
front now; there 's the chance of your release in view.'

'A rascal in view!  Name the sum.'

'I must reckon.  My head is--can you intend to submit?'

'So it's Brosey Mallard now.  You choose your deputy queerly.  He's as
bad as Abrane, with steam to it.  Chummy Potts would have done better.'

'He wins one night; loses every pound-note he has the next; and comes
vaunting--the "dry still Sillery" of the establishment,--a perpetual
chorus to his losses!'

'His consolation to you for yours.  That is the gentleman.  Chummy
doesn't change.  Say, why not St. Ombre?  He's cool.'

'There are reasons.'

'Let them rest.  And I have my reasons.  Do the same for them.'

'Yours concern the honour of the family.'

'Deeply: respect them.'

'Your relatives have to be thought of, though they are few and not too
pleasant.'

'If I had thought much of them, what would our relations be?  They object
to dicing, and I to leading strings.'

She turned to a brighter subject, of no visible connection with the
preceding.

'Henrietta comes in May.'

'The month of her colours.'

'Her money troubles are terrible.'

'Both of you appear unlucky in your partners,--if winning was the object.
She shall have all the distractions we can offer.'

'Your visit to the Chartreuse alarmed her.'

'She has rejoiced her husband.'

'A girl.  She feared the Jesuit in your friend.'

'Feltre and she are about equally affected by music.  They shall meet.'

'Russett, this once: I do entreat you to take counsel with your good
sense, and remember that you stand where you are by going against my
advice.  It is a perfect storm over London.  The world has not to be
informed of your generosity; but a chivalry that invites the most
horrible of sneers at a man!  And what can I say?  I have said it was
impossible.'

'Add the postscript: you find it was perfectly possible.'

'I have to learn more than I care to hear.'

'Your knowledge is not in request: you will speak in my name.'

'Will you consult your lawyers, Russett, before you commit yourself?'

'I am on my way to Lady Arpington.'

'You cannot be thinking how serious it is.'

'I rather value the opinion of a hard-headed woman of the world.'

'Why not listen to me?'

'You have your points, ma'am.'

'She's a torch.'

'She serves my purpose.'

Livia shrugged sadly.  'I suppose it serves your purpose to be
unintelligible to me.'

He rendered himself intelligible immediately by saying, 'Before I go--
a thousand?'

'Oh, my dear Russett!' she sighed.

'State the amount.'

She seemed to be casting unwieldly figures and he helped her with, 'Mr.
Isaacs?'

'Not less than three, I fear.'

'Has he been pressing?'

'You are always good to us, Russett.'

'You are always considerate for the honour of the family, ma'am.  Order
for the money with you here to-morrow.  And I thank you for your advice.
Do me the favour to follow mine.

'Commands should be the word.'

'Phrase it as you please.'

'You know I hate responsibility.'

'The chorus in classical dramas had generally that sentiment, but the
singing was the sweeter for it.'

'Whom do you not win when you condescend to the mood, you dear boy?'

He restrained a bitter reply, touching the kind of persons he had won: a
girl from the mountains, a philosophical tramp of the roads, troops of
the bought.

Livia spelt at the problem he was.  She put away the task of reading it.
He departed to see Lady Arpington, and thereby rivet his chains.

As Livia had said, she was a torch.  Lady Endor, Lady Eldritch, Lady
Cowry, kindled at her.  Again there were flights of the burning brands
over London.  The very odd marriage; the no-marriage; the two-ends-of-
the-town marriage; and the maiden marriage a fruitful marriage; the
monstrous marriage of the countess productive in banishment, and the
unreadable earl accepting paternity; this Amazing Marriage was again the
riddle in the cracker for tattlers and gapers.  It rattled upon the
world's native wantonness, the world's acquired decorum: society's
irrepressible original and its powerfully resisting second nature.  All
the rogues of the fine sphere ran about with it, male and female; and
there was the narrative that suggestively skipped, and that which trod
the minuet measure, dropping a curtsey to ravenous curiosity; the apology
surrendering its defensible cause in supplications to benevolence; and
the benevolence damnatory in a too eloquent urgency; followed by the
devout objection to a breath of the subject, so blackening it as to call
forth the profanely circumstantial exposition.  Smirks, blushes, dead
silences, and in the lower regions roars, hung round it.

But the lady, though absent, did not figure poorly at all.  Granting
Whitechapel and the shillelagh affair, certain whispers of her good
looks, contested only to be the more violently asserted; and therewith
Rose Mackrell's tale of her being a 'young woman of birth,' having a
'romantic story to tell of herself and her parentage,' made her latest
performance the champagne event of it hitherto.  Men sparkled when they
had it on their lips.

How, then, London asked, would the Earl of Fleetwood move his pieces in
reply to his countess's particularly clever indication of the check
threatening mate?

His move had no relation to the game, it was thought at first.  The world
could not suppose that he moved a simple pawn on his marriage board.  He
purchased a shop in Piccadilly for the sale of fruit and flowers.

Lady Arpington was entreated to deal at the shop, Countess Livia had her
orders; his friends, his parasites and satellites, were to deal there.
Intensely earnest as usual, he besought great ladies to let him have the
overflow of their hothouses; and they classing it as another of the
mystifications of a purse crazy for repleteness, inquired: 'But is it you
we are to deal with?' And he quite seriously said: 'With me, yes, at
present.'  Something was behind the curtain, of course.  His gravity had
the effect of the ultra-comical in concealing it.

The shop was opened.  We have the assurance of Rose Mackrell, that he
entered and examined the piles and pans of fruit, and the bouquets
cunningly arranged by a hand smelling French.  The shop was roomy,
splendid windows lighted the yellow, the golden, the green and parti-
coloured stores.  Four doors off, a chemist's motley in bellied glasses
crashed on the sight.  Passengers along the pavement had presented to
them such a contrast as might be shown if we could imagine the Lethean
ferry-boatload brought sharp against Pomona's lapful.  In addition to the
plucked flowers and fruits of the shop, Rose Mackrell more attentively
examined the samples doing service at the counters.  They were three,
under supervision of a watchful-eyed fourth.  Dame Gossip is for quoting
his wit.  But the conclusion he reached, after quitting the shop and
pacing his dozen steps, is important; for it sent a wind over the town to
set the springs of tattle going as wildly as when the herald's trumpet
blew the announcement for the world to hear out of Wales.

He had observed, that the young woman supervising was deficient in the
ease of an established superior; her brows were troubled; she was,
therefore, a lieutenant elevated from a lower grade; and, to his
thinking, conducted the business during the temporary retirement of the
mistress of the shop.

And the mistress of the shop?

The question hardly needs be put.

Rose Mackrell or his humour answered it in unfaltering terms.

London heard, with the variety of feelings which are indistinguishable
under a flooding amazement, that the beautiful new fruit and flower shop
had been purchased and stocked by the fabulously wealthy young Earl of
Fleetwood, to give his Whitechapel Countess a taste for business, an
occupation, and an honourable means of livelihood.

There was, Dame Gossip thumps to say, a general belief in this report.
Crowds were on the pavement, peering through the shop-windows.  Carriages
driving by stopped to look.  My lord himself had been visible, displaying
his array of provisions to friends.  Nor was credulity damped appreciably
when over the shop, in gold letters, appeared the name of Sarah Winch.
It might be the countess's maiden name, if she really was a married
countess.

But, in truth, the better informed of the town, having begun to think its
Croesus capable of any eccentricity, chose to believe.  They were at the
pitch of excitement which demands and will swallow a succession of wilder
extravagances.  To accelerate the delirium of the fun, nothing was too
much, because any absurdity was anticipated.  And the earl's readiness to
be complimented on the shop's particular merits, his gratified air at an
allusion to it, whirled the fun faster.  He seemed entirely unconscious
that each step he now took wakened peals.

For such is the fate of a man who has come to be dogged by the humourist
for the provision he furnishes; and, as it happens, he is the more
laughable if not in himself a laughable object.  The earl's handsome
figure, fine style, and contrasting sobriety heightened the burlesque of
his call to admiration of a shop where Whitechapel would sit in state-
according to the fiction so closely under the lee of fact that they were
not strictly divisible.  Moreover, Sarah Winch, whom Chumley Potts drew
into conversation, said, he vowed, she came up West from Whitechapel.
She said it a little nervously, but without blushing.  Always on the side
of the joke, he could ask: 'Who can doubt?' Indeed, scepticism poisoned
the sport.

The Old Buccaneer has written: Friends may laugh; I am not roused.  My
enemy's laugh is a bugle blown in the night.

Our enemy's laugh at us rouses to wariness, he would say.  He can barely
mean, that a condition of drowsihead is other than providently warned by
laughter of friends.  An old warrior's tough fibre would, perhaps, be
insensible to that small crackle.  In civil life, however, the friend's
laugh at us is the loudest of the danger signals to stop our course: and
the very wealthy nobleman, who is known for not a fool, is kept from
hearing it.  Unless he does hear it, he can have no suspicion of its
being about him: he cannot imagine such 'lese-majeste' in the subservient
courtiers too prudent to betray a sign.  So Fleetwood was unwarned; and
his child-like unconsciousness of the boiling sentiments around,
seasoned, pricked, and maddened his parasites under compression to
invent, for a faint relief.  He had his title for them, they their tales
of him.

Dame Gossip would recount the tales.  She is of the order of persons
inclining to suspect the tittle of truth in prodigies of scandal.  She is
rustling and bustling to us of 'Carinthia Jane's run up to London to see
Sarah Winch's grand new shop,' an eclipse of all existing grand London
western shops; and of Rose Mackrell's account of her dance of proud
delight in the shop, ending with a 'lovely cheese' just as my lord
enters; and then a scene, wild beyond any conceivable 'for pathos and
humour'--her pet pair of the dissimilar twins, both banging at us for
tear-drops by different roads, through a common aperture:--and the earl
has the Whitechapel baby boy plumped into his arms; and the countess
fetches him a splendid bob-dip and rises out of a second cheese to twirl
and fandango it; and, all serious on a sudden, request, whimperingly
beseech, his thanks to her for the crowing successor she has presented
him with: my lord ultimately, but carefully, depositing the infant on a
basket of the last oranges of the season, fresh from the Azores, by
delivery off my lord's own schooner-yacht in Southampton water; and
escaping, leaving his gold-headed stick behind him--a trophy for the
countess?  a weapon, it may be.

Quick she tucks up her skirts, she is after him.  Dame Gossip speaks
amusingly enough of the chase, and many eye-witnesses to the earl's
flight at top speed down the right side of the way along by the Green
Park; and of a Prince of the Blood, a portly Royal Duke on foot, bumped
by one or the other of them, she cannot precisely say which, but 'thinks
it to have been Carinthia Jane,' because the exalted personage, his shock
of surprise abating, turned and watched the chase, in much merriment.
And it was called, we are informed, 'The Piccadilly Hare and Hound' from
that day.

Some tradition of an extenuated nobleman pursued by a light-footed lady
amid great excitement, there is; the Dame attaches importance also to
verses of one of the ballads beginning to gain currency at the time
(issuing ostensibly from London's poetic centre, the Seven Dials, which
had, we are to conjecture, got the story by discolouring filtration
through footmen retailing in public-houses the stock of anecdotes they
gathered when stationed behind Rose Mackrell's chair, or Captain
Abrane's, or Chumley 'Potts's), and would have the whole of it quoted:--

        "'Tho' fair I be a powdered peruke,
          And once was a gaping silly,
          Your Whitechapel Countess will prove, Lord Duke,
          She's a regular tiger-lily.
          She'll fight you with cold steel
                    or she'll run you off your legs
          Down the length of Piccadilly!"

That will satisfy; and perhaps indicate the hand.

'Popular sympathy, of course, was all on the side of the Fair, as ever in
those days when women had not forfeited it by stepping from their
sanctuary seclusion.'

The Dame shall expose her confusions.  She really would seem to fancy
that the ballad verifies the main lines of the story, which is an
impossible one.  Carinthia had not the means to travel: she was
moneyless.  Every bill of her establishment was paid without stint by Mr.
Howell Edwards, the earl's manager of mines; but she had not even the
means for a journey to the Gowerland rocks she longed to see.  She had
none since she forced her brother to take the half of her share of their
inheritance, L1400, and sent him the remainder.

Accepted by Chillon John as a loan, says Dame Gossip, and no sooner
received than consumed by the pressing necessities of a husband with the
Rose Beauty of England to support in the comforts and luxuries he deemed
befitting.

Still the Dame leans to her opinion that 'Carinthia Jane' may have been
seen about London: for 'where we have much smoke there must be fire.'
And the countess never denying an imputation not brought against her in
her hearing, the ballad was unchallenged and London's wags had it their
own way.  Among the reasons why they so persistently hunted the earl,
his air of a smart correctness shadowed by this new absurdity invited
them, as when a spot of mud on the trimmest of countenances arrests
observation: Humour plucked at him the more for the good faith of his
handsome look under the prolific little disfigurement.  Besides, a
wealthy despot, with no conception of any hum around him, will have the
wags in his track as surely as the flexibles in front: they avenge his
exactions.

Fleetwood was honestly unaware of ridicule in the condition of inventive
mania at his heels.  Scheming, and hesitating to do, one-half of his mind
was absorbed with the problem of how now to treat the mother of his boy.
Her behaviour in becoming a mother was acknowledged to be good: the
production of a boy was good--considerate, he almost thought.  He grew
so far reconciled to her as to have intimations of a softness coming on;
a wish to hear her speak of the trifling kindness done to.  the sister of
Madge in reward of kindness done to her; wishes for looks he remembered,
secret to him, more his own than any possessions.  Dozens of men had
wealth, some had beautiful wives; none could claim as his own that face
of the look of sharp steel melting into the bridal flower, when she
sprang from her bed to defend herself and recognized the intruder at her
window; stood smitten:--'It is my, husband.'  Moonlight gave the
variation of her features.

And that did not appease the resentment tearing him from her, so
justifiable then, as he forced himself to think, now hideous.  Glimpses
of the pictures his deeds painted of him since his first meeting with
this woman had to be shunned.  He threw them off; they were set down to
the mystery men are.  The degrading, utterly different, back view of them
teaches that Life is an irony.  If the teaching is not accepted, and we
are to take the blame, can we bear to live?  Therefore, either way the
irony of Life is proved.  Young men straining at thought, in the grip of
their sensations, reach this logical conclusion.  They will not begin by
examining the ground they stand on, and questioning whether they have
consciences at peace with the steps to rearward.

Having established Life as the coldly malignant element, which induces to
what it chastises, a loathing of womanhood, the deputed Mother of Life,
ensues, by natural sequence.  And if there be one among women who
disturbs the serenity we choose to think our due, she wears for us the
sinister aspect of a confidential messenger between Nemesis and the
Parcae.  Fleetwood was thus compelled to regard Carinthia as both
originally and successively the cause of his internal as well as his
exterior discomfort; otherwise those glimpses would have burnt into
perpetual stigmas.  He had also to get his mind away from her.  They
pleaded against him volubly with the rising of her image into it.

His manager at the mines had sent word of ominous discontent down there.
His presence might be required.  Obviously, then, the threatened place
was unfitting for the Countess of Fleetwood.  He despatched a kind of
order through Mr. Howell Edwards, that she should remove to Esslemont to
escape annoyances.  Esslemont was the preferable residence.  She could
there entertain her friends, could spend a pleasanter time there.

He waited for the reply; Edwards deferred it.

Were they to be in a struggle with her obstinate will once more?

Henrietta was preparing to leave London for her dismal, narrow, and,
after an absence, desired love-nest.  The earl called to say farewell,
cool as a loyal wife could wish him to be, admiring perforce.  Marriage
and maternity withdrew nothing--added to the fair young woman's bloom.

She had gone to her room to pack and dress.  Livia received him.  In the
midst of the casual commonplaces her memory was enlightened.

'Oh,' said she, and idly drew a letter out of a blottingpad, 'we have
heard from Wales.'  She handed it to him.

Before he knew the thing he did, he was reading:

'There is no rest foamy brother, and I cannot help; I am kept so poor I
have not the smallest of sums.  I do not wish to leave Wales--the people
begin to love me; and can one be mistaken?  I know if I am loved or
hated.  But if my lord will give me an allowance of money of some
hundreds, I will do his bidding; I will leave England or I will go to
Esslemont; I could say--to Mr. Woodseer, in that part of London.  He
would not permit.  He thinks me blacked by it, like a sweepboy coming
from a chimney; and that I have done injury to his title.  No, Riette, to
be a true sister, I must bargain with my lord before I submit.  He has
not cared to come and see his little son.  His boy has not offended him.
There may be some of me in this dear.  I know whose features will soon
show to defend the mother's good name.  He is early my champion.  He is
not christened yet, and I hear it accuse me, and I am not to blame,--I
still wait my lord's answer.'

'Don't be bothered to read the whole,' Livia had said, with her hand out,
when his eyes were halfway down the page.

Fleetwood turned it, to read the signature: 'Janey.'

She seemed servile enough to some of her friends.  'Carinthia' would have
had--a pleasanter sound.  He folded the letter.

'Why give me this?  Take it,'--said he.

She laid it on the open pad.

Henrietta entered and had it restored to her, Livia remarking: 'I found
it in the blotter after all.'

She left them together, having to dress for the drive to the coach office
with Henrietta.

'Poor amusement for you this time.'  Fleetwood bowed, gently smiling.

'Oh!' cried Henrietta, 'balls, routs, dinners, music--as much music as I
could desire, even I!  What more could be asked?  I am eternally
grateful.'

'The world says, you are more beautiful than ever.'

'Happiness does it, then,--happiness owing to you, Lord Fleetwood.'

'Columelli pleases you?'

'His voice is heavenly!  He carries me away from earth.'

'He is a gentleman, too-rare with those fellows.'

'A pretty manner.  He will speak his compliments in his English.'

'You are seasoned to endure them in all languages.  Pity another of your
wounded: Brailstone has been hard hit at the tables.

'I cannot pity gamblers.--May I venture?--half a word?'

'Tomes!  But just a little compassion for the devoted.  He wouldn't play
so madly--if, well, say a tenth dilution of the rapt hearing Columelli
gets.'

'Signor Columelli sings divinely.'

'You don't dislike Brailstone?'

'He is one of the agreeable.'

'He must put his feelings into Italian song!'

'To put them aside will do.'

'We are not to have our feelings?'

'Yes, on the proviso that ours are respected.  But, one instant, Lord
Fleetwood, pray.  She is--I have to speak of her as my sister.  I am sure
she regrets .  .  .  She writes very nicely.'

'You have a letter from her?'

Henrietta sighed that it would not bear exposure to him: 'Yes.'

'Nicely worded?'

'Well, yes, it is.'

He paused, not expecting that the letter would be shown, but silence
fired shots, and he had stopped the petition.  'We are to have you for a
week's yachting.  You prescribe your company.  Only be merciful.
Exclusion will mean death to some.  Columelli will be touring in
Switzerland.  You shall have him in the house when my new bit of ground
Northwest of London is open: very handy, ten miles out.  We'll have the
Opera troupe there, and you shall command the Opera.'

Her beauty sweetened to thank him.

If, as Livia said, his passion for her was unchanged, the generosity
manifested in the considerate screen it wore over any physical betrayal
of it, deserved the lustre of her eyes.  It dwelt a moment, vivid with
the heart close behind and remorseful for misreading of old his fine
character.  Here was a young man who could be the very kindest of friends
to the woman rejecting him to wed another.  Her smile wavered.  How shall
a loving wife express warmth of sentiment elsewhere, without the one beam
too much, that plunges her on a tideway?  His claim of nothing called for
everything short of the proscribed.  She gave him her beauty in fullest
flower.

It had the appearance of a temptation; and he was not tempted, though he
admired; his thought being, Husband of the thing!

But he admired.  That condition awakened his unsatisfied past days to
desire positive proof of her worthlessness.  The past days writhed in
him.  The present were loveless, entirely cold.  He had not even the
wish to press her hand.  The market held beautiful women of a like
description.  He wished simply to see her proved the thing he read her
to be: and not proved as such by himself.  He was unable to summon or
imagine emotion enough for him to simulate the forms by which fair women
are wooed to their perdition.  For all he cared, any man on earth might
try, succeed or fail, as long as he had visual assurance that she
coveted, a slave to the pleasures commanded by the wealth once disdained
by her.  Till that time, he could not feel himself perfectly free.

Dame Gossip prefers to ejaculate.  Young men are mysteries! and bowl us
onward.  No one ever did comprehend the Earl of Fleetwood, she says: he
was bad, he was good; he was whimsical and stedfast; a splendid figure, a
mark for ridicule; romantic and a close arithmetician; often a devil,
sometimes the humanest of creatures.

In fine, he was a millionaire nobleman, owning to a considerable infusion
of Welsh blood in the composition of him.  Now, to the Cymry and to the
pure Kelt, the past is at their elbows continually.  The past of their
lives has lost neither face nor voice behind the shroud; nor are the
passions of the flesh, nor is the animate soul, wanting to it.  Other
races forfeit infancy, forfeit youth and manhood with their progression
to the wisdom age may bestow.  These have each stage always alive, quick
at a word, a scent, a sound, to conjure up scenes, in spirit and in
flame.  Historically, they still march with Cadwallader, with Llewellyn,
with Glendower; sing with Aneurin, Taliesin, old Llywarch: individually,
they are in the heart of the injury done them thirty years back or
thrilling to the glorious deed which strikes an empty buckler for most of
the sons of Time.  An old sea rises in them, rolling no phantom billows
to break to spray against existing rocks of the shore.  That is why, and
even if they have a dose of the Teuton in them, they have often to feel
themselves exiles when still in amicable community among the
preponderating Saxon English.

Add to the single differentiation enormous wealth--we convulse the
excellent Dame by terming it a chained hurricane, to launch in foul
blasts or beneficent showers, according to the moods during youth--and
the composite Lord Fleetwood comes nearer into our focus.  Dame Gossip,
with her jigging to be at the butterwoman's trot, when she is not
violently interrupting, would suffer just punishment were we to digress
upon the morality of a young man's legal possession of enormous wealth as
well.

Wholly Cambrian Fleetwood was not.  But he had to the full the Cambrian's
reverential esteem for high qualities.  His good-bye with Henrietta, and
estimate of her, left a dusky mental, void requiring an orb of some sort
for contemplation; and an idea of the totally contrary Carinthia, the
woman he had avowedly wedded, usurped her place.  Qualities were
admitted.  She was thrust away because she had offended: still more
because he had offended.  She bore the blame for forcing him to an
examination of his conduct at this point and that, where an ancestral
savage in his lineaments cocked a strange eye.  Yet at the moment of the
act of the deed he had known himself the veritable Fleetwood.  He had now
to vindicate himself by extinguishing her under the load of her
unwomanliness: she was like sun-dried linen matched beside oriental silk:
she was rough, crisp, unyielding.  That was now the capital charge.
Henrietta could never be guilty of the unfeminine.  Which did he prefer?

It is of all questions the one causing young men to screw wry faces when
they are asked; they do so love the feminine, the ultra-feminine, whom
they hate for her inclination to the frail.  His depths were sounded, and
he answered independently of his will, that he must be up to the heroical
pitch to decide.  Carinthia stood near him then.  The confession was a
step, and fraught with consequences.  Her unacknowledged influence
expedited him to Sarah Winch's shop, for sight of one of earth's honest
souls; from whom he had the latest of the two others down in Wales, and
of an infant there.

He dined the host of his Ixionides, leaving them early for a drive at
night Eastward, and a chat with old Mr. Woodseer over his punching and
sewing of his bootleather.  Another honest soul.  Mr. Woodseer thankfully
consented to mount his coach-box next day, and astonish Gower with a drop
on his head from the skies about the time of the mid-day meal.

There we have our peep into Dame Gossip's young man mysterious.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Always the shout for more produced it ("News")
Anecdotist to slaughter families for the amusement
Call of the great world's appetite for more (Invented news)
Enemy's laugh is a bugle blown in the night
He wants the whip; ought to have had it regularly
Magnificent in generosity; he had little humaneness
She was thrust away because because he had offended
Women treat men as their tamed housemates




End of this Project Gutenberg Etext of The Amazing Marriage, v3
by George Meredith






THE AMAZING MARRIAGE

By GEORGE MEREDITH

1895



BOOK 4.

XXIX.     CARINTHIA IN WALES
XXX.      REBECCA WYTHAN
XXXI.     WE HAVE AGAIN TO DEAL WITH THE EXAMPLES OF OUR YOUNGER MAN
XXXII.    IN WHICH WE SEE CARINTHIA PUT IN PRACTICE ONE OF HER OLD
          FATHER'S LESSONS
XXXIII.   A FRIGHTFUL DEBATE
XXXIV.    A SURVEY OF THE RIDE OF THE WELSH CAVALIERS ESCORTING THE
          COUNTESS OF FLEETWOOD TO KENTISH ESSLEMONT
XXXV.     IN WHICH CERTAIN CHANGES MAY BE DISCERNED
XXXVI.    BELOW THE SURFACE AND ABOVE
XXXVII.   BETWEEN CARINTHIA AND HER LORD
XXXVIII.  A DIP INTO THE SPRING'S WATERS



CHAPTER XXIX

CARINTHIA IN WALES

An August of gales and rains drove Atlantic air over the Welsh highlands.
Carinthia's old father had impressed on her the rapture of 'smelling
salt' when by chance he stood and threw up his nostrils to sniff largely
over a bed of bracken, that reminded him of his element, and her fancy
would be at strain to catch his once proud riding of the seas.  She felt
herself an elder daughter of the beloved old father, as she breathed it
in full volume from the billowy West one morning early after sunrise and
walked sisterly with the far-seen inexperienced little maid, whom she saw
trotting beside him through the mountain forest, listening, storing his
words, picturing the magnetic, veined great gloom of an untasted world.

This elder daughter had undergone a shipwreck; but clear proof that she
had not been worsted was in the unclouded liveliness of the younger one
gazing forward.  Imaginative creatures who are courageous will never be
lopped of the hopeful portion of their days by personal misfortune.
Carinthia could animate both; it would have been a hurt done to a living
human soul had she suffered the younger self to run overcast.  Only, the
gazing forward had become interdicted to her experienced self.  Nor could
she vision a future having any horizon for her child.  She saw it in
bleak squares, and snuggled him between dangers weathered and dangers
apprehended.

The conviction that her husband hated her had sunk into her nature.
Hating the mother, he would not love her boy.  He was her boy, and
strangely bestowed, not beautifully to be remembered rapturously or
gratefully, and with deep love of the father.  She felt the wound
recollection dealt her.  But the boy was her one treasure, and no
treasure to her husband.  They were burdens, and the heir of his House,
child of a hated mother, was under perpetual menace from an unscrupulous
tyrannical man.  The dread and antagonism were first aroused by the birth
of her child.  She had not known while bearing him her present acute
sensation of the hunted flying and at bay.  Previously, she could say:
I did wrong here; I did wrong there.  Distrust had brought the state of
war, which allows not of the wasting of our powers in confessions.

Her husband fed her and he clothed her; the limitation of his bounty was
sharply outlined.  Sure of her rectitude, a stranger to the world, she
was not very sensible of dishonour done to her name.  It happened at
times that her father inquired of her how things were going with his
little Carin; and then revolt sprang up and answered on his behalf rather
fiercely.  She was, however, prepared for any treaty including
forgiveness, if she could be at peace in regard to her boy, and have an
income of some help to her brother.  Chillon was harassed on all sides;
she stood incapable of aiding; so foolishly feeble in the shadow of her
immense longing to strive for him, that she could think her husband had
purposely lamed her with an infant.  Her love of her brother, now the one
man she loved, laid her insufficiency on the rack and tortured imbecile
cries from it.

On the contrary, her strange husband had blest her with an infant.
Everything was pardonable to him if he left her boy untouched in the
mother's charge.  Much alone as she was, she raised the dead to pet and
cherish her boy.  Chillon had seen him and praised him.  Mrs. Owain
Wythan, her neighbour over a hill, praised him above all babes on earth,
poor childless woman!

She was about to cross the hill and breakfast with Mrs. Wythan.  The time
for the weaning of the babe approached, and had as prospect beyond it her
dull fear that her husband would say the mother's work was done, and
seize the pretext to separate them: and she could not claim a longer term
to be giving milk, because her father had said: 'Not a quarter of a month
more than nine for the milk of the mother'--or else the child would draw
an unsustaining nourishment from the strongest breast.  She could have
argued her exceptional robustness against another than he.  But the dead
father wanting to build a great race of men and women ruled.

Carinthia knelt at the cradle of a princeling gone from the rich repast
to his alternative kingdom.

'You will bring him over when he wakes,' she said to Madge.  'Mrs. Wythan
would like to see him every day.  Martha can walk now.'

'She can walk and hold a child in her two arms, my lady,' said Madge.
'She expects miners popping up out of the bare ground when she sees no
goblins.'

'They!--they know him, they would not hurt him, they know my son,' her
mistress answered.

The population of the mines in revolt had no alarms for her.  The works
were empty down below.  Men sat by the wayside brooding or strolled in
groups, now and then loudly exercising their tongues; or they stood in
circle to sing hymns: melancholy chants of a melancholy time for all.

How would her father have acted by these men?  He would have been among
them.  Dissensions in his mine were vapours of a day.  Lords behaved
differently.  Carinthia fancied the people must regard their master as a
foreign wizard, whose power they felt, without the chance of making their
cry to him heard.  She, too, dealt with a lord.  It was now his wish for
her to leave the place where she had found some shreds of a home in the
thought of being useful.  She was gathering the people's language; many
of their songs she could sing, and please them by singing to them.  They
were not suspicious of her; at least, their women had open doors for her;
the men, if shy, were civil.  She had only to go below, she was greeted
in the quick tones of their speech all along the street of the slate-
roofs.

But none loved the castle, and she as little, saving the one room in it
where her boy lay.  The grey of Welsh history knew a real castle beside
the roaring brook frequently a torrent.  This was an eighteenth century
castellated habitation on the verge of a small wood midway up the height,
and it required a survey of numberless happy recollections to illumine
its walls or drape its chambers.  The permanently lighted hearth of a
dear home, as in that forsaken unfavoured old white house of the wooded
Austrian crags, it had not.  Rather it seemed a place waiting for an ill
deed to be done in it and stop all lighting of hearths thereafter.

Out on the turf of the shaven hills, her springy step dispersed any misty
fancies.  Her short-winged hive set to work in her head as usual,
building scaffoldings of great things to be done by Chillon, present
evils escaped.  The rolling big bade hills with the riding clouds excited
her as she mounted, and she was a figure of gladness on the ridge bending
over to hospitable Plas Llwyn, where the Wythans lived, entertaining rich
and poor alike.

They had led the neighbourhood to call on the discarded Countess of
Fleetwood.

A warm strain of arms about her neck was Carinthia's welcome from Mrs.
Wythan lying along the couch in her boudoir; an established invalid, who
yearned sanely to life, and caught a spark of it from the guest eyed
tenderly by her as they conversed.

'Our boy?--our Chillon Kirby till he has his baptism names; he is well?
I am to see him?'

'He follows me.  He sleeps almost through the night now.'

'Ah, my dear,' Mrs. Wythan sighed, imagining: 'It would disappoint me if
he did not wake me.'

'I wake at his old time and watch him.'

Carinthia put on the baby's face in the soft mould of slumber.

'I see him!' Mrs. Wythan cried.  'He is part mine.  He has taught Owain
to love babies.'

A tray of breakfast was placed before the countess.  'Mr. Wythan is down
among his men?' she said.

'Every morning, as long as this agitation lasts.  I need not say good
appetite to you after your walk.  You have no fear of the men, I know.
Owain's men are undisturbed; he has them in hand.  Absentee masters can't
expect continued harmony.  Dear, he tells me Mr. Edwards awaits the
earl.'

Drinking her tea, Carinthia's eyelids shut; she set down her cup, 'If he
must come,' she said.  'He wishes me to leave.  I am to go again where I
have no friends, and no language to learn, and can be of no use.  It is
not for me that I dread his coming.  He speaks to command.  The men ask
to be heard.  He will have submission first.  They do not trust him.  His
coming is a danger.  For me, I should wish him to come.  May I say . . ?'

'Your Rebecca bids you say, my darling.'

'It is, I am with the men because I am so like them.  I beg to be heard.
He commands obedience.  He is a great nobleman, but I am the daughter of
a greater man, and I have to say, that if those poor miners do harm, I
will not stand by and see an anger against injustice punished.  I wish
his coming, for him to agree upon the Christian names of the boy.  I feel
his coming will do me, injury in making me offend him worse.  I would
avoid that.  Oh, dear soul!  I may say it to you:--he cannot hurt me any
more.  I am spared loving him when I forgive him; and I do.  The loving
is the pain.  That is gone by.'

Mrs. Wythan fondled and kissed Carinthia's hand.

'Let me say in my turn; I may help you, dear.  You know I have my
husband's love, as he mine.  Am I, have I ever been a wife to him?  Here
I lie, a dead weight, to be carried up and down, all of a wife that Owain
has had for years.  I lie and pray to be taken, that my good man, my
proved good man, may be free to choose a healthy young woman and be
rewarded before his end by learning what a true marriage is.  The big
simpleton will otherwise be going to his grave, thinking he was married!
I see him stepping about softly in my room, so contented if he does not
disturb me, and he crushes me with a desire to laugh at him while I
worship.  I tricked him into marrying the prostrate invalid I am, and he
can't discover the trick, he will think it's a wife he has, instead of a
doctor's doll.  Oh! you have a strange husband, it has been a strange
marriage for you, but you have your invincible health, you have not to
lie and feel the horror of being a deception to a guileless man, whose
love blindfolds him.  The bitter ache to me is, that I can give nothing.
You abound in power to give.'

Carinthia lifted her open hands for sign of their emptiness.

'My brother would not want, if I could give.  He may have to sell out of.
the army, he thinks, fears; and I must look on.  Our mother used to say
she had done something for her country in giving a son like Chillon to
the British army.  Poor mother!  Our bright opening days all seem to end
in rain.  We should turn to Mr. Wythan for a guide.'

'He calls you Morgan le Fay christianized.'

'What I am!' Carinthia raised and let fall her head.  'An example makes
dwarfs of us.  When Mr. Wythan does penance for temper by descending into
his mine and working among his men for a day with the pick, seated, as he
showed me down below, that is an example.  If I did like that, I should
have no firedamp in the breast, and not such a task to forgive, that when
I succeed I kill my feelings.'

The entry of Madge and Martha, the nurse-girl, with the overflowing
armful of baby, changed their converse into melodious exclamations.

'Kit Ines has arrived, my lady,' Madge said.  'I saw him on the road and
stopped a minute.'

Mrs. Wythan studied Carinthia.  Her sharp invalid's ears had caught the
name.  She beckoned.  'The man who--the fighting man?'

'It will be my child this time,' said Carinthia; 'I have no fear for
myself.'  She was trembling, though her features were hard for the war
her lord had declared, as it seemed.  'Did he tell you his business
here?' she asked of Madge.

'He says, to protect you, my lady, since you won't leave.'

'He stays at the castle?'

'He is to stay there, he says, as long as the Welsh are out.'

'The "Welsh" are misunderstood by Lord Fleetwood,'

Mrs. Wythan said to Carinthia.  'He should live among them.  They will
not hurt their lady.  Protecting may be his intention; but we will have
our baby safe here.  Not?' she appealed.  'And baby's mother.  How
otherwise?'

'You read my wishes,' Carinthia rejoined.  'The man I do not think a bad
man.  He has a master.  While I am bound to my child I must be restful,
and with the man at the castle Martha's goblins would jump about me day
and night.  My boy makes a coward of his mother.'

'We merely take a precaution, and I have the pleasure of it,' said her
hostess.  'Give orders to your maid not less than a fortnight.  It will
rejoice my husband so much.'

As with the warmly hospitable, few were the words.  Madge was promised by
her mistress plenty of opportunities daily for seeing Kit Ines, and her
mouth screwed to one of women's dimples at a corner.  She went off in a
cart to fetch boxes, thinking: We are a hunted lot!  So she was not
mildly disposed for the company of Mr. Kit on her return to the castle.

England's champion light-weight thought it hard that his, coming down to
protect the castle against the gibbering heathen Welsh should cause a
clearing out, and solitariness for his portion.

'What's the good of innocence if you 're always going to suspect a man!'
he put it, like a true son of the pirates turned traders.  'I've got a
paytron, and a man in my profession must have a paytron, or where is he?
Where's his money for a trial of skill?  Say he saves and borrows and
finds the lump to clap it down, and he's knocked out o' time.  There he
is, bankrup', and a devil of a licking into the bargain.  That 's the
cream of our profession, if a man has got no paytron.

No prize-ring can live without one.  The odds are too hard on us.  My
lady ought to take into account I behaved respectful when I was obliged
to do my lord's orders and remove her from our haunts, which wasn't to
his taste.  Here I'm like a cannon for defending the house, needs be, and
all inside flies off scarified.'

'It strikes me, Kit Ines, a man with a paytron is no better than a tool
of a man,' said Madge.

'And don't you go to be sneering at honest tools,' Ines retorted.  'When
will women learn a bit of the world before they're made hags of by old
Father Wear-and-Tear!  A young woman in her prime, you Madge! be such a
fool as not see I serve tool to stock our shop.'

'Your paytron bid you steal off with my lady's child, Kit Ines, you'd do
it to stock your shop.'

Ines puffed.  'If you ain't a girl to wallop the wind!  Fancy me at that
game!  Is that why my lady--but I can't be suspected that far?  You make
me break out at my pores.  My paytron's a gentleman: he wouldn't ask and
I couldn't act such a part.  Dear Lord! it'd have to be stealing off, for
my lady can use a stick; and put it to the choice between my lady and her
child and any paytron living, paytron be damned, I'd say, rather'n go
against my notions of honour.  Have you forgot all our old talk about the
prize-ring, the nursery of honour in Old England?'

'That was before you sold yourself to a paytron, Kit Ines.'

'Ah!  Women wants mast-heading off and on, for 'em to have a bit of a
look-out over life as it is.  They go stewing over books of adventure
and drop into frights about awful man.  Take me, now; you had a no small
admiration for my manly valour once, and you trusted yourself to me, and
did you ever repent it?--owning you're not the young woman to tempt to t'
other way.'

'You wouldn't have found me talking to you here if I had.'

'And here I'm left to defend an empty castle, am I?'

'Don't drink or you'll have your paytron on you.  He's good use there.'

'I ask it, can I see my lady?'

'Drunk nor sober you won't.  Serve a paytron, be a leper, you'll find,
with all honest folk.'

Ines shook out an execrating leg at the foul word.  'Leper, you say?  You
say that?  You say leper to me?'

'Strut your tallest, Kit Ines.  It's the money rattles in your pocket
says it.'

'It's my reputation for decent treatment of a woman lets you say it,
Madge Winch.'

'Stick to that as long as your paytron consents.  It's the one thing
you've got left.'

'Benefit, you hussy, and mind you don't pull too stiff.'

'Be the woman and have the last word!'

His tongue was checked.  He swallowed the exceeding sourness of a retort
undelivered, together with the feeling that she beat him in the wrangle
by dint of her being an unreasonable wench.

Madge huffed away to fill her boxes.

He stood by the cart, hands deep down his pockets, when she descended.
She could have laughed at the spectacle of a champion prize-fighter out
of employ, hulking idle, because he was dog to a paytron; but her
contempt of him declined passing in small change.

'So you're off.  What am I to tell my lord when he comes?' Kit growled.
'His yacht's fetching for a Welsh seaport.'

She counted it a piece of information gained, and jumped to her seat,
bidding the driver start.  To have pretty well lost her character for a
hero changed into a patron's dog, was a thought that outweighed the show
of incivility.  Some little distance away, she reproached herself for
not having been so civil as to inquire what day my lord was expected,
by his appointment.  The girl reflected on the strangeness of a body of
discontented miners bringing my lord and my lady close, perhaps to meet.




CHAPTER XXX

REBECCA WYTHAN

The earl was looked for at the, chief office of the mines, and each day
an expectation of him closed in disappointment, leaving it to be surmised
that there were more serious reasons for his continued absence during a
crisis than any discussed; whether indeed, as when a timepiece neglects
to strike the hour which is, by the reckoning of natural impatience,
past, the capital charge of 'crazy works' must not be brought against a
nobleman hitherto precise upon business, of a just disposition, fairly
humane.  For though he was an absentee sucking the earth through a tube,
in Ottoman ease, he had never omitted the duty of personally attending on
the spot to grave cases under dispute.  The son of the hardheaded father
came out at a crisis; and not too highhandedly: he could hear an opposite
argument to the end.  Therefore, since he refused to comply without
hearing, he was wanted on the spot imperatively, now.

Irony perusing History offers the beaten and indolent a sugary acid in
the indication of the spites and the pranks, the whims and the tastes,
at the springs of main events.  It is, taken by itself, destructive
nourishment.  But those who labour in the field to shovel the clods of
earth to History, would be wiser of their fellows for a minor dose of it.
Mr. Howell Edwards consulting with Mr. Owain Wythan on the necessity,
that the earl should instantly keep his promise to appear among the men
and stop the fermentation, as in our younger days a lordly owner still
might do by small concessions and the physical influence--the nerve-
charm--could suppose him to be holding aloof for his pleasure or his
pride; perhaps because of illness or inability to conceive the actual
situation at a distance.  He mentioned the presence of the countess, and
Mr. Wythan mentioned it, neither of them thinking a rational man would so
play the lunatic as to let men starve, and wreck precious mines, for the
sake of avoiding her.

Sullen days went by.  On these days of the slate-cloud or the leaden-
winged, Carinthia walked over the hills to her staring or down-eyed
silent people, admitted without a welcome at some doors, rejected at
some.  Her baskets from the castle were for the most part received as
graciously.  She continued to direct them for delivery where they were
needed, and understood why a charity that supplied the place of justice
was not thanked.  She and her people here were one regarding the master,
as she had said.  They could not hurt her sensitiveness, she felt too
warmly with them.  And here it was not the squalid, flat, bricked east-
corner of London at the close of her daily pilgrimage.  Up from the
solitary street of the slate-roofs, she mounted a big hill and had the
life of high breathing.  A perpetual escape out of the smoky, grimy city
mazes was trumpeted to her in the winds up there: a recollected contrast
lightened the skyless broad spaces overhead almost to sunniness.  Having
air of the hills and activity for her limbs, she made sunshine for
herself.  Regrets were at no time her nestlings.

Look backward only to correct an error of conduct for the next attempt,
says one of her father's Maxims; as sharply bracing for women as for men.
She did not look back to moan.  Now that her hunger for the safety of her
infant was momentarily quieted, she could see Kit Ines hanging about the
lower ground, near the alehouse, and smile at Madge's comparison of him
to a drummed-out soldier, who would like to be taken for a holiday
pensioner.

He saluted; under the suspicion of his patron's lady his legs were
hampered, he dared not approach her; though his innocence of a deed not
proposed to him yet--and all to stock that girl Madge's shop, if done!
knocked at his ribs with fury to vindicate himself before the lady and
her maid.  A gentleman met them and conducted them across the hills.

And two Taffy gentlemen would hardly be sufficient for the purpose,
supposing an ill-used Englishman inclined to block their way!--What, and
play footpad, Kit Ines?  No, it's just a game in the head.  But a true
man hates to feel himself suspected.  His refuge is the beer of the
country.

Next day there were the two gentlemen to conduct the lady and her maid;
and Taffy the first walks beside the countess; and that girl Madge
trudges along with no other than my lord's Mr. Woodseer, chattering like
a watering-can on a garden-bed: deuce a glance at Kit Ines.  How can she
keep it up and the gentleman no more than nodding?  How does he enjoy
playing second fiddle with the maid while Mr. tall brown-face Taffy
violins it to her ladyship a stone's throw in front?  Ines had less
curiosity to know the object of Mr. Woodseer's appearance on the scene.
Idle, unhandsomely treated, and a cave of the yawns, he merely commented
on his observations.

'Yes, there he is, don't look at him,' Madge said to Gower; 'and whatever
he's here for, he has a bad time of it, and rather more than it's
pleasant for him to think over, if a slave to a "paytron" thinks at all.
I won't judge him; my mistress is bitten with the fear for the child,
worse than ever.  And the earl, my lord, not coming, and he wanting her
to move again, seems to her he durstn't do it here and intends to snap at
the child on the road.  She-'s forced to believe anything of such a
husband and father.  And why does he behave so?  I can't spell it.  He's
kind to my Sally--you've seen the Piccadilly shop?--because she was . . .
she did her best in love and duty for my lady.  And behaves like a
husband hating his wife's life on earth!  Then he went down with good Mr.
Woodseer, and called on Sally, pretending to inquire, after she was
kidnapped by that Kit Ines acting to please his paytron, he must be shown
up to the room where she slept, and stands at the door and peeps in,
Sally's letter says, and asks if he may enter the room.  He went to the
window looking on the chimneys she used to see, and touched an ornament
over the fireplace, called grandfather's pigtail case--he was a sailor;
only a ridiculous piece of china, that made my lady laugh about the story
of its holding a pigtail.  But he turns it over because she did--Sally
told him.  He couldn't be pretending when he bought the beautiful shop
and stocked it for Sally.  He gets her lots of customers; and no rent to
pay till next Michaelmas a year.  She's a made woman through him.  He
said to her, he had heard from Mr. Woodseer the Countess of Fleetwood
called her sister; he shook her hand.'

'The Countess of Fleetwood called both of you her sisters, I think,' said
Gower.

'I'm her servant.  I'd rather serve her than have a fortune.'

'You were born with a fortune one would like to have a nibble at, Madge.'

'I can't lay hand on it, then.'

'It's the capacity for giving, my dear.'

'Please, Mr. Gower, don't say that; you'll make me cry.  He keeps his
wife so poor she hasn't a shilling of her own; she wearies about her
brother; she can't help.  He can spend hundreds on my Sally for having
been good to her, in our small way--it's a fairy tale; and he won't hear
of money for his wife, except that she's never to want for anything it
can buy.'

'You give what it can't buy.'

'Me.  I'm "a pugilist's wench"--I've heard myself called.  She was the
first who gave me a lift; never mind me.  Have you come to take her away?
She'd trust herself and the child to you.'

'Take her?--reason with her as to the best we can do.  He holds off from
a meeting just now.  I fancy he's wearing round to it.  His keeping his
wife without money passes comprehension.  After serving him for a few
months, I had a store invested to support me for years--as much as I need
before I join the ranks of the pen.  I was at my reading and writing and
drowsing, and down he rushes: I 'm in harness again.  I can't say it's
dead waste of time; besides I pick up an independence for the days ahead.
But I don't respect myself for doing the work.  Here's the difference
between us two servants, Madge: I think of myself, and you don't.'

'The difference is more like between the master and mistress we serve,
Mr. Gower.'

'Well, I'd rather be the woman in this case.'

'You know the reputation I've got.  And can only just read, and can't
spell.  My mistress teaches me bits of German and French on her walks.'

Gower took a new observation of this girl, whom he had not regarded as
like himself, a pushing blade among the grasses.  He proposed to continue
her lessons, if she cared to learn; saying it could be done in letters.

'I won't be ashamed of writing, if you mean it,' said she.  'My mistress
will have a usefuller servant.  She had a strange honeymoon of a
marriage, if ever was--and told me t' other day she was glad because it
brought us together--she a born lady!'

'A fling-above born ladies.  She's quick as light to hit on a jewel where
there is one, whether it shines or not.  She stands among the Verities of
the world.'

'Yes,' Madge said, panting for more.  'Do speak of her.  When you praise
her, I feel she's not wasted.  Mistress; and friend and wife--if he'd let
her be; and mother; never mother like her.  The boy 'll be a sturdy.
She'll see he has every chance.  He's a lucky little one to have that
mother.'

'You think her handsome, Madge?'

Gower asked it, wishing to hear a devotee's confusion of qualities and
looks.

The question was a drop on lower spheres, and it required definitions, to
touch the exact nature of the form of beauty, and excuse a cooler tone on
the commoner plane.  These demanded language.  She rounded the
difficulty, saying: 'You see engravings of archery; that 's her figure--
her real figure.  I think her face .  .  .  I can't describe .  .  .  it
flashes.'

'That's it,' said Gower, delighted with his perception of a bare mind at
work and hitting the mark perforce of warmth.  'When it flashes, it's
unequalled.  There's the supremacy of irregular lines.  People talk of
perfect beauty: suitable for paintings and statues.  Living faces, if
they're to show the soul, which is the star on the peak of beauty, must
lend themselves to commotion.  Nature does it in a breezy tree or over
ruffled waters.  Repose has never such splendid reach as animation--
I mean, in the living face.  Artists prefer repose.  Only Nature can
express the uttermost beauty with her gathering and tuning of discords.
Well, your mistress has that beauty.  I remember my impression when I saw
her first on her mountains abroad.  Other beautiful faces of women go
pale, grow stale.  The diversified in the harmony of the flash are
Nature's own, her radiant, made of her many notes, beyond our dreams to
reproduce.  We can't hope to have a true portrait of your mistress.  Does
Madge understand?'

The literary dose was a strong one for her; but she saw the index, and
got a lift from the sound.  Her bosom heaved.  'Oh, I do try, Mr. Gower.
I think I do a little.  I do more while you're talking.  You are good to
talk so to me.  You should have seen her the night she went to meet my
lord at those beastly Gardens Kit Ines told me he was going to.  She was
defending him.  I've no words.  You teach me what's meant by poetry.  I
couldn't understand that once.'

Their eyes were on the countess and her escort in advance.  Gower's
praises of her mistress's peculiar beauty set the girl compassionately
musing.  His eloquence upon the beauty was her clue.

Carinthia and Mr. Wythan started at a sharp trot in the direction of the
pair of ponies driven by a groom along the curved decline of the narrow
roadway.  His whip was up for signal.

It concerned the house and the master of it.  His groom drove rapidly
down, while he hurried on the homeward way, as a man will do, with the
dread upon him that his wife's last breath may have been yielded before
he can enfold her.

Carinthia walked to be overtaken, not daring to fever her blood at a
swifter pace; 'lamed with an infant,' the thought recurred.

'She is very ill, she has fainted, she lies insensible,' Madge heard from
her of Mrs. Wythan.  'We were speaking of her when the groom appeared.
It has happened twice.  They fear the third.  He fears it, though he
laughs at a superstition.  Now step, I know you like walking, Mr.
Woodseer.  Once I left you behind.'

'I have the whole scene of the angel and the cripple,' Gower replied.

'O that day!'

They 'were soon speculating on the unimpressionable house in its clump of
wood midway below, which had no response for anxieties.

A maid-servant at the garden gate, by Mr. Wythan's orders, informed
Carinthia that her mistress had opened her eyes: There was a hope of
weathering the ominous third time.  But the hope was a bird of short
flight from bush to bush until the doctor should speak to confirm it.
Even the child was under the shadow of the house.  Carinthia had him in
her arms, trusting to life as she hugged him, and seeing innumerable
darts out of all regions assailing her treasure.

'She wishes to have you,' Mr. Wythan came and said to her.  'Almost her
first word.  The heart is quickening.  She will live for me if she can.'

He whispered it.  His features shot the sparkle.

Rebecca Wythan had strength to press Carinthia's hand faintly.  She made
herself heard: 'No pain.'  Her husband sat upright, quite still,
attentive for any sign.  His look of quiet pleasure ready to show,
sprightliness dwelt on her.  She returned the look, unable to give it
greeting.  Past the sense of humour, she wanted to say: 'See the poor
simple fellow who will think it a wife that he has!' She did but look.

Carinthia spoke his name, 'Mr. Wythan,' by chance, and Rebecca breathed
heavily until she formed the words: 'Owain to me.'

'To me,' Owain added.

The three formed a chain of clasped hands.

It was in the mind of the sick lady to disburden herself of more than her
weakness could utter, so far was she above earthly links.  The desire in
her was to be quit of the flesh, bearing a picture of her husband as
having the dues of his merits.

Her recovered strength next day brought her nearer to our laws.  'You
will call him Owain, Carinthia?' she said.  'He is not one to presume on
familiarity.  I must be going soon.  I cannot leave him the wife I would
choose.  I can leave him the sister.  He is a sure friend.  He is the
knightly man women dream of.  I harp on it because I long for testimony
that I leave him to have some reward.  And this may be, between two so
pure at heart as you two.'

'Dear soul friend, yes, and Owain, yes, I can say it,' Carinthia
rejoined.  'Brother?  I have only my Chillon.  My life is now for him.
I am punished for separating myself from the son of my father.  I have no
heart for a second brother.  What I can give to my friend I will.  I
shall love you in him, if I am to lose you.'

'Not Owain--it was I was the wretch refused to call on the lonely lady at
the castle until I heard she had done a romantic little bit of thing--
hushed a lambkin's bleating.  My loss!  my loss!  And I could afford it
so poorly.  Since then Carinthia has filled my days.  I shudder to leave
you and think of your going back to the English.  Their sneer withers.
They sent you down among us as a young woman to be shunned.'

'I did wildly, I was ungoverned, I had one idea,' said Carinthia.
'One idea is a bullet, good for the day of battle to beat the foe,
father tells us.  It was a madness in me.  Now it has gone, I see all
round.  I see straight, too.  With one idea, we see nothing--nothing but
itself.  Whizz!  we go.  I did.  I shall no longer offend in that way.
Mr. Gower Woodseer is here from my lord.'

'With him the child will be safe.'

'I am not alarmed.  It is to request--they would have me gone, to prepare
the way for my lord.'

'You have done, it; he has the castle to himself.  I cannot-spare you.
A tyrant ordering you to go should be defied.  My Lord Fleetwood puts
lightning into my slow veins.'

'We have talked: we shall be reproved by the husband and the doctor,'
said Carinthia.

Sullen days continued and rolled over to night at the mines.  Gower's
mission was rendered absurd by the countess's withdrawal from the castle.
He spoke of it to Mr. Wythan once, and the latter took a big breath and
blew such a lord to the winds.  'Persuade our guest to leave us, that the
air may not be tainted for her husband when he comes?  He needn't call;
he's not obliged to see her.  She's offered Esslemont to live in?  I
believe her instinct's right--he has designs on the child.  A little more
and we shall have a mad dog in the fellow.  He doubles my work by keeping
his men out.  If she were away we should hear of black doings.  Twenty
dozen of his pugilists wouldn't stop the burning.'

They agreed that persuasions need not be addressed to the countess.  She
was and would remain Mr. Wythan's guest.  As for the earl, Gower inclined
to plead hesitatingly, still to plead, on behalf of a nobleman owning his
influence and very susceptible to his wisdom, whose echo of a pointed
saying nearly equalled the satisfaction bestowed by print.  The titled
man affected the philosopher in that manner; or rather, the crude
philosopher's relish of brilliant appreciation stripped him of his robe.
For he was with Owain Wythan at heart to scorn titles which did not
distinguish practical offices.  A nation bowing to them has gone to pith,
for him; he had to shake himself, that he might not similarly stick; he
had to do it often.  Objects elevated even by a decayed world have their
magnetism for us unless we nerve the mind to wakeful repulsion.  He
protested he had reason to think the earl was humanizing, though he might
be killing a woman in the process.  'Could she wish for better?' he
asked, with at least the gravity of the undermining humourist; and he
started Owain to course an idea when he remarked of Lord Fleetwood:
'Imagine a devil on his back on a river, flying a cherub.'

Owain sparkled from the vision of the thing to wrath with it.

'Ay, but while he's floating, his people are edging on starvation.  And
I've a personal grievance.  I keep, you know, open hall, bread and cheese
and beer, for poor mates.  His men are favouring us with a call.  We have
to cart treble from the town.  If I straighten the sticks he dies to
bend, it'll be a grievance against me--and a fig for it!  But I like to
be at peace with my neighbours, and waft them "penillion" instead of
dealing the "cleddyfal" of Llewellyn.'

At last the tension ceased; they had intelligence of the earl's arrival.

His countess was little moved by it; and the reason for that lay in her
imagination being absorbed.  Henrietta had posted her a journal telling
of a deed of Chillon's: no great feat, but precious for its 'likeness to
him,' as they phrased it; that is, for the light it cast on their
conception of the man.  Heading a squadron in a riotous Midland town, he
stopped a charge, after fire of a shot from the mob, and galloped up the
street to catch a staggering urchin to his saddle-bow, and place the mite
in safety.  Then it was a simple trot of the hussars ahead; way was made
for him.

Now, to see what banquet there is for the big of heart in the world's hot
stress, take the view of Carinthia, to whom her brother's thoughtful
little act of gentleness at the moment of the red-of-the-powder smoke was
divinest bread and wine, when calamity hung around, with the future an
unfooted wilderness, her powers untried, her husband her enemy.




CHAPTER XXXI

WE HAVE AGAIN TO DEAL WITH THE EXAMPLES OF OUR YOUNGER MAN

The most urgent of Dames is working herself up to a grey squall in her
detestation of imagerial epigrams.  Otherwise Gower Woodseer's dash at
the quintessential young man of wealth would prompt to the carrying of it
further, and telling how the tethered flutterer above a 'devil on his
back on a river' was beginning to pull if not drag his withholder and
teaser.

Fleetwood had almost a desire to see the small dot of humanity which drew
the breath from him;--and was indistinguishably the bubbly grin and
gurgle of the nurses, he could swear.  He kicked at the bondage to our
common fleshly nature imposed on him by the mother of the little animal.
But there had been a mother to his father: odd movements of a warmish
curiosity brushed him when the cynic was not mounting guard.  They were,
it seemed, external--no part of him: like blasts of a wayside furnace
across wintry air.  They were, as it chanced, Nature's woman in him
plucking at her separated partner, Custom's man; something of an oriental
voluptuary on his isolated regal seat; and he would suck the pleasures
without a descent into the stale old ruts where Life's convict couple
walk linked to one another, to their issue more.

There was also a cold curiosity to see the male infant such a mother
would have.  The grandson of Old Lawless might turn out a rascal,--he
would be no mean one, no coward.

That mother, too, who must have been a touch astonished to find herself a
mother:--Fleetwood laughed a curt bark, and heard rebukes, and pleaded
the marriage-trap to the man of his word; devil and cherub were at the
tug, or say, dog and gentleman, a survival of the schoolboy--that mother,
a girl of the mountains, perhaps wanted no more than smoothing by the
world.  'It is my husband' sounded foolish, sounded freshish,--a new
note.  Would she repeat it?  The bit of simplicity would bear repeating
once.  Gower Woodseer says the creature grows and studies to perfect
herself.  She's a good way off that, and may spoil herself in the
process; but she has a certain power.  Her donkey obstinacy in refusing
compliance, and her pursuit of 'my husband,' and ability to drench him
with ridicule, do not exhibit the ordinary young female.  She stamps her
impression on the people she meets.  Her husband is shaken to confess it
likewise, despite a disagreement between them.

He has owned he is her husband: he has not disavowed the consequence.
That fellow, Gower Woodseer, might accuse the husband of virtually lying,
if he by his conduct implied her distastefulness or worse.  By heaven!
as felon a deed as could be done.  Argue the case anyhow, it should be
undone.  Let her but cease to madden.  For whatever the rawness of the
woman, she has qualities; and experience of the facile loves of London
very sharply defines her qualities.  Think of her as raw, she has the
gift of rareness: forget the donkey obstinacy, her character grasps.
In the grasp of her character, one inclines, and her husband inclines,
to become her advocate.  She has only to discontinue maddening.

The wealthy young noble prized any form of rareness wherever it was
visible, having no thought of the purchase of it, except with worship.
He could listen pleased to the talk of a Methodist minister sewing
bootleather.  He picked up a roadside tramp and made a friend of him,
and valued the fellow's honesty, submitted to his lectures, pardoned his
insolence.  The sight of Carinthia's narrow bedroom and strip of bed over
Sarah Winch's Whitechapel shop had gone a step to drown the bobbing
Whitechapel Countess.  At least, he had not been hunted by that gaunt
chalk-quarry ghost since his peep into the room.  Own it!  she likewise
has things to forgive.  Women nurse their larvae of ideas about fair
dealing.  But observe the distinction: aid if women understood justice
they would be the first to proclaim, that when two are tied together, the
one who does the other serious injury is more naturally excused than the
one who-tenfold abhorrent if a woman!--calls up the grotesque to
extinguish both.

With this apology for himself, Lord Fleetwood grew tolerant of the person
honourably avowed as his wife.  So; therefore, the barrier between him
and his thoughts of her was broken.  The thoughts carrying red doses were
selected.  Finally, the taste to meet her sprouted.  If agreeable, she
could be wooed; if barely agreeable, tormented; if disagreeable, left as
before.

Although it was the hazard of a die, he decided to follow his taste.
Her stay at the castle had kept him long from the duties of his business;
and he could imagine it a grievance if he pleased, but he put it aside.
Alighting at his chief manager's office, he passed through the heated
atmosphere of black-browed, wiry little rebels, who withheld the salute
as they lounged: a posture often preceding the spring in compulsorily
idle workers.  He was aware of instinct abroad, an antagonism to the
proprietor's rights.  They roused him to stand by them, and were his own
form of instinct, handsomely clothed.  It behoved that he should examine
them and the claims against them, to be sure of his ground.  He and Mr.
Howell Edwards debated the dispute for an hour; agreeing, partially
differing.  There was a weakness on the principle in Edwards.  These
fellows fixed to the spot are for compromise too much.  An owner of mines
has no steady reckoning of income if the rate of wage is perpetually to
shift according to current, mostly ignorant, versions of the prosperity
of the times.  Are we so prosperous?  It is far from certain.  And if the
rate ascends, the question of easing it down to suit the discontinuance
of prosperity agitating our exchequer--whose demand is for fixity--
perplexes us further.

However, that was preliminary.  He and Howell Edwards would dine and
wrangle it out.  The earl knew himself a hot disputant after dinner.
Incidentally he heard of Lady Fleetwood as a guest of Mrs. Wythan; and
the circumstance was injurious to him because he stood against Mr.
Wythan's pampering system with his men.

Ines up at the castle smelt of beer, and his eyelids were sottish.
Nothing to do tries the virtue of the best.  He sought his excuse in a
heavy lamentation over my lady's unjust suspicion of him,--a known man of
honour, though he did serve his paytron.

The cause of Lady Fleetwood's absence was exposed to her outraged lord,
who had sent the man purely to protect her at this castle, where she
insisted on staying.  The suspicion cast on the dreary lusher was the
wife's wild shot at her husband.  One could understand a silly woman's
passing terror.  Her acting under the dictate of it struck the husband's
ribbed breast as a positive clap of hostilities between them across a
chasm.

His previous placable mood was immediately conceived by him to have been
one of his fits of generosity; a step to a frightful dutiful embrace of
an almost repulsive object.  He flung the thought of her back on her
Whitechapel.  She returned from that place with smiles, dressed in a
laundry white with a sprinkle of smuts, appearing to him as an adversary
armed and able to strike.  There was a blow, for he chewed resentments;
and these were goaded by a remembered shyness of meeting her eyes when he
rounded up the slope of the hill, in view of his castle, where he
supposed she would be awaiting 'my husband.'  The silence of her absence
was lively mockery of that anticipation.

Gower came on him sauntering about the grounds.

'You're not very successful down here,' Fleetwood said, without greeting.

'The countess likes the air of this country,' said Gower, evasively,
impertinently, and pointlessly; offensively to the despot employing him
to be either subservient or smart.

'I wish her to leave it.'

'She wishes to see you first.'

'She takes queer measures.  I start to-morrow for my yacht at Cardiff.'
There the matter ended; for Fleetwood fell to talking of the mines.  At
dinner and after dinner it was the topic, and after Howell Edwards had
departed.

When the man who has a heart will talk of nothing but what concerns his
interests, and the heart is hurt, it may be perceived by a cognizant
friend, that this is his proud mute way of petitioning to have the
tenderer subject broached.  Gower was sure of the heart, armoured or
bandaged though it was,--a haunt of evil spirits as well,--and he began:
'Now to speak of me half a minute.  You cajoled me out of my Surrey room,
where I was writing, in the vein .  .  .'

'I've had the scene before me!' the earl interposed.  'Juniper dells and
that tree of the flashing leaf, and that dear old boy, your father, young
as you and me, and saying love of Nature gives us eternal youth.  On with
you.'

'I doubted whether I should be of use to you.  I told you the amount of
alloy in my motives.  A year with you, I have subsistence for ten years
assured to me.'

'Don't be a prosy dog, Gower Woodseer.'

'Will you come over to the Wythans before you go?'

'I will not.'

'You would lengthen your stride across a wounded beast?'

'I see no wound to the beast.'

'You can permit yourself to kick under cover of a metaphor.'

'Tell me what you drive at, Gower.'

'The request is, for you to spare pain by taking one step--an extra
strain on the muscles of the leg.  It 's only the leg wants moving.'

'The lady has legs to run away, let them bring her back.'

'Why have me with you, then?  I'm useless.  But you read us all, see
everything, and wait only for the mood to do the right.  You read me,
and I'm not open to everybody.  You read the crux of a man like me in my
novel position.  You read my admiration of a beautiful woman and effort
to keep honest.  You read my downright preference of what most people
would call poverty, and my enjoyment of good cookery and good company.
You enlist among the crew below as one of our tempters.  You find I come
round to the thing I like best.  Therefore, you have your liking for me;
and that's why you turn to me again, after your natural infidelities.
So much for me.  You read this priceless lady quite as clearly.
You choose to cloud her with your moods.  She was at a disadvantage,
'arriving in a strange country, next to friendless; and each new incident
bred of a luckless beginning--I could say more.'

Fleetwood nodded.  'You are read without the words: You read in history,
too, I suppose, that there are two sides to most cases.  The loudest is
not often the strongest.  However, now the lady shows herself crazed.
That's reading her charitably.  Else she has to be taken for a spiteful
shrew, who pretends to suspect anything that's villanous, because she can
hit on no other way of striking.'

'Crazed, is a wide shot and hits half the world,' muttered Gower.  'Lady
Fleetwood had a troubled period after her marriage.  She suffered a sort
of kidnapping when she was bearing her child.  There's a book by an
Edinburgh doctor might be serviceable to you.  It enlightens me.  She
will have a distrust of you, as regards the child, until she understands
you by living with you under one roof.'

'Such animals these women are!' Good Lord !' Fleetwood ejaculated.
'I marry one, and I 'm to take to reading medical books!' He yawned.

'You speak that of women and pretend to love Nature,' said Gower.
'You hate Nature unless you have it served on a dish by your own cook.
That's the way to the madhouse or the monastery.  There we expiate the
sin of sins.  A man finds the woman of all women fitted to stick him in
the soil, and trim and point him to grow, and she's an animal for her
pains!  The secret of your malady is, you've not yet, though you're
on a healthy leap for the practices of Nature, hopped to the primary
conception of what Nature means.  Women are in and of Nature.  I've
studied them here--had nothing to do but study them.  That most noble of
ladies' whole mind was knotted to preserve her child during her time of
endurance up to her moment of trial.  Think it over.  It's your one
chance of keeping sane.

And expect to hear flat stuff from me while you go on playing tyrant.'

'You certainly take liberties,' Fleetwood's mildest voice remarked.

'I told you I should try you, when you plucked me out of my Surrey nest.'

Fleetwood, passed from a meditative look to a malicious half-laugh.
'You seem to have studied the "most noble of ladies" latterly rather like
a barrister with a brief for the defendant--plaintiff, if you like!'

'As to that, I'll help you to an insight of a particular weakness of
mine,' said Gower.  'I require to have persons of even the highest value
presented to me on a stage, or else I don't grasp them at all--they 're
simply pictures.  I saw the lady; admired, esteemed, sufficiently, I
supposed, until her image appeared to me in the feelings of another.
Then I saw fathoms.  No doubt, it was from feeling warmer.  I went
through the blood of the other for my impression.'

'Name the other,' said the earl, and his features were sharp.

You can have the name,' Gower answered.  'It was the girl, Madge Winch.'

Fleetwood's hard stare melted to surprise and contemptuous amusement.
'You see the lady to be the "most noble of ladies" through the warming
you get by passing into the feelings of Madge Winch?'

Sarcasm was in the tone, and beneath it a thrill of compassionateness
traversed him and shot a remorseful sting with the vision of those two
young women on the coach at the scene of the fight.  He had sentience of
their voices, nigh to hearing them.  The forlorn bride's hand given to
the anxious girl behind her gushed an image of the sisterhood binding
women under the pangs they suffer from men.  He craved a scourging that
he might not be cursing himself; and he provoked it, for Gower was very
sensitive to a cold breath on the weakness he had laid bare; and when
Fleetwood said: 'You recommend a bath in the feelings of Madge Winch?'
the retort came:--'It might stop you on the road to a cowl.'

Fleetwood put on the mask of cogitation to cover a shudder, 'How?'

'A question of the man or the monk with you, as I fancy I've told you
more than once!'

'You may fancy committing any impertinence and be not much out.'

'The saving of you is that you digest it when you've stewed it down.'

'You try me!'

'I don't impose the connection.'

'No, I take the blame for that.'

They sat in dumbness, fidgeted, sprang to their feet, and lighted bedroom
candles.

Mounting the stairs, Gower was moved to let fall a benevolent look on the
worried son of fortune.  'I warned you I should try you.  It ought to be
done politely.  If I have to speak a truth I 'm boorish.  The divinely
damnable naked truth won't wear ornaments.  It's about the same as
pitching a handful of earth.'

'You dirt your hands, hit or miss.  Out of this corridor!  Into my room,
and spout your worst,' cried the earl.

Gower entered his dressing-room and was bidden to smoke there.

'You're a milder boor when you smoke.  That day down in Surrey with the
grand old bootmaker was one of our days, Gower Woodseer!  There's no
smell of the boor in him.  Perhaps his religion helps him, more than
Nature-worship: not the best for manners.  You won't smoke your pipe?
--a cigar?  Lay on, then, as hard as you like.'

'You're asking for the debauchee's last luxury--not a correction,' said
Gower, grimly thinking of how his whip might prove effective and punish
the man who kept him fruitlessly out of his bed.

'I want stuff for a place in the memory,' said Fleetwood; and the late
hour, with the profitless talk, made it a stinging taunt.

'You want me to flick your indecision.'

'That's half a hit.'

'I 'm to talk italics, for you to store a smart word or so.'

'True, I swear!  And, please, begin.'

'You hang for the Fates to settle which is to be smothered in you, the
man or the lord--and it ends in the monk, if you hang much longer.'

'A bit of a scorpion in his intention,' Fleetwood muttered on a stride.
'I'll tell you this, Gower Woodseer; when you lay on in earnest, your
diction is not so choice.  Do any of your remarks apply to Lady
Fleetwood?'

'All should.  I don't presume to allude to Lady Fleetwood.'

'She has not charged you to complain?'

' Lady Fleetwood is not the person to complain or condescend to speak of
injuries.'

'She insults me with her insane suspicion.'

A swollen vein on the young nobleman's forehead went to confirm the idea
at the Wythans' that he was capable of mischief.  They were right; he was
as capable of villany as of nobility.  But he happened to be thanking
Gower Woodseer's whip for the comfortable numbness he felt at Carinthia's
behaviour, while detesting her for causing him to desire it and endure
it, and exonerate his prosy castigator.

He was ignorant of the revenge he had on Gower, whose diction had not
been particularly estimable.  In the feebleness of a man vainly courting
sleep, the disarmed philosopher tossed from one side to the other through
the remaining hours of darkness, polishing sentences that were natural
spouts of choicest diction; and still the earl's virulent small sneer
rankled.  He understood why, after a time.  The fervour of advocacy,
which inspires high diction, had been wanting.  He had sought more to
lash the earl with his personal disgust and partly to parade his contempt
of a lucrative dependency--than he had felt for the countess.  No wonder
his diction was poor.  It was a sample of limp thinness; a sort of tongue
of a Master Slender:--flavourless, unsatisfactory, considering its
object: measured to be condemned by its poor achievement.  He had
nevertheless a heart to feel for the dear lady, and heat the pleading for
her, especially when it ran to its object, as along a shaft of the sun-
rays, from the passionate devotedness of that girl Madge.

He brooded over it till it was like a fire beneath him to drive him from
his bed and across the turfy roller of the hill to the Wythans', in the
front of an autumnal sunrise--grand where the country is shorn of surface
decoration, as here and there we find some unadorned human creature,
whose bosom bears the ball of warmth.




CHAPTER XXXII

IN WHICH WE SEE CARINTHIA PUT IN PRACTICE ONE OF HER OLD FATHER'S LESSONS

Seated at his breakfast-table, the earl saw Gower stride in, and could
have wagered he knew the destination of the fellow's morning walk.  It
concerned him little; he would be leaving the castle in less than an
hour.  She might choose to come or choose to keep away.  The whims of
animals do not affect men unless they are professionally tamers.
Petty domestic dissensions are besides poor webs to the man pulling
singlehanded at ropes with his revolted miners.  On the topic of wages,
too, he was Gower's master, and could hold forth: by which he taught
himself to feel that practical affairs are the proper business of men,
women and infants being remotely secondary; the picturesque and poetry,
consequently, sheer nonsense.

'I suppose your waiting here is useless, to quote you,' he said.  'The
countess can decide now to remain, if she pleases.  Drive with me to
Cardiff--I miss you if you 're absent a week.  Or is it legs?  Drop me a
line of your stages on the road, and don't loiter much.'

Gower spoke of starting his legs next day, if he had to do the journey
alone: and he clouded the yacht for Fleetwood with talk of the Wye and
the Usk, Hereford and the Malvern Hills elliptical over the plains.

'Yes,' the earl acquiesced jealously; 'we ought to have seen--tramped
every foot of our own country.  That yacht of mine, there she is, and I
said I would board her and have a fly with half a dozen fellows round the
Scottish isles.  We're never free to do as we like.'

'Legs are the only things that have a taste of freedom,' said Gower.

They strolled down to Howell Edwards' office at nine, Kit Ines beside the
luggage cart to the rear.

Around the office and along to the street of the cottages crowds were
chattering, gesticulating; Ines fancied the foreign jabberers inclined to
threaten.  Howell Edwards at the door of his office watched them
calculatingly.  The lord of their destinies passed in with him, leaving
Gower to study the features of the men, and Ines to reckon the chance of
a fray.

Fleetwood came out presently, saying to Edwards:

'That concession goes far enough.  Because I have a neighbour who yields
at every step?  No, stick to the principle.  I've said my final word.
And here's the carriage.  If the mines are closed, more's the pity: but
I'm not responsible.  You can let them know if you like, before I drive
off; it doesn't matter to me.'

The carriage was ready.  Gower cast a glance up the hill.  Three female
figures and a pannier-donkey were visible on the descent.  He nodded to
Edwards, who took the words out of his mouth.  'Her ladyship, my lord.'

She was distinctly seen, and looked formidable in definition against the
cloud.  Madge and the nurse-maid Martha were the two other young women.
On they came, and the, angry man seated in the carriage could not give
the order to start.  Nor could he quite shape an idea of annoyance,
though he hung to it and faced at Gower a battery of the promise to pay
him for this.  Tattling observers were estimated at their small
importance there, as everywhere, by one so high above them.  But the
appearance of the woman of the burlesque name and burlesque actions, and
odd ascension out of the ludicrous into a form to cast a spell, so that
she commanded serious recollections of her, disturbed him.  He stepped
from his carriage.  Again he had his incomprehensible fit of shyness;
and a vision of the complacent, jowled, redundant, blue-coated monarch
aswing in imbecile merriment on the signboard of the Royal Sovereign inn;
constitutionally his total opposite, yet instigating the sensation.

In that respect his countess and he had shifted characters.  Carinthia
came on at her bold mountain stride to within hail of him.  Met by Gower,
she talked, smiled, patted her donkey, clutched his ear, lifted a silken
covering to show the child asleep; entirely at her ease and unhurried.
These women get aid from their pride of maternity.  And when they can
boast a parson behind them, they are indecorous up to insolent in their
ostentation of it.

She resumed her advance, with a slight abatement of her challengeing
match, sedately; very collectedly erect; changed in the fulness of her
figure and her poised calm bearing.

He heard her voice addressing Gower: 'Yes, they do; we noticed the slate-
roofs, looking down on them.  They do look like a council of rooks in the
hollow; a parliament, you said.  They look exceedingly like, when a peep
of sunshine falls.  Oh, no; not clergymen!'

She laughed at the suggestion.

She might be one of the actresses by nature.

Is the man unsympathetic with women a hater of Nature deductively?  Most
women are actresses.  As to worshipping Nature, we go back to the state
of heathen beast, Mr. Philosopher Gower could be answered .  .  .  .

Fleetwood drew in his argument.  She stood before him.  There was on
his part an insular representation of old French court salute to the
lady, and she replied to it in the exactest measure, as if an instructed
proficient.

She stood unshadowed.  'We have come to bid you adieu, my lord,' she
said, and no trouble of the bosom shook her mellow tones.  Her face was
not the chalk-quarry or the rosed rock; it was oddly individual, and,
in a way, alluring, with some gentle contraction of her eyelids.  But
evidently she stood in full repose, mistress of herself.

Upon him, it appeared, the whole sensibility of the situation was to be
thrown.  He hardened.

'We have had to settle business here,' he said, speaking resonantly, to
cover his gazing discomposedly, all but furtively.

The child was shown, still asleep.  A cunning infant not a cry in him to
excuse a father for preferring concord or silence or the bachelor's
exemption.

'He is a strong boy,' the mother said.  'Our doctor promises he will ride
over all the illnesses.'

Fleetwood's answer set off with an alarum of the throat, and dwindled to
'We 'll hope so.  Seems to sleep well.'

She had her rocky brows.  They were not barren crags, and her shape was
Nature's ripeness, it was acknowledged: She stood like a lance in air-
rather like an Amazon schooled by Athene, one might imagine.  Hues of
some going or coming flush hinted the magical trick of her visage.  She
spoke in modest manner, or it might be indifferently, without a flaunting
of either.

'I wish to consult you, my lord.  He is not baptized.  His Christian
names?'

'I have no choice.'

'I should wish him to bear one of my brother's names.'

'I have no knowledge of your brother's names.'

'Chillon is one.'

'Ah!  Is it, should you think, suitable to our climate?'

'Another name of my brother's is John.'

'Bull.'  The loutish derision passed her and rebounded on him.  'That
would be quite at home.'

'You will allow one of your own names, my lord?'

'Oh, certainly, if you desire it, choose.  There are four names you will
find in a book of the Peerage or Directory or so.  Up at the castle--or
you might have written:--better than these questions on the public road.
I don't demur.  Let it be as you like.'

'I write empty letters to tell what I much want,' Carinthia said.

'You have only to write your plain request.'

'If, now I see you, I may speak another request, my lord.'

'Pray,' he said, with courteous patience, and stepped forward down to the
street of the miners' cottages.  She could there speak out-bawl the
request, if it suited her to do so.

On the point of speaking, she gazed round.

'Perfectly safe!  no harm possible,' said he, fretful under the burden of
this her maniacal maternal anxiety.

'The men are all right, they would not hurt a child.  What can rationally
be suspected!'

'I know the men; they love their children,' she replied.  'I think my
child would be precious to them.  Mr. Woodseer and Mr. Edwards and Madge
are there.'

'Is the one more request--I mean, a mother's anxiety does not run to the
extent of suspecting everybody?'

'Some of the children are very pretty,' said Carinthia, and eyed the
bands of them at their games in the roadway and at the cottage doors.
'Children of the poor have happy mothers.'

Her eyes were homely, morning over her face.  They were open now to what
that fellow Woodseer (who could speak to the point when he was not aiming
at it) called the parlour, or social sitting-room; where we may have
converse with the tame woman's mind, seeing the door to the clawing
recesses temporarily shut.

'Forgive me if I say you talk like the bigger child,' Fleetwood said
lightly, not ungenially; for the features he looked on were museful,
a picture in their one expression.

Her answer chilled him.  'It is true, my lord.  I will not detain you.
I would beg to be supplied with money.'

He was like the leaves of a frosted plant, in his crisp curling inward:--
he had been so genial.

'You have come to say good-bye, that an opportunity to--as you put it--
beg for money.  I am not sure of your having learnt yet the right
disposal of money.'

'I beg, my lord, to have two thousand pounds a year allowed me.'

'Ten--and it's a task to spend the sum on a single household--shall be
alloted to your expenditure at Esslemont;--stables, bills, et caetera.
You can entertain.  My steward Leddings will undertake the management.
You will not be troubled with payings.'

Her head acknowledged the graciousness.--'I would have two thousand
pounds and live where I please.'

'Pardon me: the two, for a lady living where she pleases, exceeds the
required amount.'

'I will accept a smaller sum, my lord.'

'Money!-it seems a singular demand when all supplies are furnished.'

'I would have control of some money.'

'You are thinking of charities.'

'Not charities.'

'Edwards here has a provision for the hospital needs of the people.  Mr.
Woodseer applies to me in cases he can certify.  Leddings will do the
same at Esslemont.'

'I am glad, I am thankful.  The money I would have is for my own use.
It is for me.'

'Ah.  Scarcely that, I fancy.'

The remark should have struck home.  He had a thirst for the sign of her
confessing to it.  He looked.  Something like a petrifaction of her
wildest face was shown.

Carinthia's eyes were hard out on a scattered knot of children down the
street.

She gathered up her skirts.  Without a word to him, she ran, and running
shouted to the little ones around and ahead: 'In! in! indoors, children!
"Blant, i'r ty!"  Mothers, mothers, ho! get them in.  See the dog!  "Ci!
Ci!"  In with them!  "Blant, i'r ty!  Vr ty!"'

A big black mongrel appeared worrying at one of two petticoated urchins
on the ground.

She scurried her swiftest, with such warning Welsh as she had on the top
of her mountain cry; and doors flew wide, there was a bang of doors when
she darted by: first gust of terrible heavens that she seemed to the
cottagers.

Other shouts behind her rent the air, gathering to a roar, from the
breasts of men and women.  'Mad dog about' had been for days the rumour,
crossing the hills over the line of village, hamlet, farm, from Cardiff
port.

Dead hush succeeded the burst.  Men and women stood off.  The brute was
at the lady.

Her arms were straight above her head; her figure overhanging, on a bend
of the knees.  Right and left, the fury of the slavering fangs shook her
loose droop of gown; and a dull, prolonged growl, like the clamour of a
far body of insurrectionary marching men, told of the rage.

Fleetwood hovered helpless as a leaf on a bough.

'Back--', I pray,' she said to him, and motioned it, her arms at high
stretch.

He held no weapon.  The sweat of his forehead half blinded him.  And she
waved him behind her, beckoned to the crowd to keep wide way, used her
lifted hands as flappers; she had all her wits.  There was not a wrinkle
of a grimace.  Nothing but her locked lips betrayed her vision of
imminent doom.  The shaking of her gown and the snarl in the undergrowl
sounded insatiate.

The brute dropped hold.  With a weariful jog of the head, it pursued its
course at an awful even swinging pace: Death's own, Death's doer, his
reaper,--he, the very Death of the Terrors.

Carinthia's cry rang for clear way to be kept on either side, and that
accursed went the path through a sharp-edged mob, as it poured pell-mell
and shrank back, closing for the chase to rear of it.

'Father taught me,' she said to the earl, not more discomposed than if
she had taken a jump.

'It's over!' he groaned, savagely white, and bellowed for guns, any
weapons.  'Your father?  pray?' She was entreated to speak.

'Yes, it must be shot; it will be merciful to kill it,' she said.  'They
have carried the child indoors.  The others are safe.  Mr. Woodseer, run
to my nurse-girl, Martha.  He goes,' she murmured, and resumed to the
earl: 'Father told me women have a better chance than men with a biting
dog.  He put me before him and drilled me.  He thought of everything.
Usually the poor beast snaps--one angry bite, not more.  My dress teased
it.'

Fleetwood grinned civilly in his excitement; intending to yield patient
hearing, to be interested by any mortal thing she might choose to say.

She was advised by recollection to let her father rest.

'No, dear girl, not hurt, no scratch,--only my gown torn,' she said to
Madge; and Madge heaved and whimpered, and stooped to pin the frayed
strips.  'Quite safe; you see it is easy for women to escape,
Mr. Edwards.'

Carinthia's voice hummed over the girl's head

'Father made me practise it, in case.  He forethought.  Madge, you heard
of this dog.  I told you how to act.  I was not feverish.  Our babe will
not feel it.'

She bade Madge open her hands.  'A scratch would kill.  Never mind the
tearings; I will hold my dress.  Oh!  there is that one child bitten.
Mr. Edwards, mount a man for the doctor.  I will go in to the child.
He was bitten.  Lose not one minute, Mr. Edwards.  I see you go.'

He bowed and hastened.

The child's mother was red eyes at her door for ease of her heart to the
lady.  Carinthia stepped into the room, where the little creature was
fetching sobs after the spout of screams.

'God in heaven! she can't be going to suck the bite?'  Fleetwood cried to
Madge, whose answer was disquieting 'If it's to save life, my mistress
won't stop at anything.'

His heart sprang with a lighted comprehension of Gower Woodseer's
meaning.  This girl's fervour opened portals to new views of her
mistress, or opened eyes.




CHAPTER XXXIII

A FRIGHTFUL DEBATE

Pushing through a swarm into the cot, Fleetwood saw Carinthia on a knee
beside a girl's lap, where the stripped child lay.  Its mother held a
basin for the dabbing at raw red spots.

A sting of pain touched the memory of its fright, and brought further
screams, then the sobs.  Carinthia hummed a Styrian cradle-song as the
wailing lulled.

She glanced up; she said to the earl: 'The bite was deep; it was in the
blood.  We may have time.  Get me an interpreter.  I must ask the mother.
I know not many words.'

'What now?' said he, at the looming of new vexations.

'We have no choice.  Has a man gone?  Dr. Griffiths would hurry fast.
An hour may be too late.  The poison travels: Father advised it:--Fifty
years for one brave minute!  This child should be helped to live.'

'We 'll do our best.  Why an interpreter?'

'A poker in the fire.  The interpreter--whether the mother will bear to
have it done.'

'Burn, do you mean?'

'It should be burnt.'

'Not by you?'

'Quick! Quick!'

'But will you--could you?  No, I say!'

'If there is no one else.'

'You forget your own child.'

'He is near the end of his mother.'

'The doctor will soon arrive.'

'The poison travels.  It cannot be overtaken unless we start nearly
equal, father said.'

'Work like that wants an experienced hand.'

'A steady one.  I would not quake--not tremble.'

'I cannot permit it.'

'Mr. Wythan would know!--he would know!

'Do you hear, Lady Fleetwood--the dog may not be mad!'

'Signs!  He ran heavy, he foamed.'

'Foam 's no sign.'

'Go; order to me a speaker of English and Welsh.'

The earl spun round, sensible of the novelty of his being commanded, and
submitting; but no sooner had he turned than he fell into her view of the
urgency, and he went, much like the boy we see at school, with a strong
hand on his collar running him in.

Madge entered, and said: 'Mr. Woodseer has seen baby and Martha and the
donkey all safe.'

'He is kind,' said Carinthia.  'Do we right to bathe the wound?  It seems
right to wash it.  Little things that seem right may be exactly wrong
after all, when we are ignorant.  I know burning the wound is right.'

Madge asked: 'But, my lady, who is to do it?'

'You would do it, dear, if I shrank,' her mistress replied.

'Oh, my lady, I don't know, I can't say.  Burning a child!  And there's
our baby.'

'He has had me nearly his time.'

'Oh, my dear lady!  Would the mother consent?'

'My Madge!  I have so few of their words yet.  You would hold the child
to save it from a dreadful end.'

'God help me, my lady--I would, as long as I live I will .  .  .  .  Oh!
poor infant, we do need our courage now.'

Seeing that her mistress had not a tear or a tremor, the girl blinked and
schooled her quailing heart, still under the wicked hope that the mother
would not consent; in a wonderment at this lady, who was womanly, and who
could hold the red iron at living flesh, to save the poor infant from a
dreadful end.  Her flow of love to this dear lady felt the slicing of a
cut; was half revulsion, half worship; uttermost worship in estrangement,
with the further throbbing of her pulses.

The cottage door was pushed open for Lord Fleetwood and Howell Edwards,
whom his master had prepared to stand against immediate operations.  A
mounted messenger had been despatched.  But it was true, the doctor might
not be at home.  Assuming it to be a bite of rabies, minutes lost meant
the terrible: Edwards bowed his head to that.  On the other hand, he
foresaw the closest of personal reasons for hesitating to be in agreement
with the lady wholly.  The countess was not so much a persuasive lady as
she was, in her breath and gaze, a sweeping and a wafting power.  After
a short argument, he had the sense of hanging like a bank detached to
fatality of motion by the crack of a landslip, and that he would speedily
be on his manhood to volunteer for the terrible work.

He addressed the mother.  Her eyes whitened from their red at his first
word of laying hot iron on the child: she ran out with the wild woman's
howl to her neighbours.

'Poor mother!' Carinthia sighed.  'It may last a year in the child's
body, and one day he shudders at water.  Father saw a bitten man die.
I could fear death with the thought of that poison in me.  I pray Dr.
Griffiths may come.'

Fleetwood shuffled a step.  'He will come, he will come.'

The mother and some women now packed the room.

A gabble arose between them and Edwards.  They fired sharp snatches of
speech, and they darted looks at the lady and her lord.

'They do not know!' said Carinthia.

Gower brought her news that the dog had been killed; Martha and her
precious burden were outside, a mob of men, too.  He was not alarmed; but
she went to the door and took her babe in her arms, and when the women
observed the lady holding her own little one, their looks were softened.
At a hint of explanation from Edwards, the guttural gabble rattled up to
the shrill vowels.

Fleetwood's endurance broke short.  The packed small room, the caged-
monkey lingo, the wailful child, and the past and apprehended debate upon
the burning of flesh, composed an intolerable torture.  He said to
Edwards: 'Go to the men; settle it with them.  We have to follow that man
Wythan; no peace otherwise.  Tell the men the body of the dog must be
secured for analysis.  Mad or not, it's the same.  These Welsh mothers
and grandmothers won't allow cautery at any price.  Hark at them!'

He turned to Carinthia: 'Your ladyship will let Mr. Edwards or Mr.
Woodseer conduct you to the house where you are residing.  You don't know
these excitable people.  I wish you to leave.'

She replied softly: 'I stay for the doctor's coming.'

'Impossible for me to wait, and I can't permit you to be here.'

'It is life and death, and I must not be commanded.'

'You may be proposing gratuitous agony.'

'I would do it to my own child.'

The earl attacked Gower: 'Add your voice to persuade Lady Fleetwood.'

Gower said: 'What if I think with Lady Fleetwood?'

'You would see her do it?'

'Do it myself, if there was no one else'

'This dog-all of you have gone mad,' the earl cried.

'Griffiths may keep his head; it's the only chance.  Take my word, these
Welshwomen just listen to them won't have it.  You 'll find yourself in a
nest of Furies. It may be right to do, it's folly to propose it, madness
to attempt it.  And I shall be bitten if I stop here a minute longer; I'm
gone; I can neither command nor influence.  I should have thought Gower
Woodseer would have kept his wits.'

Fleetwood's look fell on Madge amid the group.  Gower's perception of her
mistress through the girl's devotion to her moved him.  He took Madge by
the hand, and the sensation came that it was the next thing to pressing
his wife's.  'You're a loyal girl.  You have a mistress it 's an honour
to serve.  You bind me.  By the way, Ines shall run down for a minute
before I go.'

'Let him stay where he is,'' Madge said, having bobbed her curtsey.

'Oh, if he's not to get a welcome!' said the earl; and he could now fix a
steadier look on his countess, who would have animated him with either a
hostile face or a tender.  She had no expression of a feeling.  He bent
to her formally.

Carinthia's words were: 'Adieu, my lord.'

'I have only to say, that Esslemont is ready to receive you,' he
remarked, bowed more curtly, and walked out.  .  .

Gower followed him.  They might as well have been silent, for any effect
from what was uttered between them.  They spoke opinions held by each of
them--adverse mainly; speaking for no other purpose than to hold their
positions.

'Oh, she has courage, no doubt; no one doubted it,' Fleetwood said, out
of all relation to the foregoing.

Courage to grapple with his pride and open his heart was wanting in him.

Had that been done, even to the hint of it, instead of the lordly
indifference shown, Gower might have ventured on a suggestion, that the
priceless woman he could call wife was fast slipping away from him and
withering in her allegiance.  He did allude to his personal sentiment.
'One takes aim at Philosophy; Lady Fleetwood pulls us up to pay tribute
to our debts.'  But this was vague, and his hearer needed a present
thunder and lightning to shake and pierce him.

'I pledged myself to that yacht,' said Fleetwood, by way of reply, 'or
you and I would tramp it, as we did once-jolly old days!  I shall have
you in mind.  Now turn back.  Do the best you can.'

They parted midway up the street, Gower bearing away a sharp contrast
of the earl and his countess; for, until their senses are dulled,
impressionable young men, however precociously philosophical, are
mastered by appearances; and they have to reflect under new lights before
vision of the linked eye and mind is given them.

Fleetwood jumped into his carriage and ordered the coachman to drive
smartly.  He could not have admitted the feeling small; he felt the
having been diminished, and his requiring a rapid transportation from
these parts for him to regain his proper stature.  Had he misconducted
himself at the moment of danger?  It is a ghastly thought, that the
craven impulse may overcome us.  But no, he could reassure his repute for
manliness.  He had done as much as a man could do in such a situation.

At the same time, he had done less than the woman.

Needed she to have gone so far?  Why precipitate herself into the jaws of
the beast?

Now she, proposes to burn the child's wound.  And she will do it if they
let her.  One, sees her at the work,--pale, flinty; no faces; trebly the
terrific woman in her mild way of doing the work.  All because her old
father recommended it.  Because she thinks it a duty, we will say; that
is juster.  This young woman is a very sword in the hand of her idea of
duty.  She can be feminine, too,--there is one who knows.  She can be
particularly distant, too.  If in timidity, she has a modest view of
herself--or an enormous conception of the magi that married her.  Will
she take the world's polish a little?

Fleetwood asked with the simplicity of the superior being who will
consequently perhaps bestow the debt he owes. . .

But his was not the surface nature which can put a question of the sort
and pass it.  As soon as it had been formed, a vision of the elemental
creature calling him husband smote to shivers the shell we walk on, and
caught him down among the lower forces, up amid the higher; an infernal
and a celestial contest for the extinction of the one or the other of
them, if it was not for their union.  She wrestled with him where the
darknesses roll their snake-eyed torrents over between jagged horns of
the netherworld.  She stood him in the white ray of the primal vital
heat, to bear unwithering beside her the test of light.  They flew, they
chased, battled, embraced, disjoined, adventured apart, brought back the
count of their deeds, compared them,--and name the one crushed!  It was
the one weighted to shame, thrust into the cellar-corner of his own
disgust, by his having asked whether that starry warrior spirit in the
woman's frame would 'take polish a little.'

Why should it be a contention between them?  For this reason: he was
reduced to admire her act; and if he admired, he could not admire without
respecting; if he respected, perforce he reverenced; if he reverenced,
he worshipped.  Therefore she had him at her feet.  At the feet of any
woman, except for the trifling object!  But at the feet of 'It is my
husband!'  That would be a reversal of things.

Are not things reversed when the name Carinthia sounds in the thought of
him who laughed at the name not less angelically martial than Feltre's
adored silver trumpets of his Papal procession; sweeter of the new
morning for the husband of the woman; if he will but consent to the
worshipper's posture?  Yes, and when Gower Woodseer's 'Malady of the
Wealthy,' as he terms the pivotting of the whole marching and wheeling
world upon the favoured of Fortune's habits and tastes, promises to quit
its fell clutch on him?

Another voice in the young nobleman cried: Pooh, dolt and dupe!  and
surrounded her for half a league with reek of burnt flesh and shrieks
of a tortured child; giving her the aspect of a sister of the Parcw.
But it was not the ascendant' voice.  It growled underneath, much like
the deadly beast at Carinthia's gown while she stood:--an image of her
to dominate the princeliest of men.

The princeliest must have won his title to the place before he can yield
other than complimentary station to a woman without violation of his
dignity; and vast wealth is not the title; worldly honours are not; deeds
only are the title.  Fleetwood consented to tell himself that he had not
yet performed the deeds.

Therefore, for him to be dominated was to be obscured, eclipsed.  A man
may outrun us; it is the fortune of war.  Eclipsed behind the skirts of a
woman waving her upraised hands, with, 'Back, pray!'--no, that ignominy
is too horribly abominable!  Be sure, the situation will certainly recur
in some form; will constantly recur.  She will usurp the lead; she will
play the man.

Let matters go on as they are.  We know our personal worth.

Arrived at this point in the perpetual round of the conflict Carinthia
had implanted, Fleetwood entered anew the ranks of the ordinary men of
wealth and a coronet, and he hugged himself.  He enjoyed repose; knowing
it might be but a truce.  Matters might go on as they were.  Still, he
wished her away from those Wythans, residing at Esslemont.  There she
might come eventually to a better knowledge of his personal worth:--'the
gold mine we carry in our bosoms till it is threshed out of us in sweat,'
that fellow Gower Woodseex says; adding, that we are the richer for not
exploring it.  Philosophical cynicism is inconclusive.  Fleetwood knew
his large capacities; he had proved them and could again.  In case a
certain half foreseen calamity should happen:--imagine it a fact, imagine
him seized, besides admiring her character, with a taste for her person!
Why, then, he would have to impress his own mysteriously deep character
on her portion of understanding.  The battle for domination would then
begin.

Anticipation of the possibility of it hewed division between the young
man's pride of being and his warmer feelings.  Had he been free of the
dread of subjection, he would have sunk to kiss the feet of the
statuesque young woman, arms in air, firm-fronted over the hideous death
that tore at her skirts.




CHAPTER XXXIV

A SURVEY OF THE RIDE OF THE WELSH CAVALIERS ESCORTING THE COUNTESS OF
FLEETWOOD TO KENTISH ESSLEMONT

A formal notification from the earl, addressed to the Countess of
Fleetwood in the third person, that Esslemont stood ready to receive her,
autocratically concealed her lord's impatience to have her there; and by
the careful precision with which the stages of her journey were marked,
as places where the servants despatched to convey their lady would find
preparations for her comfort, again alarmed the disordered mother's mind
on behalf of the child she deemed an object of the father's hatred,
second to his hatred of the mother.  But the mother could defend herself,
the child was prey.  the child of a detested wife was heir to his title
and estates.  His look at the child, his hasty one look down at her
innocent, was conjured before her as resembling a kick at a stone in his
path.  His indifference to the child's Christian names pointed darkly
over its future.

The distempered wilfulness of a bruised young woman directed her
thoughts.  She spoke them in the tone of reason to her invalid friend
Rebecca Wythan, who saw with her, felt with her, yearned to retain her
till breath was gone.  Owain Wythan had his doubts of the tyrant guilty
of maltreating this woman of women.  'But when you do leave Wales,' he
said, 'you shall be guarded up to your haven.'

Carinthia was not awake to his meaning then.  She sent a short letter of
reply, imitating the style of her lord; very baldly stating, that she was
unable to leave Wales because of her friend's illness and her part as
nurse.  Regrets were unmentioned.

Meanwhile Rebecca Wythan was passing to death.  Not cheerlessly, more and
more faintly, her thread of life ran to pause, resembling a rill of the
drought; and the thinner-it grew, the shrewder were her murmurs for
Carinthia's ears in commending 'the most real of husbands of an unreal
wife' to her friendly care of him when he would no longer see the shadow
he had wedded.  She had the privilege of a soul beyond our minor rules
and restrainings to speak her wishes to the true wife of a mock husband-
no husband; less a husband than this shadow of a woman a wife, she said;
and spoke them without adjuring the bowed head beside her to record a
promise or seem to show the far willingness, but merely that the wishes
should be heard on earth in her last breath, for a good man's remaining
one chance of happiness.  On the theme touching her husband Owain, it was
verily to hear a soul speak, and have knowledge of the broader range, the
rich interflowings of the tuned discords, a spirit past the flesh can
find.  Her mind was at the same time alive to our worldly conventions
when other people came under its light; she sketched them and their views
in her brief words between the gasps, with perspicuous, humorous
bluntness, as vividly as her twitched eyebrows indicated the laugh.
Gower Woodseer she read startlingly, if correctly.

Carinthia could not leave her.  Attendance upon this dying woman was a
drinking at the springs of life.

Rebecca Wythan under earth, the earl was briefly informed of Lady
Fleetwood's consent to quit Wales, obedient to a summons two months old,
--and that she would be properly escorted; for the which her lord had
made provision.  Consequently the tyrant swallowed his wrath, little
conceiving the monstrous blow she was about to strike.

In peril of fresh floods from our Dame, who should be satisfied with the
inspiring of these pages, it is owned that her story of 'the four and
twenty squires of Glamorgan and Caermarthen in their brass-buttoned green
coats and buckskins, mounted and armed, an escort of the Countess of
Fleetwood across the swollen Severn, along midwinter roads, up to the
Kentish gates of Esslemont,' has a foundation, though the story is not
the more credible for her flourish of documentary old ballad-sheets,
printed when London's wags had ears on cock to any whisper of the doings.
of their favourite Whitechapel Countess; and indeed hardly depended on
whispers.

Enthusiasm sufficient to troop forth four and twenty and more hundreds of
Cambrian gentlemen, and still more of the common folk, as far as they
could journey afoot, was over the two halves of the Principality, to give
the countess a reputable and gallant body-guard.  London had intimations
of kindling circumstances concerning her, and magnified them in the
interests of the national humour: which is the English way of exalting to
criticize, criticizing to depreciate, and depreciating to restore,
ultimately to cherish, in reward for the amusement furnished by an
eccentric person, not devoid of merit.

These little tales of her, pricking cool blood to some activity, were
furze-fires among the Welsh.  But where the latter heard Bardic strings
inviting a chorus, the former as unanimously obeyed the stroke of their
humorous conductor's baton for an outburst from the ribs or below.  And
it was really funny to hear of Whitechapel's titled heroine roaming
Taffyland at her old pranks.

Catching a maddened bull by the horns in the marketplace, and hanging to
the infuriate beast, a wild whirl of clouts, till he is reduced to be a
subject for steaks, that is no common feat.

Her performances down mines were things of the underworld.  England
clapped hands, merely objecting to her not having changed her garb for
the picador's or matador's, before she seized the bull.  Wales adopted
and was proud of her in any costume.  Welshmen North and South, united
for the nonce, now propose her gallantry as a theme to the rival Bards at
the next Eisteddfod.  She is to sit throned in full assembly, oak leaves
and mistletoe interwoven on her head, a white robe and green sash to
clothe her, and the vanquished beast's horns on a gilded pole behind the
dais; hearing the eulogies respectively interpreted to her by Colonel
Fluellen Wythan at one ear, and Captain Agincourt Gower at the other.  A
splendid scene; she might well insist to be present.

There, however, we are at the pitch of burlesque beyond her illustrious
lord's capacity to stand.  Peremptory orders from England arrive,
commanding her return.  She temporizes, postpones, and supplicates to
have the period extended up to the close of the Eisteddfod.  My lord's
orders are imperatively repeated, and very blunt.  He will not have her
'continue playing the fool down there.'  She holds her ground from August
into February, and then sets forth, to undergo the further process of
her taming at Esslemont in England; with Llewellyn and Vaughan and
Cadwallader, and Watkyn and Shenkyn and the remains of the race of Owen
Tudor, attending her; vowed to extract a receipt from the earl her lord's
responsible servitors for the safe delivery of their heroine's person at
the gates of Esslemont; ich dien  their trumpeted motto.

Counting the number at four and twenty, it wears the look of an invasion.
But the said number is a ballad number, and has been since the antique
time.  There was, at a lesser number, enough of a challenge about it for
squires of England, never in those days backward to pick up a glove or
give the ringing rejoinder for a thumb-bite, to ride out and tilt
compliments with the Whitechapel Countess's green cavaliers, rally their
sprites and entertain them exactly according to their degrees of dignity,
as exhibited by their 'haviour under something of a trial; and satisfy
also such temporary appetites as might be excited in them by (among other
matters left to the luck of events) a metropolitan play upon the Saxon
tongue, hard of understanding to the leeky cocks until their ready store
of native pepper seasons it; which may require a corresponding English
condiment to rectify the flavour of the stew.

Now the number of Saxe-Normans riding out to meet and greet the Welshmen
is declared to have not exceeded nine.  So much pretends to be historic,
in opposition to the poetic version.  They would, we may be sure, have
made it a point of honour to meet and greet their invading guests in
precisely similar numbers a larger would have overshot the mark of
courtesy; and doubtless a smaller have fallen deplorably short of it.
Therefore, an acquaintance with her chivalrous, if less impulsive,
countrymen compels to the dismissing of the Dame's ballad authorities.
She has every right to quote them for her own good pleasure, and may
create in others an enjoyment of what has been called 'the Mackrell fry.'

Her notion of a ballad is, that it grows like mushrooms from a scuffle of
feet on grass overnight, and is a sort of forest mother of the pied
infant reared and trimmed by historians to show the world its fatherly
antecedent steps.  The hand of Rose Mackrell is at least suggested in
more than one of the ballads.  Here the Welsh irruption is a Chevy Chase;
next we have the countess for a disputed Helen.

The lady's lord is not a shining figure.  How can an undecided one be a
dispenser of light?  Poetry could never allow him to say with her:

                   'Where'er I go I make a name,
                    And leave a song to follow.'

Yet he was the master of her fortunes at the time; all the material power
was his.  Even doggerel verse (it is worth while to brood on the fact)
denies a surviving pre-eminence to the potent moody, reverses the
position between the driven and the driver.  Poetry, however erratic,
is less a servant of the bully Present, or pomlious Past, than History.
The Muse of History has neither the same divination of the intrinsic nor
the devotion to it, though truly, she has possession of all the positive
matter and holds us faster by the crediting senses.

Nine English cavaliers, then, left London early on a January or February
morning in a Southerly direction, bearing East; and they were the Earl of
Fleetwood's intimates, of the half-dependent order; so we may suppose
them to have gone at his bidding.  That they met the procession of the
Welsh, and claimed to take charge of the countess's carriage, near the
Kentish border-line, is an assertion supported by testimony fairly
acceptable.

Intelligence of the advancing party had reached the earl by courier, from
the date of the first gathering on the bridge of Pont-y-pridd; and from
Gloucester, along to the Thames at Reading; thence away to the Mole, from
Mickleham, where the Surrey chalk runs its final turfy spine North-
eastward to the slope upon Kentish soil.

Greatly to the astonishment of the Welsh cavaliers, a mounted footman,
clad in the green and scarlet facings of Lord Fleetwood's livery, rode up
to them a mile outside the principal towns and named the inn where the
earl had ordered preparations for the reception of them.  England's
hospitality was offered on a princely scale.  Cleverer fencing could not
be.

The meeting, in no sense an encounter, occurred close by a thirty-acre
meadow, famous over the county; and was remarkable for the punctilious
exchange of ceremonial speech, danger being present; as we see powder-
magazines protected by their walls and fosses and covered alleys.
Notwithstanding which, there was a scintillation of sparks.

Lord Brailstone, spokesman of the welcoming party, expressed comic
regrets that they had not an interpreter with them.

Mr. Owain Wythan, in the name of the Cambrian chivalry, assured him of
their comprehension and appreciation of English slang.

Both gentlemen kept their heads uncovered in a suspense; they might for
a word or two more of that savour have turned into the conveniently
spacious meadow.  They were induced, on the contrary, to enter the
channel of English humour, by hearing Chumley Potts exclaim:  'His nob!'
and all of them laughed at the condensed description of a good hit back,
at the English party's cost.

Laughter, let it be but genuine, is of a common nationality, indeed a
common fireside; and profound disagreement is not easy after it.  The
Dame professes to believe that 'Carinthia Jane' had to intervene as
peacemaker, before the united races took the table in Esslemont's dining-
hall for a memorable night of it, and a contest nearer the mark of
veracity than that shown in another of the ballads she would have us
follow.  Whatever happened, they sat down at table together, and the
point of honour for them each and every was, not to be first to rise
from it.  Once more the pure Briton and the mixed if not fused English
engaged, Bacchus for instrument this time, Bacchus for arbiter of the
fray.

You may imagine!  says the Dame.  She cites the old butler at Esslemont,
'as having been much questioned on the subject by her family relative,
Dr. Glossop, and others interested to know the smallest items of the
facts,'--and he is her authority for the declaration that the Welsh
gentlemen and the English gentlemen, 'whatever their united number,'
consumed the number of nine dozen and a half of old Esslemont wine before
they rose, or as possibly sank, at the festive board at the hour of five
of the morning.

Years later, this butler, Joshua Queeney, 'a much enfeebled old man,'
retold and enlarged the tale of the enormous consumption of his best
wine; with a sacred oath to confirm it, and a tear expressive of
elegiacal feelings.

'They bled me twelve dozen, not a bottle less,' she quotes him, after a
minute description of his countenance and scrupulously brushed black
suit, pensioner though he had become.  He had grown, during the interval,
to be more communicative as to particulars.  The wines were four.  Sherry
led off the parade pace, Hock the trot into the merry canter, Champagne
the racing gallop, Burgundy the grand trial of constitutional endurance
for the enforced finish.  All these wines, except the sparkling, had
their date of birth in the precedent century.  'They went like water.'

Questioned anxiously by Dr. Glossop, Queeney maintained an impartial
attitude, and said there was no victor, no vanquished.  They did not sit
in blocks.  The tactics for preserving peace intermingled them.  Each
English gentleman had a Welsh gentleman beside him; they both sat firm;
both fell together.  The bottles or decanters were not stationary for the
guest to fill his glass, they circulated, returning to an empty glass.
All drank equally.  Often the voices were high, the talk was loud.  The
gentlemen were too serious to sing.

At one moment of the evening Queeney confidently anticipated a
'fracassy,' he said.  One of the foreign party--and they all spoke
English, after five dozen bottles had gone the round, as correct as the
English themselves--remarked on the seventy-years Old Brown Sherry, that
'it had a Madeira flavour.'  He spoke it approvingly.  Thereupon Lord
Simon Pitscrew calls to Queeney, asking him 'why Madeira had been
supplied instead of Esslemont's renowned old Sherry?'  A second Welsh
gentleman gave his assurances that his friend had not said it was
Madeira.  But Lord Brailstone accused them of the worse unkindness to a
venerable Old Brown Sherry, in attributing a Madeira flavour to it.  Then
another Welsh gentleman briskly and emphatically stated his opinion, that
the attribution of Madeira flavour to it was a compliment.  At this,
which smelt strongly, he said, of insult, Captain Abrane called on the
name of their absent host to warrant the demand of an apology to the Old
Brown Sherry, for the imputation denying it an individual distinction.
Chumley Potts offered generally to bet that he would distinguish
blindfold at a single sip any Madeira from any first-class Sherry, Old
Brown or Pale.  'Single sip or smell!' Ambrose Mallard cried, either for
himself or his comrade, Queeney could not say which.

Of all Lord Fleetwood's following, Mr. Potts and Mr. Mallard were, the
Dame informs us, Queeney's favourites, because they were so genial; and
he remembered most of what they said and did, being moved to it by 'poor
young Mr. Mallard's melancholy end and Mr. Potts's grief!'

The Welsh gentlemen, after paying their devoirs to the countess next
morning, rode on in fresh health and spirits at mid-day to Barlings, the
seat of Mr. Mason Fennell, a friend of Mr. Owain Wythan's.  They shouted,
in an unseemly way, Queeney thought, at their breakfast-table, to hear
that three of the English party, namely, Captain Abrane, Mr. Mallard, and
Mr. Potts, had rung for tea and toast in bed.  Lord Simon Pitscrew, Lord
Brailstone, and the rest of the English were sore about it; for it
certainly wore a look of constitutional inferiority on the English side,
which could boast of indubitably stouter muscles.  The frenzied spirits
of the Welsh gentlemen, when riding off, let it be known what their
opinion was.  Under the protection of the countess's presence, they were
so cheery as to seem triumphantly ironical; they sent messages of
condolence to the three in bed.

With an undisguised reluctance, the countess, holding Mr. Owain Wythan's
hand longer than was publicly decent, calling him by his Christian name,
consented to their departure.  As they left, they defiled before her; the
vow was uttered by each, that at the instant of her summons he would
mount and devote himself to her service, individually or collectively.
She waved her hand to them.  They ranged in line and saluted.  She kissed
her hand.  Sweeping the cavaliers' obeisance, gallantest of bows, they
rode away.

A striking scene, Dame Gossip says; but raises a wind over the clipped
adventure, and is for recounting what London believed about it.  Enough
has been conceded for the stoppage of her intrusion; she is left in the
likeness of a full-charged pistol capless to the clapping trigger.

That which London believed, or affected to believe about it, would fill
chapters.  There was during many months an impression of Lord Fleetwood's
countess as of a tenacious, dread, prevailing young woman, both intrepid
and astute, who had, by an exercise of various arts, legitimate in open
war of husband and wife, gathered the pick of the Principality to storm
and carry another of her husband's houses.  The certification that her
cavaliers were Welsh gentlemen of wealth and position required a broader
sneer at the Welsh than was warranted by later and more intimate
acquaintance, if it could be made to redound to her discredit.  So,
therefore, added to the national liking for a plucky woman, she gained
the respect for power.  Whitechapel was round her like London's one
street's length extension of smoky haze, reminder of the morning's fog
under novel sunbeams.

Simultaneously, strange to say, her connubial antagonist, far from being
overshadowed, grew to be proportionately respected, and on the strength
of his deserts, apart from his title and his wealth.  He defended
himself, as he was bound to do, by welcoming the picked Welsh squires
with hospitable embrace, providing ceremonies, receptions, and most
comfortable arrangements for them, along the route.  But in thus gravely
entering into the knightly burlesque of the procession, and assisting to
swell the same, he not only drew the venom from it, he stood forth as
England's deputed representative, equal to her invasive challengeing
guests at all points, comic, tragic, or cordial.  He saw that it had to
be treated as a national affair; and he parried the imputation which
would have injured his country's name for courtly breeding, had they been
ill-received, while he rescued his own good name from derision by joining
the extravagance.

He was well inspired.  It was popularly felt to be the supreme of clever-
nay, noble-fencing.  Really noble, though the cleverness was conspicuous.
A defensive stroke, protecting him against his fair one's violent charge
of horse, warded off an implied attack upon Old England, in Old England's
best-humoured easy manner.

Supposing the earl to have acted otherwise, his countess would virtually
have ridden over him, and wild Wales have cast a shadow on the chivalry
of magisterial England.  He and his country stood to meet the issue
together the moment the Countess of Fleetwood and her escort crossed the
Welsh border; when it became a question between the hot-hearted, at their
impetuous gallop, and the sedatively minded, in an unfortified camp of
arm-chairs.  The earl's adroitness, averting a collision fatal or
discomforting to both, disengaged him from an incumbent odium, of which,
it need hardly be stated, neither the lady nor her attendant cavaliers
had any notion at the hour of the assembly for the start for England on
the bridge of Pont-y-pridd.  The hungry mother had the safety of her babe
in thought.  The hotheaded Welshmen were sworn to guard their heroine.

That is the case presented by the Dame's papers, when the incredible is
excised.  She claims the being a good friend to fiction in feeding
popular voracity with all her stores.  But the Old Buccaneer, no
professed friend to it, is a sounder guide in the maxim, where he says:
Deliver yourself by permit of your cheque on the 'Bank of Reason, and
your account is increased instead of lessened.

Our account with credulity, he would signify.

The Dame does not like the shaking for a sifting.  Romance, however, is
not a mountain made of gold, but a vein running some way through; and it
must be engineered, else either we are filled with wind from swallowing
indigestible substance, or we consent to a debasing of the currency,
which means her to-morrow's bankruptcy; and the spectacle of Romance in
the bankruptcy court degrades us (who believe we are allied to her) as
cruelly as it appals.  It gives the cynic licence to bark day and night
for an entire generation.

Surely the Countess of Fleetwood's drive from the Welsh borders to
Esslemont, accompanied by the chosen of the land, followed by the vivats
of the whole Principality, and England gaping to hear the stages of her
progress, may be held sufficiently romantic without stuffing of surprises
and conflicts, adventures at inns, alarms at midnight, windings of a horn
over hilly verges of black heaths, and the rape of the child, the
pursuit, the recovery of the child, after a new set of heroine
performances on the part of a strung-wire mother, whose outcry in a waste
country district, as she clasps her boy to her bosom again: 'There's a
farm I see for milk for him!' the Dame repeats, having begun with an
admission that the tale has been contradicted, and is not produced on
authority.  The end in design is to win the ear by making a fuss, and
roll event upon event for the braining of common intelligence, until her
narrative resembles dusty troopings along a road to the races.

Carinthia and her babe reached Esslemont, no matter what impediments.
There, like a stopped runner whose pantings lengthen to the longer
breath, her alarms over the infant subsided, ceasing for as long as she
clasped it or was in the room with it.  Walking behind the precious
donkey-basket round the park, she went armed, and she soon won a fearful
name at Kentish cottage-hearths, though she 'was not black to see, nor
old.  No, she was very young.  But she did all the things that soldiers
do,--was a bit of a foreigner;--she brought a reputation up from the
Welsh land, and it had a raven's croak and a glow-worm's drapery and a
goblin's origin.

Something was hinted of her having agitated London once.  Somebody
dropped word of her and that old Lord Levellier up at Croridge.  She
stalked park and country at night.  Stories, one or two near the truth,
were told of a restless and a very decided lady down these parts as well;
and the earl her husband daren't come nigh in his dread of her, so that
he runs as if to save his life out of every place she enters.  And he's
not one to run for a trifle.  His pride is pretty well a match for
princes and princesses.

All the same, he shakes in his shoes before her, durst hardly spy at
Esslemont again while she's in occupation.  His managing gentleman comes
down from him, and goes up from her; that's how they communicate.  One
week she's quite solitary; another week the house is brimful as can be.
She 's the great lady entertaining then.  Yet they say it 's a fact, she
has not a shilling of her own to fling at a beggar.  She 'll stock a
cottage wanting it with provision for a fortnight or more, and she'll
order the doctor in, and she'll call and see the right things done for
illness.  'But no money; no one's to expect money of her.  The shots you
hear in Esslemont grounds out of season are she and her maid, always
alongside her, at it before a target on a bank, trying that old Lord
Levellier's gunpowder out of his mill; and he's got no money either; not
for his workmen, they say, until they congregate, and a threatening to
blow him up brings forth half their pay, on account.  But he 's a known
miser.  She's not that.  She's a pleasant-faced lady for the poor.  She
has the voice poor people like.  It's only her enemy, maybe her husband,
she can be terrible to.  She'd drive a hole through a robber stopping her
on the road, as soon as look at him.

This was Esslemont's atmosphere working its way to the earl, not so very
long after the establishment of his countess there.  She could lay hold
of the English, too, it seemed.  Did she call any gentleman of the
district by his Christian name?  Lord Simon Pitscrew reported her doing
so in the case of one of the Welshmen.  Those Welshmen!  Apparently they
are making a push for importance in the kingdom!




CHAPTER XXXV

IN WHICH CERTAIN CHANGES MAY BE DISCERNED
