
CHAPTER XXVIII

OTTILIA

She was on horseback; I on foot, Schwartz for sole witness, and a wide
space of rolling silent white country around us.

We had met in the fall of the winter noon by accident.  'You like my
Professor?' said Ottilia.

'I do: I respect him for his learning.'

'You forgive him his irony?  It is not meant to be personal to you.
England is the object; and partly, I may tell you, it springs from
jealousy.  You have such wealth!  You embrace half the world: you are
such a little island!  All this is wonderful.  The bitterness is, you are
such a mindless people--I do but quote to explain my Professor's ideas.
"Mindless," he says, "and arrogant, and neither in the material nor in
the spiritual kingdom of noble or gracious stature, and ceasing to have a
brave aspect." He calls you squat Goths.  Can you bear to hear me?'

'Princess!'

'And to his conception, you, who were pioneers when the earth had to be
shaped for implements and dug for gold, will turn upon us and stop our
march; you are to be overthrown and left behind, there to gain humility
from the only teacher you can understand--from poverty.  Will you defend
yourself?'

'Well, no, frankly, I will not.  The proper defence for a nation is its
history.'

'For an individual?'

'For a man, his readiness to abide by his word.'

'For a woman--what?'

'For a princess, her ancestry.'

'Ah!  but I spoke of women.  There, there is my ground of love for my
Professor!  I meet my equals, princes, princesses, and the man, the
woman, is out of them, gone, flown!  They are out of the tide of
humanity; they are walking titles, "Now," says my Professor, "that tide
is the blood of our being; the blood is the life-giver; and to be cut off
from it is to perish."  Our princely houses he esteems as dead wood.
Not near so much say I: yet I hear my equals talk, and I think, "Oh!  my
Professor, they testify to your wisdom."  I love him because he has given
my every sense a face-forward attitude (you will complain of my
feebleness of speech) to exterior existence.  There is a princely view of
life which is a true one; but it is a false one if it is the sole one.
In your Parliament your House of Commons shows us real princes, your
Throne merely titled ones.  I speak what everybody knows, and you, I am
sure, are astonished to hear me.'

'I am,' said I.

'It is owing to my Professor, my mind's father and mother.  They say it
is the pleasure of low-born people to feel themselves princes; mine it is
to share their natural feelings.  "For a princess, her ancestry."  Yes;
but for a princess who is no more than princess, her ancestors are a
bundle of faggots, and she, with her mind and heart tied fast to them,
is, at least a good half of her, dead wood.  This is our opinion.  May I
guess at your thoughts?'

'It's more than I could dare to do myself, princess.'

How different from the Ottilia I had known, or could have imagined!  That
was one thought.

'Out of the number, then, this,' she resumed: 'you think that your
English young ladies have command over their tongues: is it not so?'

'There are prattlers among them.'

'Are they educated strictly?'

'I know little of them.  They seem to me to be educated to conceal their
education.'

'They reject ideas?'

'It is uncertain whether they have had the offer.'

Ottilia smiled.  'Would it be a home in their midst?'

Something moved my soul to lift wings, but the passion sank.

'I questioned you of English ladies,' she resumed, 'because we read your
writings of us.  Your kindness to us is that which passes from nurse to
infant; your criticism reminds one of paedagogue and urchin.  You make us
sorry for our manners and habits, if they are so bad; but most of all you
are merry at our simplicity.  Not only we say what we feel, we display
it.  Now, I am so German, this offence is especially mine.'

I touched her horse's neck, and said, 'I have not seen it.'

'Yet you understand me.  You know me well.  How is that?'

The murmur of honest confession came from me: 'I have seen it!'

She laughed.  'I bring you to be German, you see.  Could you forsake your
England?'

'Instantly, though not willingly.'

'Not regrettingly?'

'Cheerfully, if I had my work and my--my friend.'

'No; but well I know a man's field of labour is his country.  You have
your ambition.'

'Yes, now I have.'

She struck a fir-branch with her riding-whip, scattering flakes on my
head.  'Would that extinguish it?'

'In the form of an avalanche perhaps it would.'

'Then you make your aims a part of your life?'

'I do.'

'Then you win!  or it is written of you that you never knew failure!  So
with me.  I set my life upon my aim when I feel that the object is of
true worth.  I win, or death hides from me my missing it.

This I look to; this obtains my Professor's nod, and the approval of my
conscience.  Worthiness, however!--the mind must be trained to discern
it.  We can err very easily in youth; and to find ourselves shooting at a
false mark uncontrollably must be a cruel thing.  I cannot say it is
undeserving the scourge of derision.  Do you know yourself?  I do not;
and I am told by my Professor that it is the sole subject to which you
should not give a close attention.  I can believe him.  For who beguiles
so much as Self?  Tell her to play, she plays her sweetest.  Lurk to
surprise her, and what a serpent she becomes!  She is not to be aware
that you are watching her.  You have to review her acts, observe her
methods.  Always be above her; then by-and-by you catch her hesitating at
cross-roads; then she is bare: you catch her bewailing or exulting; then
she can no longer pretend she is other than she seems.  I make self the
feminine, for she is the weaker, and the soul has to purify and raise
her.  On that point my Professor and I disagree.  Dr. Julius, unlike our
modern Germans, esteems women over men, or it is a further stroke of his
irony.  He does not think your English ladies have heads: of us he is
proud as a laurelled poet.  Have I talked you dumb?'

'Princess, you have given me matter to think upon.'

She shook her head, smiling with closed eyelids.

I, now that speech had been summoned to my lips, could not restrain it,
and proceeded, scarcely governing the words, quite without ideas; 'For
you to be indifferent to rank--yes, you may well be; you have intellect;
you are high above me in both--' So on, against good taste and common
sense.

She cried: 'Oh! no compliments from you to me.  I will receive them, if
you please, by deputy.  Let my Professor hear your immense admiration for
his pupil's accomplishments.  Hear him then in return!  He will beat at
me like the rainy West wind on a lily.  "See," he will say, when I am
broken and bespattered, "she is fair, she is stately, is she not!"  And
really I feel, at the sound of praise, though I like it, that the
opposite, satire, condemnation, has its good right to pelt me.  Look;
there is the tower, there 's the statue, and under that line of pine-
trees the path we ran up;--"dear English boys!"  as I remember saying to
myself; and what did you say of me?'

Her hand was hanging loose.  I grasped it.  She drew a sudden long
breath, and murmured, without fretting to disengage herself,

'My friend, not that!'

Her voice carried an unmistakeable command.  I kissed above the fingers
and released them.

'Are you still able to run?' said she, leading with an easy canter, face
averted.  She put on fresh speed; I was outstripped.

Had she quitted me in anger?  Had she parted from me out of view of the
villa windows to make it possible for us to meet accidentally again in
the shadow of her old protecting Warhead, as we named him from his
appearance, gaunt Schwartz?




CHAPTER XXIX

AN EVENING WITH DR. JULIUS VON KARSTEG

In my perplexity, I thought of the Professor's saying: 'A most fortunate
or a most unfortunate young man.' These words began to strike me as
having a prophetic depth that I had not fathomed.  I felt myself fast
becoming bound in every limb, every branch of my soul.  Ottilia met me
smiling.  She moved free as air.  She could pursue her studies, and argue
and discuss and quote, keep unclouded eyes, and laugh and play, and be
her whole living self, unfettered, as if the pressure of my hand implied
nothing.  Perhaps for that reason I had her pardon.  'My friend, not
that!'  Her imperishably delicious English rang me awake, and lulled me
asleep.  Was it not too securely friendly?  Or was it not her natural
voice to the best beloved, bidding him respect her, that we might meet
with the sanction of her trained discretion?  The Professor would invite
me to his room after the 'sleep well' of the ladies, and I sat with him
much like his pipe-bowl, which burned bright a moment at one sturdy puff,
but generally gave out smoke in fantastical wreaths.  He told me frankly
he had a poor idea of my erudition.  My fancifulness he commended as
something to be turned to use in writing stories.  'Give me time, and
I'll do better things,' I groaned.  He rarely spoke of the princess; with
grave affection always when he did.  He was evidently observing me
comprehensively.  The result was beyond my guessing.

One night he asked me what my scheme of life was.

On the point of improvizing one of an impressive character, I stopped and
confessed: 'I have so many that I may say I have none.' Expecting
reproof, I begged him not to think the worse of me for that.

'Quite otherwise,' said he.  'I have never cared to read deliberately in
the book you open to me, my good young man.'

'The book, Herr Professor?'

'Collect your wits.  We will call it Shakespeare's book; or Gothe's, in
the minor issues.  No, not minor, but a narrower volume.  You were about
to give me the answer of a hypocrite.  Was it not so?'

I admitted it, feeling that it was easily to have been perceived.  He was
elated.

'Good.  Then I apprehend that you wait for the shifting of a tide to
carry you on?'

'I try to strengthen my mind.'

'So I hear,' said he dryly.

'Well, as far as your schools of teaching will allow.'

'That is, you read and commit to memory, like other young scholars.
Whereunto?  Have you no aim?  You have, or I am told you are to have,
fabulous wealth--a dragon's heap.  You are one of the main drainpipes of
English gold.  What is your object?  To spend it?'

'I shall hope to do good with it.'

'To do good!  There is hardly a prince or millionaire, in history or
alive, who has not in his young days hugged that notion.  Pleasure
swarms, he has the pick of his market.  You English live for pleasure.'

'We are the hardest workers in the world.'

'That you may live for pleasure!  Deny it!'

He puffed his tobacco-smoke zealously, and resumed:

'Yes, you work hard for money.  You eat and drink, and boast of your
exercises: they sharpen your appetites.  So goes the round.  We strive,
we fail; you are our frog-chorus of critics, and you suppose that your
brekek-koax affects us.  I say we strive and fail, but we strive on,
while you remain in a past age, and are proud of it.  You reproach us
with lack of common sense, as if the belly were its seat.  Now I ask you
whether you have a scheme of life, that I may know whether you are to be
another of those huge human pumpkins called rich men, who cover your
country and drain its blood and intellect--those impoverishers of nature!
Here we have our princes; but they are rulers, they are responsible,
they have their tasks, and if they also run to gourds, the scandal
punishes them and their order, all in seasonable time.  They stand
eminent.  Do you mark me?  They are not a community, and are not--
bad enough!  bad enough!--but they are not protected by laws in their
right to do nothing for what they receive.  That system is an invention
of the commercial genius and the English.'

'We have our aristocracy, Herr Professor.'

'Your nobles are nothing but rich men inflated with empty traditions of
insufferable, because unwarrantable, pride, and drawing, substance from
alliances with the merchant class.  Are they your leaders?  Do they lead
you in Letters?  in the Arts?  ay, or in Government?  No, not, I am
informed, not even in military service! and there our titled witlings do
manage to hold up their brainless pates.  You are all in one mass,
struggling in the stream to get out and lie and wallow and belch on the
banks.  You work so hard that you have all but one aim, and that is
fatness and ease!'

'Pardon me, Herr Professor,' I interposed, 'I see your drift.
Still I think we are the only people on earth who have shown mankind a
representation of freedom.  And as to our aristocracy, I must, with due
deference to you, maintain that it is widely respected.'

I could not conceive why he went on worrying me in this manner with his
jealous outburst of Continental bile.

'Widely!' he repeated.  'It is widely respected; and you respect it: and
why do you respect it?'

'We have illustrious names in our aristocracy.'

'We beat you in illustrious names and in the age of the lines, my good
young man.'

'But not in a race of nobles who have stood for the country's liberties.'

'So long as it imperilled their own!  Any longer?'

'Well, they have known how to yield.  They have helped to build our
Constitution.'

'Reverence their ancestors, then!  The worse for such descendants.  But
you have touched the exact stamp of the English mind:--it is, to accept
whatsoever is bequeathed it, without inquiry whether there is any change
in the matter.  Nobles in very fact you would not let them be if they
could.  Nobles in name, with a remote recommendation to posterity--that
suits you!'

He sat himself up to stuff a fresh bowl of tobacco, while he pursued:
'Yes, yes: you worship your aristocracy.  It is notorious.  You have a
sort of sagacity.  I am not prepared to contest the statement that you
have a political instinct.  Here it is chiefly social.  You worship your
so-called aristocracy perforce in order to preserve an ideal of contrast
to the vulgarity of the nation.'

This was downright insolence.

It was intolerable.  I jumped on my feet.  'The weapons I would use
in reply to such remarks I cannot address to you, Herr Professor.
Therefore, excuse me.'

He sent out quick spirts of smoke rolling into big volumes.  'Nay, my
good young Englishman, but on the other hand you have not answered me.
And hear me: yes, you have shown us a representation of freedom.  True.
But you are content with it in a world that moves by computation some
considerable sum upwards of sixty thousand miles an hour.'

'Not on a fresh journey--a recurring course!' said I.

'Good!' he applauded, and I was flattered.

'I grant you the physical illustration,' the Professor continued,
and with a warm gaze on me, I thought.  'The mind journeys somewhat
in that way, and we in our old Germany hold that the mind advances
notwithstanding.  Astronomers condescending to earthly philosophy may
admit that advance in the physical universe is computable, though not
perceptible.  Some--whither we tend, shell and spirit.  You English,
fighting your little battles of domestic policy, and sneering at us for
flying at higher game, you unimpressionable English, who won't believe in
the existence of aims that don't drop on the ground before your eyes, and
squat and stare at you, you assert that man's labour is completed when
the poor are kept from crying out.  Now my question is, have you a scheme
of life consonant with the spirit of modern philosophy--with the views of
intelligent, moral, humane human beings of this period?  Or are you one
of your robust English brotherhood worthy of a Caligula in his prime,
lions in gymnastics--for a time; sheep always in the dominions of mind;
and all of one pattern, all in a rut!  Favour me with an outline of your
ideas.  Pour them out pell-mell, intelligibly or not, no matter.  I
undertake to catch you somewhere.  I mean to know you, hark you, rather
with your assistance than without it.'

We were deep in the night.  I had not a single idea ready for delivery.
I could have told him, that wishing was a good thing, excess of tobacco a
bad, moderation in speech one of the outward evidences of wisdom; but
Ottilia's master in the Humanities exacted civility from me.

'Indeed,' I said, 'I have few thoughts to communicate at present, Herr
Professor.  My German will fail me as soon as I quit common ground.  I
love my country, and I do not reckon it as perfect.  We are swillers,
possibly gluttons; we have a large prosperous middle class; many good men
are to be found in it.'

His discharges of smoke grew stifling.  My advocacy was certainly of a
miserable sort.

'Yes, Herr Professor, on my way when a boy to this very place I met a
thorough good man.'

Here I related the tale of my encounter with Captain Welsh.

Dr. Julius nodded rapidly for continuations.  Further!  further!

He refused to dig at the mine within me, and seemed to expect it to
unbosom its riches by explosion.

'Well, Herr Professor, we have conquered India, and hold it as no other
people could.'

'Vide the articles in the last file of English newspapers !' said he.

'Suppose we boast of it '

'Can you?' he simulated wonderment.

'Why, surely it's something!'

'Something for non-commissioned officers to boast of; not for statesmen.
However, say that you are fit to govern Asiatics.  Go on.'

'I would endeavour to equalize ranks at home, encourage the growth of
ideas .  .  .'

'Supporting a non-celibate clergy, and an intermingled aristocracy?  Your
endeavours, my good young man, will lessen like those of the man who
employed a spade to uproot a rock.  It wants blasting.  Your married
clergy and merchandized aristocracy are coils: they are the ivy about
your social tree: you would resemble Laocoon in the throes, if one could
imagine you anything of a heroic figure.  Forward.'

In desperation I exclaimed, 'It 's useless!  I have not thought at all.
I have been barely educated.  I only know that I do desire with all my
heart to know more, to be of some service.'

'Now we are at the bottom, then!' said he.

But I cried, 'Stay; let me beg you to tell me what you meant by calling
me a most fortunate, or a most unfortunate young man.'

He chuckled over his pipe-stem, 'Aha!'

'How am I one or the other?'

'By the weight of what you carry in your head.'

'How by the weight?'

He shot a keen look at me.  'The case, I suspect, is singular, and does
not often happen to a youth.  You are fortunate if you have a solid and
adventurous mind: most unfortunate if you are a mere sensational
whipster.  There 's an explanation that covers the whole.  I am as much
in the dark as you are.  I do not say which of us two has the convex
eye.'

Protesting that I was unable to read riddles, though the heat of the one
in hand made my frame glow, I entreated to have explicit words.  He might
be in Ottilia's confidence, probing me--why not?  Any question he chose
to put to me, I said, I was ready to answer.

'But it's the questioner who unmasks,' said he.

'Are we masked, Herr Professor?  I was not aware of it.'

'Look within, and avoid lying.'

He stood up.  'My nights,' he remarked, 'are not commonly wasted in this
manner.  We Germans use the night for work.'

After a struggle to fling myself on his mercy and win his aid or counsel,
I took his hand respectfully, and holding it, said, 'I am unable to speak
out.  I would if it involved myself alone.'

'Yes, yes, I comprehend; your country breeds honourable men, chivalrous
youngsters,' he replied.  'It 's not enough--not enough.  I want to see a
mental force, energy of brain.  If you had that, you might look as high
as you liked for the match for it, with my consent.  Do you hear?  What I
won't have is, flat robbery!  Mark me, Germany or England, it 's one to
me if I see vital powers in the field running to a grand career.  It 's a
fine field over there.  As well there as here, then!  But better here
than there if it 's to be a wasp's life.  Do you understand me?'

I replied, 'I think I do, if I may dare to'; and catching breath: 'Herr
Professor, dear friend, forgive my boldness; grant me time to try me;
don't judge of me at once; take me for your pupil--am I presumptuous in
asking it?--make of me what you will, what you can; examine me; you may
find there's more in me than I or anybody may know.  I have thoughts and
aims, feeble at present--Good God!  I see nothing for me but a choice of
the two--"most unfortunate" seems likeliest.  You read at a glance that I
had no other choice.  Rather the extremes!--I would rather grasp the
limits of life and be swung to the pits below, be the most unfortunate of
human beings, than never to have aimed at a star.  You laugh at me?  An
Englishman must be horribly in earnest to talk as I do now.  But it is a
star!' (The image of Ottilia sprang fountain-like into blue night heavens
before my eyes memorably.) 'She,' was my next word.  I swallowed it, and
with a burning face, petitioned for help in my studies.

To such sight as I had at that instant he appeared laughing outrageously.
It was a composed smile 'Right,' he said; 'you shall have help in a
settled course.  Certain Professors, friends of mine, at your University,
will see you through it.  Aim your head at a star--your head!--and even
if you miss it you don't fall.  It's that light dancer, that gambler, the
heart in you, my good young man, which aims itself at inaccessible
heights, and has the fall--somewhat icy to reflect on!  Give that organ
full play and you may make sure of a handful of dust.  Do you hear?
It's a mind that wins a mind.  That is why I warn you of being most
unfortunate if you are a sensational whipster.  Good-night Shut my door
fast that I may not have the trouble to rise.'

I left him with the warm lamplight falling on his forehead, and books
piled and sloped, shut and open; an enviable picture to one in my
condition.  The peacefulness it indicated made scholarship seem
beautiful, attainable, I hoped.  I had the sense to tell myself that it
would give me unrotting grain, though it should fail of being a
practicable road to my bright star; and when I spurned at consolations
for failure, I could still delight to think that she shone over these
harvests and the reapers.




CHAPTER XXX

A SUMMER STORM, AND LOVE

The foregoing conversations with Ottilia and her teacher, hard as they
were for passion to digest, grew luminous on a relapsing heart.  Without
apprehending either their exact purport or the characters of the
speakers, I was transformed by them from a state of craving to one of
intense quietude.  I thought neither of winning her, nor of aiming to win
her, but of a foothold on the heights she gazed at reverently.  And if,
sometimes, seeing and hearing her, I thought, Oh, rarest soul!  the wish
was, that brother and sisterhood of spirit might be ours.  My other eager
thirstful self I shook off like a thing worn out.  Men in my confidence
would have supposed me more rational: I was simply possessed.

My desire was to go into harness, buried in books, and for recreation to
chase visions of original ideas for benefiting mankind.  A clear-wined
friend at my elbow, my dear Temple, perhaps, could have hit on the track
of all this mental vagueness, but it is doubtful that he would have
pushed me out of the strange mood, half stupor, half the folding-in of
passion; it was such magical happiness.  Not to be awake, yet vividly
sensible; to lie calm and reflect, and only to reflect; be satisfied with
each succeeding hour and the privations of the hour, and, as if in the
depths of a smooth water, to gather fold over patient fold of the
submerged self, safe from wounds; the happiness was not noble, but it
breathed and was harmless, and it gave me rest when the alternative was
folly and bitterness.

Visitors were coming to the palace to meet the prince, on his return with
my father from England.  I went back to the University, jealous of the
invasion of my ecstatic calm by new faces, and jealous when there of the
privileges those new faces would enjoy; and then, how my recent deadness
of life cried out against me as worse than a spendthrift, a destroyer!
a nerveless absorbent of the bliss showered on me--the light of her
morning presence when, just before embracing, she made her obeisance to
the margravine, and kindly saluted me, and stooped her forehead for the
baroness to kiss it; her gestures and her voice; her figure on horseback,
with old Warhead following, and I meeting her but once!--her walk with
the Professor, listening to his instructions; I used to see them walking
up and down the cypress path of the villa garden, her ear given to him
wholly as she continued her grave step, and he shuffling and treading out
of his line across hers, or on the path-borders, and never apologizing,
nor she noticing it.  At night she sang, sometimes mountain ditties to
the accompaniment of the zither, leaning on the table and sweeping the
wires between snatches of talk.  Nothing haunted me so much as those
tones of, her zither, which were little louder than summer gnats when
fireflies are at their brightest and storm impends.

My father brought horses from England, and a couple of English grooms,
and so busy an air of cheerfulness, that I had, like a sick invalid, to
beg him to keep away from me and prolong unlimitedly his visit to
Sarkeld; the rather so, as he said he had now become indispensable to the
prince besides the margravine.  'Only no more bronze statues!' I adjured
him.  He nodded.  He had hired Count Fretzel's chateau, in the immediate
neighbourhood, and was absolutely independent, he said.  His lawyers were
busy procuring evidence.  He had impressed Prince Ernest with a due
appreciation of the wealth of a young English gentleman, by taking him
over my grandfather's mine.

'And, Richie, we have advanced him a trifle of thousands for the working
of this coal discovery of his.  In six weeks our schooner yacht will be
in the Elbe to offer him entertainment.  He graciously deigns to accept a
couple of English hunters at our hands; we shall improve his breed of
horses, I suspect.  Now, Richie, have I done well?  I flatter myself I
have been attentive to your interests, have I not?'

He hung waiting for confidential communications on my part, but did not
press for them; he preserved an unvarying delicacy in that respect.

'You have nothing to tell?' he asked.

'Nothing,' I said.  'I have only to thank you.'

He left me.  At no other period of our lives were we so disunited.  I
felt in myself the reverse of everything I perceived in him, and such
letters as I wrote to the squire consequently had a homelier tone.  It
seems that I wrote of the pleasures of simple living--of living for
learning's sake.  Mr. Peterborough at the same time despatched praises of
my sobriety of behaviour and diligent studiousness, confessing that I
began to outstrip him in some of the higher branches.  The squire's brief
reply breathed satisfaction, but too evidently on the point where he had
been led to misconceive the state of affairs.  'He wanted to have me near
him, as did another person, whom I appeared to be forgetting; he granted
me another year's leave of absence, bidding me bluffly not to be a
bookworm and forget I was an Englishman.'  The idea that I was deceiving
him never entered my mind.

I was deceiving everybody, myself in the bargain, as a man must do when
in chase of a woman above him in rank.  The chase necessitates deceit--
who knows?  chicanery of a sort as well; it brings inevitable
humiliations; such that ever since the commencement of it at speed I
could barely think of my father with comfort, and rarely met him with
pleasure.  With what manner of face could I go before the prince or the
margravine, and say, I am an English commoner, the son of a man of
doubtful birth, and I claim the hand of the princess?  What contortions
were not in store for these features of mine!  Even as affairs stood now,
could I make a confidant of Temple and let him see me through the stages
of the adventure?  My jingling of verses, my fretting about the
signification of flowers, and trifling with symbols, haunted me
excrutiatingly, taunting me with I know not what abject vileness of
spirit.

In the midst of these tortures an arrow struck me, in the shape of an
anonymous letter, containing one brief line: 'The princess is in need of
help.'

I threw my books aside, and repaired to Count Fretzel's chateau, from
which, happily, my father was absent; but the countenance of the princess
gave me no encouragement to dream I could be of help to her; yet a second
unsigned note worded in a quaint blunt manner, insisted that it was to me
she looked.  I chanced to hear the margravine, addressing Baroness
Turckems, say: 'The princess's betrothal,' what further, escaped me.
Soon after, I heard that Prince Otto was a visitor at the lake-palace.
My unknown correspondent plied me a third time.

I pasted the scrap in my neglected book of notes and reflections, where
it had ample space and about equal lucidity.  It drew me to the book,
nearly driving me desperate; I was now credulous of anything, except that
the princess cared for help from me.  I resolved to go home; I had no
longer any zeal for study.  The desolation of the picture of England in
my mind grew congenial.  It became imperative that I should go somewhere,
for news arrived of my father's approach with a French company of actors,
and deafening entertainments were at hand.  On the whole, I thought it
decent to finish my course at the University, if I had not quite lost the
power of getting into the heart of books.  One who studies is not being a
fool: that is an established truth.  I thanked Dr. Julius for planting it
among my recollections.  The bone and marrow of study form the surest
antidote to the madness of that light gambler, the heart, and distasteful
as books were, I had gained the habit of sitting down to them, which was
as good as an instinct toward the right medicine, if it would but work.

On an afternoon of great heat I rode out for a gaze at the lake-palace,
that I chose to fancy might be the last, foreseeing the possibility of
one of my fits of movement coming on me before sunset.  My very pulses
throbbed 'away!'  Transferring the sense of overwhelming heat to my moral
condition, I thought it the despair of silliness to stay baking in that
stagnant place, where the sky did nothing but shine, gave nothing forth.
The sky was bronze, a vast furnace dome.  The folds of light and shadow
everywhere were satin-rich; shadows perforce of blackness had light in
them, and the light a sword-like sharpness over their edges.  It was
inanimate radiance.  The laurels sparkled as with frost-points; the
denser foliage dropped burning brown: a sickly saint's-ring was round the
heads of the pines.  That afternoon the bee hummed of thunder, and
refreshed the ear.

I pitied the horse I rode, and the dog at his heels, but for me the
intensity was inspiriting.  Nothing lay in the light, I had the land to
myself.  'What hurts me?' I thought.  My physical pride was up, and I
looked on the cattle in black corners of the fields, and here and there a
man tumbled anyhow, a wreck of limbs, out of the insupportable glare,
with an even glance.  Not an eye was lifted on me.

I saw nothing that moved until a boat shot out of the bight of sultry
lake-water, lying close below the dark promontory where I had drawn rein.
The rower was old Schwartz Warhead.  How my gorge rose at the impartial
brute!  He was rowing the princess and a young man in uniform across the
lake.

That they should cross from unsheltered paths to close covert was
reasonable conduct at a time when the vertical rays of the sun were fiery
arrow-heads.  As soon as they were swallowed in the gloom I sprang in my
saddle with torture, transfixed by one of the coarsest shafts of hideous
jealousy.  Off I flew, tearing through dry underwood, and round the bend
of the lake, determined to confront her, wave the man aside, and have my
last word with the false woman.  Of the real Ottilia I had lost
conception.  Blood was inflamed, brain bare of vision: 'He takes her
hand, she jumps from the boat; he keeps her hand, she feigns to withdraw
it, all woman to him in her eyes: they pass out of sight.' A groan burst
from me.  I strained my crazy imagination to catch a view of them under
cover of the wood and torture myself trebly, but it was now blank, shut
fast.  Sitting bolt upright, panting on horseback in the yellow green of
one of the open woodways, I saw the young officer raise a branch of
chestnut and come out.  He walked moodily up to within a yard of my
horse, looked up at me, and with an angry stare that grew to be one of
astonishment, said, 'Ah?  I think I have had the pleasure--somewhere?  in
Wurtemberg, if I recollect.'

It was Prince Otto.  I dismounted.  He stood alone.  The spontaneous
question on my lips would have been 'Where is she?' but I was unable to
speak a word.

'English?' he said, patting the horse's neck.

'Yes--the horse?  an English hunter.  How are you, Prince Otto?  Do you
like the look of him?'

'Immensely.  You know we have a passion for English thoroughbreds.
Pardon me, you look as if you had been close on a sunstroke.  Do you
generally take rides in this weather?'

'I was out by chance.  If you like him, pray take him; take him.  Mount
him and try him.  He is yours if you care to have him; if he doesn't suit
you send him up to Count Fretzel's.  I've had riding enough in the
light.'

'Perhaps you have,' said he, and hesitated.  'It's difficult to resist
the offer of such a horse.  If you want to dispose of him, mention it
when we meet again.  Shall I try him?  I have a slight inclination to go
as hard as you have been going, but he shall have good grooming in the
prince's stables, and that 's less than half as near again as Count
Pretzel's place; and a horse like this ought not to be out in this
weather, if you will permit me the remark.'

'No: I'm ashamed of bringing him out, and shan't look on him with
satisfaction,' said I.  'Take him and try him, and then take him from me,
if you don't mind.'

'Do you know, I would advise your lying down in the shade awhile?' he
observed solicitously.  'I have seen men on the march in Hungary and
Italy.  An hour's rest under cover would have saved them.'

I thanked him.

'Ice is the thing!' he ejaculated.  'I 'll ride and have some fetched to
you.  Rest here.'

With visible pleasure he swung to the saddle.  I saw him fix his cavalry
thighs and bound off as if he meant to take a gate.  Had he glanced
behind him he would have fancied that the sun had done its worst.  I ran
at full speed down the footpath, mad to think she might have returned
homeward by the lake.  The two had parted--why?  He this way, she that.
They would not have parted but for a division of the will.  I came on the
empty boat.  Schwartz lay near it beneath heavy boughs, smoking and
perspiring in peace.  Neither of us spoke.  And it was now tempered by a
fit of alarm that I renewed my search.  So when I beheld her, intense
gratitude broke my passion; when I touched her hand it was trembling for
absolute assurance of her safety.  She was leaning against a tree, gazing
on the ground, a white figure in that iron-moted gloom.

'Otto!' she cried, shrinking from the touch; but at sight of me, all
softly as a light in the heavens, her face melted in a suffusion of
wavering smiles, and deep colour shot over them, heavenly to see.  She
pressed her bosom while I spoke: a lover's speech, breathless.

'You love me?' she said.

'You have known it!'

'Yes, yes!'

'Forgiven me?  Speak, princess.'

'Call me by my name.'

'My own soul!  Ottilia!'

She disengaged her arms tenderly.

'I have known it by my knowledge of myself,' she said, breathing with her
lips dissevered.  'My weakness has come upon me.  Yes, I love you.  It is
spoken.  It is too true.  Is it a fate that brings us together when I
have just lost my little remaining strength--all power?  You hear me!
I pretend to wisdom, and talk of fate!'

She tried to laugh in scorn of herself, and looked at me with almost a
bitter smile on her features, made beautiful by her soft eyes.  I feared
from the helpless hanging of her underlip that she would swoon; a shudder
convulsed her; and at the same time I became aware of the blotting out of
sunlight, and a strange bowing and shore-like noising of the forest.

'Do not heed me,' she said in happy undertones.  'I think I am going to
cry like a girl.  One cannot see one's pride die like this, without but
it is not anguish of any kind.  Since we are here together, I would have
no other change.'

She spoke till the tears came thick.

I told her of the letters I had received, warning me of a trouble
besetting her.  They were, perhaps, the excuse for my conduct, if I had
any.

Schwartz burst on us with his drill-sergeant's shout for the princess.
Standing grey in big rain-drops he was an object of curiosity to us both.
He came to take her orders.

'The thunder,' he announced, raising a telegraphic arm, 'rolls.  It
rains.  We have a storm.  Command me, princess!  your highness!'

Ottilia's eyelids were set blinking by one look aloft.  Rain and
lightning filled heaven and earth.

'Direct us, you!' she said to me gently.

The natural proposal was to despatch her giant by the direct way down the
lake to fetch a carriage from the stables, or matting from the boathouse.
I mentioned it, but did not press it.

She meditated an instant.  'I believe I may stay with my beloved?'

Schwartz and I ran to the boat, hauled it on land, and set it keel upward
against a low leafy dripping branch.  To this place of shelter,
protecting her as securely as I could, I led the princess, while Schwartz
happed a rough trench around it with one of the sculls.  We started him
on foot to do the best thing possible; for the storm gave no promise that
it was a passing one.  In truth, I knew that I should have been the
emissary and he the guard; but the storm overhead was not fuller of its
mighty burden than I of mine.  I looked on her as mine for the hour, and
well won.




CHAPTER XXXI

PRINCESS OTTILIA'S LETTER

That hour of tempest went swift as one of its flashes over our little
nest of peace, where we crouched like insects.  The lightning and the
deluge seemed gloriously endless.  Ottilia's harbouring nook was dry
within an inch of rushing floods and pattered mire.  On me the torrents
descended, and her gentle efforts drew me to her side, as with a maternal
claim to protect me, or to perish in my arms if the lightning found us.
We had for prospect an ever-outbursting flame of foliage, and the hubbub
of the hissing lake, crimson, purple, dusky grey, like the face of a
passionate creature scourged.  It was useless to speak.  Her lips were
shut, but I had the intent kindness of her eyes on me almost unceasingly.

The good hour slipped away.  Old Warhead's splashed knees on the level of
our heads were seen by us when the thunder had abated.  Ottilia prepared
to rise.

'You shall hear from me,' she said, bending with brows measuring the
boat-roof, like a bird about to fly.

'Shall I see you?'

'Ultimately you surely will.  Ah!  still be patient.'

'Am I not?  have I not been?'

'Yes; and can you regret it?'

'No; but we separate!'

'Would you have us be two feet high for ever?' she answered smiling.

'One foot high, or under earth, if it might be together!'

'Poor little gnomes!' said she.

The homeliness of our resting-place arrested her for an instant, and
perhaps a touch of comic pity for things of such diminutive size as to
see nothing but knees where a man stood.  Our heads were hidden.

'Adieu!  no pledge is needed,' she said tenderly.

'None!' I replied.

She returned to the upper world with a burning blush.

Schwartz had borne himself with extraordinary discretion by forbearing
to spread alarm at the palace.  He saluted his young mistress in the
regulation manner while receiving her beneath a vast umbrella, the
holiday peasant's invariable companion in these parts.  A forester was
in attendance carrying shawls, clogs, and matting.  The boat was turned
and launched.

'Adieu, Harry Richmond.  Will you be quite patient till you hear from
me?' said Ottilia, and added, 'It is my question!' delightfully recalling
old times.

I was soon gazing at the track of the boat in rough water.

Shouts were being raised somewhere about the forest, and were replied to
by hearty bellow of the rower's lungs.  She was now at liberty to join my
name to her own or not, as she willed.  I had to wait.  But how much
richer was I than all the world!  The future owed me nothing.  I would
have registered a vow to ask nothing of it.  Among the many determined
purposes framing which I walked home, was one to obtain a grant of that
bit of land where we had sat together, and build a temple on it.  The
fear that it might be trodden by feet of men before I had enclosed it
beset me with anguish.  The most absolute pain I suffered sprang from a
bewildering incapacity to conjure up a vision of Ottilia free of the
glittering accessories of her high birth; and that was the pain of shame;
but it came only at intervals, when pride stood too loftily and the
shadow of possible mischance threatened it with the axe.

She did not condemn me to long waiting.  Her favourite Aennchen brought
me her first letter.  The girl's face beamed, and had a look as if she
commended me for a worthy deed.

'An answer, Aennchen?' I asked her.

'Yes, yes!' said she anxiously; 'but it will take more time than I can
spare.' She appointed a meeting near the palace garden-gates at night.

I chose a roof of limes to read under.

'Noblest and best beloved!' the princess addressed me in her own tongue,
doubting, I perceived, as her training had taught her, that my English
eyes would tolerate apostrophes of open-hearted affection.  The rest was
her English confided to a critic who would have good reason to be
merciful:

'The night has come that writes the chapter of the day.  My father has
had his interview with his head-forester to learn what has befallen from
the storm in the forest.  All has not been told him!  That shall not be
delayed beyond to-morrow.

'I am hurried to it.  And I had the thought that it hung perhaps at the
very end of my life among the coloured leaves, the strokes of sunset--
that then it would be known!  or if earlier, distant from this strange
imperative Now.  But we have our personal freedom now, and I have learnt
from minutes what I did mean to seek from years, and from our forest what
I hoped that change of scene, travel, experience, would teach me.  Yet I
was right in my intention.  It was a discreet and a just meaning I had.
For things will not go smoothly for him at once: he will have his hard
battle.  He is proved: he has passed his most brave ordeal.  But I!
Shall I see him put to it and not certainly know myself?  Even thus I
reasoned.  One cannot study without knowing that our human nature is most
frail.  Daily the body changes, daily the mind--why not the heart?  I did
design to travel and converse with various persons.

'Pardon it to one who knew that she would require super-feminine power
of decision to resolve that she would dispose of herself!

'I heard of Harry Richmond before I saw him.  My curiosity to behold the
two fair boys of the sailor kingdom set me whipping my pony after them
that day so remote, which is always yesterday.  My thoughts followed you,
and I wondered--does he mean to be a distinguished countryman of his
Nelson?  or a man of learning?  Then many an argument with "my
Professor," until--for so it will ever be--the weaker creature did
succumb in the open controversy, and thought her thoughts to herself.
Contempt of England gained on me still.  But when I lay withered, though
so young, by the sea-shore, his country's ancient grandeur insisted, and
I dreamed of Harry Richmond, imagining that I had been false to my
childhood.  You stood before me, dearest.  You were kind: you were
strong, and had a gentle voice.  Our souls were caught together on the
sea.  Do you recollect my slip in the speaking of Lucy Sibley's
marriage?--"We change countries."  At that moment I smelt salt air, which
would bring you to my sight and touch were you and I divided let me not
think how far.

'To-morrow I tell the prince, my father, that I am a plighted woman.
Then for us the struggle, for him the grief.  I have to look on him and
deal it.

'I can refer him to Dr. Julius for my estimate of my husband's worth.

'"My Professor" was won by it.  He once did incline to be the young bold
Englishman's enemy.  "Why is he here?  what seeks he among us?"  It was
his jealousy, not of the man, but of the nation, which would send one to
break and bear away his carefully cultivated German lily.  No eye but his
did read me through.  And you endured the trial that was forced on you.
You made no claim for recompense when it was over.  No, there is no pure
love but strong love!  It belongs to our original elements, and of its
purity should never be question, only of its strength.

'I could not help you when you were put under scrutiny before the
margravine and the baroness.  Help from me would have been the betrayal
of both.  The world has accurate eyes, if they are not very penetrating.
The world will see a want of balance immediately, and also too true a
balance, but it will not detect a depth of concord between two souls that
do not show some fretfulness on the surface.

'So it was considered that in refusing my cousin Otto and other proposed
alliances, I was heart-free.  An instructed princess, they thought, was
of the woeful species of woman.  You left us: I lost you.  I heard you
praised for civil indifference to me--the one great quality you do not
possess!  Then it was the fancy of people that I, being very cold, might
be suffered to hear my cousin plead for himself.  The majority of our
family favour Otto.  He was permitted to woo me as though I had been a
simple maid; and henceforth shall I have pity for all poor little
feminine things who are so persecuted, asked to inflict cruelty--to take
a sword and strike with it.  But I--who look on marriage as more than a
surrender--I could well withstand surpassing eloquence.  It was easy to
me to be inflexible in speech and will when I stood there, entreated to
change myself.  But when came magically the other, who is my heart, my
voice, my mate, the half of me, and broke into illumination of things
long hidden--oh! then did I say to you that it was my weakness had come
upon me?  It was my last outcry of self--the "I" expiring.  I am now
yours, "We" has long overshadowed "I," and now engulphs it.  We are one.
If it were new to me to find myself interrogating the mind of my beloved,
relying on his courage, taking many proofs of his devotion, I might pause
to re-peruse my words here, without scruple, written.  I sign it, before
heaven, your Ottilia.

               'OTTILIA FREDERIKA WILHELMINA HEDWIG,
                    'Princess of Eppenwelzen-Sarkeld.'




CHAPTER XXXII

AN INTERVIEW WITH PRINCE ERNEST AND A MEETING WITH PRINCE OTTO

A messenger from Prince Ernest commanding my immediate attendance at the
palace signified that the battle had begun.  I could have waited for my
father, whose return from one of his expeditions in the prince's service
was expected every instant; but though I knew I should have, had a
powerful coadjutor in him to assist me through such a conference, I
preferred to go down alone.  Prince Otto met me in the hall.  He passed
by, glancing an eye sharply, and said over his shoulder,

'We shall have a word together presently!'

The library door was flung open.  Prince Ernest and the margravine were
in the room.  She walked out with angry majesty.  The prince held his
figure in the stiff attitude of reception.  He could look imposing.

The character of the interview was perceptible at once.

'You have not, I presume, to be informed of the business in hand, Mr.
Richmond!'

'Your Highness, I believe I can guess it.'

This started him pacing the floor.

'An impossibility!  a monstrous extravagance!  a thing unheard of!
mania!  mania!' he muttered.  'You are aware, sir, that you have been
doing your worst to destroy the settled arrangements of my family?  What
does it mean?  In common reason you cannot indulge any legitimate hope of
succeeding.  Taking you as a foreigner, you must know that.  Judge of the
case by your own reigning Families.  Such events never happen amongst
them.  Do you suppose that the possession of immense wealth entitles you
to the immeasurable presumption of aspiring to equality of position with
reigning Houses?  Such folly is more frequently castigated than reasoned
with.  Why, now--now, were it published--that I had condescended--
condescend as I am doing, I should be the laughing-stock of every Court
in Europe.  You English want many lessons.  You are taught by your
scribes to despise the dignity which is not supported by a multitude of
bayonets, guns, and gold.  I heard of it when I travelled incognito.  You
make merry over little potentates.  Good.  But do not cross their paths.
Their dominion may be circumscribed, but they have it; and where we are
now, my power equals that of the Kaiser and the Czar.  You will do me the
favour to understand that I am not boasting, not menacing; I attempt,
since it is extraordinarily imposed on me, to instruct you.  I have cause
to be offended; I waive it.  I meet you on common ground, and address
myself to your good sense.  Have you anything to say?'

'Much, sir.'

'Much?' he said, with affected incredulity.

The painful hardship for me was to reply in the vague terms he had been
pleased to use.

'I have much to say, your Highness.  First, to ask pardon of you, without
excusing myself.'

'A condition, apparently, that absolves the necessity for the grant.
Speak precisely.'

But I was as careful as he in abstaining from any direct indication of
his daughter's complicity, and said, 'I have offended your Highness.
You have done me the honour to suggest that it is owing to my English
training.  You will credit my assurance that the offence was not
intentional, not preconceived.'

'You charge it upon your having been trained among a nation of
shopkeepers?'

'My countrymen are not illiterate or unmannerly, your Highness.'

'I have not spoken it; I may add, I do not think it.'

'I feared that your Highness entertained what I find to be a very
general, perhaps here and there wilful, error with regard to England.'

'When I was in the service I had a comrade, a gallant gentleman, deeply
beloved by me, and he was an Englishman.  He died in the uniform and
under the flag I reverence.'

'I rejoice that your Highness has had this experience of us.  I have to
imagine that I expressed myself badly.  My English training certainly
does not preclude the respect due to exalted rank.  Your Highness will,
I trust humbly, pardon my offence.  I do not excuse myself because I
cannot withdraw, and I am incapable of saying that I regret it.'

'In cool blood you utter that?' exclaimed the prince.

His amazement was unfeigned.

'What are the impossible, monstrous ideas you--where--?  Who leads you
to fancy there is one earthly chance for you when you say you cannot
withdraw?  Cannot?  Are you requested?  Are you consulted?  It is a
question to be decided in the imperative: you must.  What wheel it is you
think you have sufficient vigour to stop, I am profoundly unaware, but I
am prepared to affirm that it is not the wheel of my household.  I would
declare it, were I a plain citizen.  You are a nullity in the case, in
point of your individual will--a nullity swept away with one wave of the
hand.  You can do this, and nothing else: you can apologize, recognize
your station, repair a degree of mischief that I will not say was
preconceived or plotted.  So for awhile pursue your studies, your
travels.  In time it will give me pleasure to receive you.  Mr.
Richmond,' he added, smiling and rising; 'even the head of a little
German principality has to give numberless audiences.'  His features
took a more cordial smile to convince me that the dismissing sentence
was merely playful.

As for me, my mind was confused by the visible fact that the father's
features resembled the daughter's.  I mention it, that my mind's
condition may be understood.

Hardly had I been bowed out of the room when my father embraced me,
and some minutes later I heard Prince Otto talking to me and demanding
answers.  That he or any one else should have hostile sentiments toward
a poor devil like me seemed strange.  My gift of the horse appeared to
anger him most.  I reached the chateau without once looking back, a
dispirited wretch.  I shut myself up; I tried to read.  The singular
brevity of my interview with the prince, from which I had expected great
if not favourable issues, affected me as though I had been struck by a
cannon shot; my brains were nowhere.  His perfect courtesy was
confounding.  I was tormented by the delusion that I had behaved
pusillanimously.

My father rushed up to me after dark.  Embracing me and holding me by the
hand, he congratulated me with his whole heart.  The desire of his life
was accomplished; the thing he had plotted for ages had come to pass.
He praised me infinitely.  My glorious future, he said, was to carry a
princess to England and sit among the, highest there, the husband of a
lady peerless in beauty and in birth, who, in addition to what she was
able to do for me by way of elevation in my country, could ennoble in her
own territory.  I had the option of being the father of English nobles or
of German princes; so forth.  I did not like the strain; yet I clung to
him.  I was compelled to ask whether he had news of any sort worth
hearing.

'None,' said he calmly; 'none.  I have everything to hear, nothing to
relate; and, happily, I can hardly speak for joy.'  He wept.

He guaranteed to have the margravine at the chateau within a week, which
seemed to me a sufficient miracle.  The prince, he said, might require
three months of discretionary treatment.  Three further months to bring
the family round, and the princess would be mine.  'But she is yours!
she is yours already!' he cried authoritatively.  'She is the reigning
intellect there.  I dreaded her very intellect would give us all the
trouble, and behold, it is our ally!  The prince lives with an elbow out
of his income.  But for me it would be other parts of his person as well,
I assure you, and the world would see such a princely tatterdemalion as
would astonish it.  Money to him is important.  He must carry on his
mine.  He can carry on nothing without my help.  By the way, we have to
deal out cheques?'

I assented.

In spite of myself, I caught the contagion of his exuberant happiness and
faith in his genius.  The prince had applauded his energetic management
of the affairs of the mine two or three times in my hearing.  It struck
me that he had really found his vocation, and would turn the sneer on
those who had called him volatile and reckless.  This led me to a
luxurious sense of dependence on him, and I was willing to live on
dreaming and amused, though all around me seemed phantoms, especially the
French troupe, the flower of the Parisian stage: Regnault, Carigny,
Desbarolles, Mesdames Blanche Bignet and Dupertuy, and Mdlle. Jenny
Chassediane, the most spirituelle of Frenchwomen.  'They are a part of
our enginery, Richie,' my father said.  They proved to be an irresistible
attraction to the margravine.  She sent word to my father that she meant
to come on a particular day when, as she evidently knew, I should not be
present.  Two or three hours later I had Prince Otto's cartel in my
hands.  Jorian DeWitt, our guest at this season, told me subsequently,
and with the utmost seriousness, that I was largely indebted to Mdlle.
Jenny for a touching French song of a beau chevalier she sang before
Ottilia in my absence.  Both he and my father believed in the efficacy of
this kind of enginery, but, as the case happened, the beau chevalier was
down low enough at the moment his highborn lady listened to the song.

It appeared that when Prince Otto met me after my interview with Prince
Ernest, he did his best to provoke a rencontre, and failing to get
anything but a nod from my stunned head, betook himself to my University.
A friendly young fellow there, Eckart vom Hof, offered to fight him on my
behalf, should I think proper to refuse.  Eckart and two or three others
made a spirited stand against the aristocratic party siding with Prince
Otto, whose case was that I had played him a dishonourable trick to laugh
at him.  I had, in truth, persuaded him to relieve me at once of horse
and rival at the moment when he was suffering the tortures of a
rejection, and I was rushing to take the hand he coveted; I was so far
guilty.  But to how great a degree guiltless, how could I possibly
explain to the satisfaction of an angry man?  I had the vision of him
leaping on the horse, while I perused his challenge; saw him fix to the
saddle and smile hard, and away to do me of all services the last he
would have performed wittingly.  The situation was exactly of a sort for
one of his German phantasy-writers to image the forest jeering at him as
he flew, blind, deaf, and unreasonable, vehement for one fierce draught
of speed.  We are all dogged by the humour of following events when we
start on a wind of passion.  I could almost fancy myself an accomplice.
I realized the scene with such intensity in the light running at his
heels: it may be quite true that I laughed in the hearing of his
messenger as I folded up the letter.  That was the man's report.  I am
not commonly one to be forgetful of due observances.

The prospect of the possible eternal separation from my beloved pricked
my mechanical wits and set them tracing the consequent line by which I
had been brought to this pass as to a natural result.  Had not my father
succeeded in inspiring the idea that I was something more than something?
The tendency of young men is to conceive it for themselves without
assistance; a prolonged puff from the breath of another is nearly sure to
make them mad as kings, and not so pardonably.

I see that I might have acted wisely, and did not; but that is a
speculation taken apart from my capabilities.  If a man's fate were as a
forbidden fruit, detached from him, and in front of him, he might
hesitate fortunately before plucking it; but, as most of us are aware,
the vital half of it lies in the seed-paths he has traversed.  We are
sons of yesterday, not of the morning.  The past is our mortal mother,
no dead thing.  Our future constantly reflects her to the soul.  Nor is
it ever the new man of to-day which grasps his fortune, good or ill.  We
are pushed to it by the hundreds of days we have buried, eager ghosts.
And if you have not the habit of taking counsel with them, you are but an
instrument in their hands.

My English tongue admonishes me that I have fallen upon a tone resembling
one who uplifts the finger of piety in a salon of conversation.  A man's
review of the course of his life grows for a moment stringently serious
when he beholds the stream first broadening perchance under the light
interpenetrating mine just now.

My seconds were young Eckart vom Hof, and the barely much older, though
already famous Gregorius Bandelmeyer, a noted mathematician, a savage
Republican, lean-faced, spectacled, and long, soft-fingered; a cat to
look at, a tiger to touch.  Both of them were animated by detestation of
the Imperial uniform.  They distrusted my skill in the management of the
weapon I had chosen; for reasons of their own they carried a case of
pistols to the field.  Prince Otto was attended by Count Loepel and a
Major Edelsheim of his army, fresh from the garrison fortress of Mainz,
gentlemen perfectly conversant with the laws of the game, which my worthy
comrades were not.  Several minutes were spent in an altercation between
Edelsheim and Bandelmeyer.  The major might have had an affair of his own
had he pleased.  My feelings were concentrated within the immediate ring
where I stood: I can compare them only to those of a gambler determined
to throw his largest stake and abide the issue.  I was not open to any
distinct impression of the surrounding scenery; the hills and leafage
seemed to wear an iron aspect.  My darling, my saint's face was shut up
in my heart, and with it a little inaudible cry of love and pain.  The
prince declined to listen to apologies.  'He meant to teach me that this
was not a laughing matter.'  Major Edelsheim had misunderstood
Bandelmeyer; no offer of an apology had been made.  A momentary human
sensation of an unworthy sort beset me when I saw them standing together
again, and contrasted the collectedness and good-humour of my adversary's
representative with the vexatious and unnecessary naggling of mine, the
sight of whose yard-long pipe scandalized me.

At last the practical word was given.  The prince did not reply to my
salute.  He was smoking, and kept his cigar in one corner of his mouth,
as if he were a master fencer bidding his pupil to come on.  He assumed
that he had to do with a bourgeois Briton unused to arms, such as we are
generally held to be on the Continent.  After feeling my wrist for a
while he shook the cigar out of his teeth.

The 'cliquetis' of the crossed steel must be very distant in memory, and
yourself in a most dilettante frame of mind, for you to be accessible to
the music of that thin skeleton's clank.  Nevertheless, it is better and
finer even at the time of action, than the abominable hollow ogre's eye
of the pistol-muzzle.  We exchanged passes, the prince chiefly attacking.
Of all the things to strike my thoughts, can you credit me that the
vividest was the picture of the old woman Temple and I had seen in our
boyhood on the night of the fire dropping askew, like forks of brown
flame, from the burning house in London city; I must have smiled.  The
prince cried out in French: 'Laugh, sir; you shall have it!'  He had
nothing but his impetuosity for an assurance of his promise, and was
never able to force me back beyond a foot.  I touched him on the arm and
the shoulder, and finally pierced his arm above the elbow.  I could have
done nearly what I liked with him; his skill was that of a common
regimental sabreur.

'Ludere qui nescit campestribus abstinet armis!' Bandelmeyer sang out.

'You observed?' said Major Edelsheim, and received another disconcerting
discharge of a Latin line.  The prince frowned and made use of some
military slang.  Was his honour now satisfied?  Not a whit.  He certainly
could not have kept his sword-point straight, and yet he clamoured to
fight on, stamped, and summoned me to assault him, proposed to fight me
with his left hand after his right had failed; in short, he was beside
himself, an example of the predicament of a man who has given all the
provocation and finds himself disabled.  My seconds could have stopped it
had they been equal to their duties; instead of which Bandelmeyer,
hearing what he deemed an insult to the order of student and scholar,
retorted furiously and offensively, and Eckart, out of good-fellowship,
joined him, whereat Major Edelsheim, in the act of bandaging the prince's
arm, warned them that he could not pass by an outrage on his uniform.
Count Loepel stept politely forward, and gave Eckart a significant bow.
The latter remarked mockingly, 'With pleasure and condescension!'  At a
murmur of the name of doctor from Edelsheim, the prince damned the doctor
until he or I were food for him.  Irritated by the whole scene, and his
extravagant vindictiveness, in which light I regarded the cloak of fury
he had flung over the shame of his defeat, I called to Bandelmeyer to
open his case of pistols and offer them for a settlement.  As the
proposal came from me, it was found acceptable.  The major remonstrated
with the prince, and expressed to me his regrets and et caeteras of well-
meant civility.  He had a hard task to keep out of the hands of
Bandelmeyer, who had seized my sword, and wanted vi et armis to defend
the cause of Learning and the People against military brigands on the
spot.  If I had not fallen we should have had one or two other prostrate
bodies.

A silly business on all sides.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Ask pardon of you, without excusing myself
Habit of antedating his sagacity
He thinks or he chews
If you kneel down, who will decline to put a foot on you?
It goes at the lifting of the bridegroom's little finger
Look within, and avoid lying
Mindless, he says, and arrogant
One who studies is not being a fool
The past is our mortal mother,  no dead thing
The proper defence for a nation is its history
Then for us the struggle, for him the grief
They seem to me to be educated to conceal their education
We has long overshadowed "I"
Who beguiles so much as Self?




End of this Project Gutenberg Etext of Adventures of Harry Richmond, v4
by George Meredith






THE ADVENTURES OF HARRY RICHMOND

By George Meredith



BOOK 5.

XXXIII.   WHAT CAME OF A SHILLING
XXXIV.    I GAIN A PERCEPTION OF PRINCELY STATE
XXXV.     THE SCENE IN THE LAKE-PALACE LIBRARY
XXXVI.    HOMEWARD AND HOME AGAIN.
XXXVII.   JANET RENOUNCES ME
XXXVIII.  MY BANKERS' BOOK.



CHAPTER XXXIII

WHAT CAME OF A SHILLING

The surgeon, who attended us both, loudly admired our mutual delicacy in
sparing arteries and vital organs: but a bullet cuts a rougher pathway
than the neat steel blade, and I was prostrate when the prince came to
press my hand on his departure for his quarters at Laibach.  The utterly
unreasonable nature of a duel was manifested by his declaring to me, that
he was now satisfied I did not mean to insult him and then laugh at him.
We must regard it rather as a sudorific for feverish blood and brains.
I felt my wound acutely, seeing his brisk step when he retired.  Having
overthrown me bodily, it threw my heart back to its first emotions, and I
yearned to set eyes on my father, with a haunting sense that I had of
late injured him and owed him reparation.  It vanished after he had been
in my room an hour, to return when he had quitted it, and incessantly and
inexplicably it went and came in this manner.  He was depressed.
I longed for drollery, relieved only by chance allusions to my beloved
one, whereas he could not conceal his wish to turn the stupid duel to
account.

'Pencil a line to her,' he entreated me, and dictated his idea of a
moving line, adding urgently, that the crippled letters would be
affecting to her, as to the Great Frederick his last review of his
invalid veterans.  'Your name--the signature of your name alone, darling
Richie,' and he traced a crooked scrawl with a forefinger,--", Still,
dearest angel, in contempt of death and blood, I am yours to eternity,
Harry Lepel Richmond, sometimes called Roy--a point for your decision in
the future, should the breath everlastingly devoted to the most celestial
of her sex, continue to animate the frame that would rise on wings to say
adieu!  adieu!"--Richie, just a sentence?'

He was distracting.

His natural tenderness and neatness of hand qualified him for spreading
peace in a sick-room; but he was too full of life and his scheme, and
knowing me out of danger, he could not forbear giving his despondency an
outlet.  I heard him exclaim in big sighs: 'Heavens!  how near!' and
again, 'She must hear of it!'  Never was man so incorrigibly dramatic.

He would walk up to a bookcase and take down a volume, when the
interjectional fit waxed violent, flip the pages, affecting a perplexity
he would assuredly have been struck by had he perused them, and read, as
he did once,--'Italy, the land of the sun!  and she is to be hurried away
there, and we are left to groan.  The conspiracy is infamous!  One of the
Family takes it upon himself to murder us! and she is to be hurried out
of hearing!  And so we are to have the blood of the Roys spilt for
nothing?--no!' and he shut up the book with a report, and bounded to my
side to beg pardon of me.  From his particular abuse of the margravine,
the iteration of certain phrases, which he uttered to denounce and defy
them, I gathered that an interview had passed between the two, and that
she had notified a blockade against all letters addressed to the
princess.  He half admitted having rushed to the palace on his road to
me.

'But, Richie,' said he, pressing me again to write the moving line, 'a
letter with a broad black border addressed by me might pass.'  He looked
mournfully astute.  'The margravine might say to herself," Here's Doctor
Death in full diploma come to cure the wench of her infatuation."  I am
but quoting the coarse old woman, Richie; confusion on her and me!  for I
like her.  It might pass in my handwriting, with a smudge for paternal
grief--it might.  "To Her Serene Highness the Margravine of Rippau, etc.,
etc., etc., in trust for the Most Exalted the Princess of Eppenwelzen-
Sarkeld."  I transpose or omit a title or so.  "Aha!"  says she, "there's
verwirrung in Roy's poor head, poor fellow; the boy has sunk to a
certainty.  Here (to the princess), it seems, my dear, this is for you.
Pray do not communicate the contents for a day or so, or a month."'

His imitation of the margravine was the pleasantest thing I heard from
him.  The princess's maid and confidante, he regretted to state, was
incorruptible, which I knew.  That line of Ottilia's writing, 'Violets
are over,' read by me in view of the root-mountain of the Royal House of
Princes, scoffed at me insufferably whenever my father showed me these
openings of his mind, until I was dragged down to think almost that I had
not loved the woman and noble soul, but only the glorified princess--
the carved gilt frame instead of the divine portrait!  a shameful acrid
suspicion, ransacking my conscience with the thrusting in of a foul torch
here and there.

For why had I shunned him of late?  How was it that he tortured me now?
Did I in no degree participate in the poignant savour of his scheme?
Such questionings set me flushing in deadly chills.  My brain was weak,
my heart exhausted, my body seemed truthful perforce and confessed on the
rack.  I could not deny that I had partly, insensibly clung to the vain
glitter of hereditary distinction, my father's pitfall; taking it for a
substantial foothold, when a young man of wit and sensibility and, mark
you, true pride, would have made it his first care to trample that under
heel.  Excellent is pride; but oh! be sure of its foundations before you
go on building monument high.  I know nothing to equal the anguish of an
examination of the basis of one's pride that discovers it not solidly
fixed; an imposing, self-imposing structure, piled upon empty cellarage.
It will inevitably, like a tree striking bad soil, betray itself at the
top with time.  And the anguish I speak of will be the sole healthy sign
about you.  Whether in the middle of life it is adviseable to descend the
pedestal altogether, I dare not say.  Few take the precaution to build a
flight of steps inside--it is not a labour to be proud of; fewer like to
let themselves down in the public eye--it amounts to a castigation; you
must, I fear, remain up there, and accept your chance in toppling over.
But in any case, delude yourself as you please, your lofty baldness will
assuredly be seen with time.  Meanwhile, you cannot escape the internal
intimations of your unsoundness.  A man's pride is the front and
headpiece of his character, his soul's support or snare.  Look to it in
youth.  I have to thank the interminable hours on my wretched sick-bed
for a singularly beneficial investigation of the ledger of my deeds and
omissions and moral stock.  Perhaps it has already struck you that one
who takes the trouble to sit and write his history for as large a world
as he can obtain, and shape his style to harmonize with every development
of his nature, can no longer have much of the hard grain of pride in him.
A proud puppet-showman blowing into Pandaean pipes is an inconceivable
object, except to those who judge of characteristics from posture.

It began to be observed by others that my father was not the most
comforting of nurses to me.  My landlady brought a young girl up to my
room, and introduced her under the name of Lieschen, saying that she had
for a long time been interested in me, and had been diligent in calling
to inquire for news of my condition.  Commanded to speak for herself,
this Lieschen coloured and said demurely, 'I am in service here, sir,
among good-hearted people, who will give me liberty to watch by you, for
three hours of the afternoon and three of the early part of the night, if
you will honour me.'

My father took her shoulder between finger and thumb, and slightly shook
her to each ejaculation of his emphatic 'No! no! no! no!  What!  a
young maiden nurse to a convalescent young gentleman!  Why, goodness
gracious me!  Eh?'

She looked at me softly, and I said I wished her to come.

My father appealed to the sagacity of the matron.  So jealous was he of a
suggested partner in his task that he had refused my earnest requests to
have Mr. Peterborough to share the hours of watching by my side.  The
visits of college friends and acquaintances were cut very short, he soon
reduced them to talk in a hush with thumbs and nods and eyebrows; and if
it had not been so annoying to me, I could have laughed at his method of
accustoming the regular visitors to make ready, immediately after
greeting, for his affectionate dismissal of them.  Lieschen went away
with the mute blessing of his finger on one of her modest dimples; but,
to his amazement, she returned in the evening.  He gave her a lecture,
to which she listened attentively, and came again in the morning.  He was
petrified.  'Idiots, insects, women, and the salt sea ocean!' said he, to
indicate a list of the untameables, without distressing the one present,
and, acknowledging himself beaten, he ruefully accepted his holiday.

The girl was like sweet Spring in my room.  She spoke of Sarkeld
familiarly.  She was born in that neighbourhood, she informed me, and had
been educated by a dear great lady.  Her smile of pleasure on entering
the room one morning, and seeing me dressed and sitting in a grand-
fatherly chair by the breezy window, was like a salutation of returning
health.  My father made another stand against the usurper of his
privileges; he refused to go out.

'Then must I go,' said Lieschen, 'for two are not allowed here.'

'No!  don't leave me,' I begged of her, and stretched out my hands for
hers, while she gazed sadly from the doorway.  He suspected some
foolishness or he was actually jealous.  'Hum-oh!' He went forthwith a
murmured groan.

She deceived me by taking her seat in perfect repose.

After smoothing her apron, 'Now I must go,' she said.

'What!  to leave me here alone?'

She looked at the clock, and leaned out of the window.

'Not alone; oh, not alone!' the girl exclaimed.  'And please, please do
not mention me--presently.  Hark!  do you hear wheels?  Your heart must
not beat.  Now farewell.  You will not be alone: at least, so I think.
See what I wear, dear Mr. Patient!' She drew from her bosom, attached to
a piece of blue ribbon, the half of an English shilling, kissed it, and
blew a soft farewell to me:

She had not been long gone when the Princess Ottilia stood in her place.

A shilling tossed by an English boy to a couple of little foreign girls
in a woodman's hut!--you would not expect it to withstand the common fate
of silver coins, and preserve mysterious virtues by living celibate,
neither multiplying nor reduced, ultimately to play the part of a
powerful magician in bringing the boy grown man to the feet of an
illustrious lady, and her to his side in sickness, treasonably to the
laws of her station.  The little women quarrelled over it, and snatched
and hid and contemplated it in secret, each in her turn, until the strife
it engendered was put an end to by a doughty smith, their mother's
brother, who divided it into equal halves, through which he drove a hole,
and the pieces being now thrown out of the currency, each one wore her
share of it in her bosom from that time, proudly appeased.  They were not
ordinary peasant children, and happily for them they had another friend
that was not a bird of passage, and was endowed by nature and position to
do the work of an angel.  She had them educated to read, write, and knit,
and learn pretty manners, and in good season she took one of the sisters
to wait on her own person.  The second went, upon her recommendation,
into the household of a Professor of a neighbouring University.  But
neither of them abjured her superstitious belief in the proved merits of
the talisman she wore.  So when they saw the careless giver again they
remembered him; their gratitude was as fresh as on that romantic morning
of their childhood, and they resolved without concert to serve him after
their own fashion, and quickly spied a way to it.  They were German
girls.

You are now enabled to guess more than was known to Ottilia and me of the
curious agency at work to shuffle us together.  The doors of her suite in
the palace were barred against letters addressed to the princess; the
delivery of letters to her was interdicted, she consenting, yet she found
one: it lay on the broad walk of the orange-trees, between the pleasure
and the fruit-gardens, as if dropped by a falcon in mid air.  Ottilia
beheld it, and started.  Her little maid walking close by, exclaimed,
scuttling round in front of her the while like an urchin in sabots,

'Ha!  what is it?  a snake?  let me!  let me !' The guileless mistress
replied, 'A letter!'  Whereupon the maid said: 'Not a window near! and no
wall neither!  Why, dearest princess, we have walked up and down here a
dozen times and not seen it staring at us!  Oh, my good heaven!'  The
letter was seized and opened, and Ottilia read:

     'He who loves you with his heart has been cruelly used.  They have
     shot him.  He is not dead.  He must not die.  He is where he has
     studied since long.  He has his medicine and doctors, and they say
     the bullet did not lodge.  He has not the sight that cures.  Now is
     he, the strong young man, laid helpless at anybody's mercy.'

She supped at her father's table, and amused the margravine and him
alternately with cards and a sonata.  Before twelve at midnight she was
driving on the road to the University, saying farewell to what her mind
reverenced, so that her lover might but have sight of her.  She imagined
I had been assassinated.  For a long time, and most pertinaciously, this
idea dwelt with her.  I could not dispossess her of it, even after
uttering the word 'duel' I know not how often.  I had flatly to relate
the whole-of the circumstances.

'But Otto is no assassin,' she cried out.

What was that she reverenced?  It was what she jeopardized--her state,
her rank, her dignity as princess and daughter of an ancient House,
things typical to her of sovereign duties, and the high seclusion of her
name.  To her the escapades of foolish damsels were abominable.  The laws
of society as well as of her exalted station were in harmony with her
intelligence.  She thought them good, but obeyed them as a subject, not
slavishly: she claimed the right to exercise her trained reason.  The
modestest, humblest, sweetest of women, undervaluing nothing that she
possessed, least of all what was due from her to others, she could go
whithersoever her reason directed her, putting anything aside to act
justly according to her light.  Nor would she have had cause to repent
had I been the man she held me to be.  Even with me she had not behaved
precipitately.  My course of probation was severe and long before she
allowed her heart to speak.

Pale from a sleepless night and her heart's weariful eagerness to be near
me, she sat by my chair, holding my hand, and sometimes looking into my
eyes to find the life reflecting hers as in a sunken well that has once
been a spring.  My books and poor bachelor comforts caught her attention
between-whiles.  We talked of the day of storm by the lake; we read the
unsigned letter.  With her hand in mine I slept some minutes, and awoke
grasping it, doubting and terrified, so great a wave of life lifted me
up.

'No! you are not gone,' I sighed.

'Only come,' said she.

The nature of the step she had taken began to dawn on me.

'But when they miss you at the palace?  Prince Ernest?'

'Hush!  they have missed me already.  It is done.'  She said it smiling.

'Ottilia, will he take you away?'

'Us, dear, us.'

'Can you meet his anger?'

'Our aunt will be the executioner.  We have a day of sweet hours before
she can arrive.'

'May I see her first?'

'We will both see her as we are now.'

'We must have prompt answers for the margravine.'

'None, Harry.  I do not defend myself ever.'

Distant hills, and folds of receding clouds and skies beyond them, were
visible from my window, and beyond the skies I felt her soul.

'Ottilia, you were going to Italy?'

'Yes: or whither they please, for as long as they please.  I wished once
to go, I have told you why.  One of the series' (she touched the letter
lying on a reading-table beside her) 'turned the channel of all wishes
and intentions.  My friends left me to fall at the mercy of this one.
I consented to the injunction that I should neither write nor receive
letters.  Do I argue ill in saying that a trust was implied?  Surely it
was a breach of the trust to keep me ignorant of the danger of him I
love!  Now they know it.  I dared not consult them--not my dear father!
about any design of mine when I had read this odd copybook writing, all
in brief sentences, each beginning "he" and "he."  It struck me like
thrusts of a sword; it illuminated me like lightning.  That "he" was the
heart within my heart.  The writer must be some clever woman or simple
friend, who feels for us very strongly.  My lover assassinated, where
could I be but with him?'

Her little Ann coming in with chocolate and strips of fine white bread to
dip in it stopped my efforts to explain the distinction between an
assassination and a duel.  I noticed then the likeness of Aennchen to
Lieschen.

'She has a sister here,' said Ottilia; 'and let her bring Lieschen to
visit me here this afternoon.'

Aennchen, with a blush, murmured, that she heard and would obey.  I had a
memorable pleasure in watching my beloved eat and drink under my roof.

The duel remained incomprehensible to her.  She first frightened me by
remarking that duels were the pastime of brainless young men.  Her next
remark, in answer to my repeated attempts to shield my antagonist from a
capital charge: 'But only military men and Frenchmen fight duels!'
accompanied by a slightly investigating glance of timid surprise, gave me
pain, together with a flashing apprehension of what she had forfeited,
whom offended, to rush to the succour of a duellist.  I had to repeat to
her who my enemy was, so that there should be no further mention of
assassination.  Prince Otto's name seemed to entangle her understanding
completely.

'Otto!  Otto!' she murmured; 'he has, I have heard, been obliged by some
so-called laws of honour once or twice to--to--he is above suspicion of
treachery!  To my mind it is one and the same, but I would not harshly
exclude the view the world puts on things; and I use the world's language
in saying that he could not do a dishonourable deed.  How far he honours
himself is a question apart.  That may be low enough, while the world is
full of a man's praises.'

She knew the nature of a duel.  'It is the work of soulless creatures!'
she broke through my stammered explanations with unwonted impatience, and
pressing my hand: 'Ah!  You are safe.  I have you still.  Do you know,
Harry, I am not yet able to endure accidents and misadventures: I have
not fortitude to meet them, or intelligence to account for them.  They
are little ironical laughter.  Say we build so high: the lightning
strikes us:--why build at all?  The Summer fly is happier.  If I had lost
you!  I can almost imagine that I should have asked for revenge.  For why
should the bravest and purest soul of my worship be snatched away?  I am
not talking wisdom, only my shaken self will speak just now!  I pardon
Otto, though he has behaved basely.'

'No, not basely,' I felt bound to plead on his behalf, thinking, in spite
of a veritable anguish of gathering dread, that she had become
enlightened and would soon take the common view of our case; 'not basely.
He was excessively irritated, without cause in my opinion; he simply
misunderstood certain matters.  Dearest, you have nations fighting: a war
is only an exaggerated form of duelling.'

'Nations at war are wild beasts,' she replied.  'The passions of these
hordes of men are not an example for a living soul.  Our souls grow up to
the light: we must keep eye on the light, and look no lower.  Nations
appear to me to have no worse than a soiled mirror of themselves in mobs.
They are still uncivilized: they still bear a resemblance to the old
monsters of the mud.  Do you not see their claws and fangs, Harry?  Do
you find an apology in their acts for intemperate conduct?  Men who fight
duels appear in my sight no nobler than the first desperate creatures
spelling the cruel A B C of the passions.'

'No, nor in mine,' I assented hastily.  'We are not perfect.  But hear
me.  Yes, the passions are cruel.  Circumstances however--I mean, there
are social usages--Ay, if one were always looking up t.  But should we
not be gentle with our comparisons if we would have our views in
proportion?'

She hung studiously silent, and I pursued:

'I trust you so much as my helper and my friend that I tell you what we
do not usually tell to women--the facts, and the names connected with
them.  Sooner or later you would have learnt everything.  Beloved, I do
not wait to let you hear it by degrees, to be reconciled to it
piecemeal.'

'And I forgive him,' she sighed.  'I scarcely bring myself to believe
that Harry has bled from Otto's hand.'

'It was the accident of the case, Ottilia.  We had to meet.'

'To meet?'

'There are circumstances when men will not accept apologies; they--we--
heaven knows, I was ready to do all that a man could do to avoid this
folly--wickedness; give it the worst of titles!'

'It did not occur accidentally?' she inquired.  Her voice sounded
strange, half withheld in the utterance.

'It occurred,' said I, feeling my strength ebb and despair set in, 'it
occurred--the prince compelled me to the meet him.'

'But my cousin Otto is no assassin?

'Compelled, I say: that is, he conceived I had injured him, and left me
no other way of making amends.'

Her defence of Otto was in reality the vehement cherishing of her idea of
me.  This caused her bewilderment, and like a barrier to the flowing of
her mind it resisted and resisted.  She could not suffer herself to
realize that I was one of the brainless young savages, creatures with
claws and fangs.

Her face was unchanged to me.  The homeliness of her large mild eyes
embraced me unshadowed, and took me to its inner fire unreservedly.
Leaning in my roomy chair, I contemplated her at leisure while my heart
kept saying 'Mine!  mine!' to awaken an active belief in its possession.
Her face was like the quiet morning of a winter day when cloud and sun
intermix and make an ardent silver, with lights of blue and faint fresh
rose; and over them the beautiful fold of her full eyebrow on the eyelid
like a bending upper heaven.  Those winter mornings are divine.  They
move on noiselessly.  The earth is still, as if awaiting.  A wren
warbles, and flits through the lank drenched brambles; hill-side opens
green; elsewhere is mist, everywhere expectancy.  They bear the veiled
sun like a sangreal aloft to the wavy marble flooring of stainless cloud.

She was as fair.  Gazing across her shoulder's gentle depression, I could
have desired to have the couchant brow, and round cheek, and rounding
chin no more than a young man's dream of woman, a picture alive, without
the animating individual awful mind to judge of me by my acts.  I chafed
at the thought that one so young and lovely should meditate on human
affairs at all.  She was of an age to be maidenly romantic: our situation
favoured it.  But she turned to me, and I was glad of the eyes I knew.
She kissed me on the forehead.

'Sleep,' she whispered.

I feigned sleep to catch my happiness about me.

Some disenchanting thunder was coming, I was sure, and I was right.  My
father entered.

'Princess !' He did amazed and delighted homage, and forthwith
uncontrollably poured out the history of my heroism, a hundred words for
one;--my promptitude in picking the prince's glove up on my sword's
point, my fine play with the steel, my scornful magnanimity, the
admiration of my fellow-students;--every line of it; in stupendous
language; an artillery celebration of victory.  I tried to stop him.
Ottilia rose, continually assenting, with short affirmatives, to his
glorifying interrogations--a method he had of recapitulating the main
points.  She glanced to right and left, as if she felt caged.

'Is it known?' I heard her ask, in the half audible strange voice which
had previously made me tremble.

'Known?  I certify to you, princess,'--the unhappy man spouted his
withering fountain of interjections over us anew; known in every Court
and garrison of Germany!  Known by this time in Old England!  And, what
was more, the correct version of it was known!  It was known that the
young Englishman had vanquished his adversary with the small sword, and
had allowed him, because he had raged demoniacally on account of his
lamed limb, to have a shot in revenge.

'The honour done me by the princess in visiting me is not to be known,' I
summoned energy enough to say.

She shook her head.

My father pledged himself to the hottest secresy, equivalent to a calm
denial of the fact, if necessary.

'Pray be at no trouble,' she addressed him.

The 'Where am I?' look was painful in her aspect.

It led me to perceive the difference of her published position in
visiting a duellist lover instead of one assassinated.  In the latter
case, the rashness of an hereditary virgin princess avowing her
attachment might pass condoned or cloaked by general compassion.  How
stood it in the former?  I had dragged her down to the duellist's level!
And as she was not of a nature to practise concealments, and scorned to
sanction them, she was condemned, seeing that concealment as far as
possible was imperative, to suffer bitterly in her own esteem.  This, the
cruellest, was the least of the evils.  To keep our names disjoined was
hopeless.  My weakened frame and mental misery coined tears when thoughts
were needed.

Presently I found the room empty of our poor unconscious tormentor.
Ottilia had fastened her hand to mine again.

'Be generous,' I surprised her by saying.  'Go back at once.  I have seen
you!  Let my father escort you the road.  You will meet the margravine,
or some one.  I think, with you, it will be the margravine, and my father
puts her in good humour.  Pardon a wretched little scheme to save you
from annoyance!  So thus you return within a day, and the margravine,
shelters you.  Your name will not be spoken.  But go at once, for the
sake of Prince Ernest.  I have hurt him already; help me to avoid doing
him a mortal injury.  It was Schwartz who drove you?  our old Schwartz !
Old Warhead!  You see, we may be safe; only every fresh minute adds to
the danger.  And another reason for going-another--'

'Ah!' she breathed, 'my Harry will talk himself into a fever.'

'I shall have it if the margravine comes here.'

'She shall not be admitted.'

'Or if I hear her, or hear that she has come!  Consent at once, and
revive me.  Oh!  I am begging you to leave me, and wishing it with all my
soul.  Think over what I have done.  Do not write to me.  I shall see the
compulsion of mere kindness between the lines.  You consent.  Your wisdom
I never doubt--I doubt my own.'

'When it is yours you would persuade me to confide in?' said she, with
some sorrowful archness.

Wits clear as hers could see that I had advised well, except in proposing
my father for escort.  It was evidently better that she should go as she
came.

I refrained from asking her what she thought of me now.  Suing for
immediate pardon would have been like the applying of a lancet to a vein
for blood: it would have burst forth, meaning mere words coloured by
commiseration, kindness, desperate affection, anything but her soul's
survey of herself and me; and though I yearned for the comfort passion
could give me, I knew the mind I was dealing with, or, rather, I knew I
was dealing with a mind; and I kept my tongue silent.  The talk between
us was of the possible date of my recovery, the hour of her return to the
palace, the writer of the unsigned letters, books we had read apart or
peeped into together.  She was a little quicker in speech, less
meditative.  My sensitive watchfulness caught no other indication of a
change.

My father drove away an hour in advance of the princess to encounter the
margravine.

'By,' said he, rehearsing his exclamation of astonishment and delight at
meeting her, 'by the most miraculous piece of good fortune conceivable,
dear madam.  And now comes the question, since you have condescended to
notice a solitary atom of your acquaintance on the public highroad,
whether I am to have the honour of doubling the freight of your carriage,
or you will deign to embark in mine?  But the direction of the horses'
heads must be reversed, absolutely it must, if your Highness would repose
in a bed to-night.  Good.  So.  And now, at a conversational trot, we may
happen to be overtaken by acquaintances.'

I had no doubt of his drawing on his rarely-abandoned seven-league boots
of jargon, once so delicious to me, for the margravine's entertainment.
His lack of discernment in treating the princess to it ruined my
patience.

The sisters Aennchen and Lieschen presented themselves a few minutes
before his departure.  Lieschen dropped at her feet.

'My child,' said the princess, quite maternally, 'could you be quit of
your service with the Mahrlens for two weeks, think you, to do duty
here?'

'The Professor grants her six hours out of the twenty-four already,' said
I.

'To go where?' she asked, alarmed.

'To come here.'

'Here?  She knows you?  She did not curtsey to you.'

'Nurses do not usually do that.'

The appearance of both girls was pitiable; but having no suspicion of the
cause for it, I superadded,

'She was here this morning.'

'Ah!  we owe her more than we were aware of.'

The princess looked on her kindly, though with suspense in the
expression.

'She told me of my approaching visitor,' I said.

'Oh!  not told!' Lieschen burst out.

'Did you,'--the princess questioned her, and murmured to me, 'These
children cannot speak falsehoods,' they shone miserably under the burden
of uprightness 'did you make sure that I should come?'

Lieschen thought--she supposed.  But why?  Why did she think and suppose?
What made her anticipate the princess's arrival?  This inveterate why
communicated its terrors to Aennchen, upon whom the princess turned
scrutinizing eyes, saying, 'You write of me to your sister?'

'Yes, princess.'

'And she to you?'

Lieschen answered: 'Forgive me, your Highness, dearest lady!'

'You offered yourself here unasked?'

'Yes, princess.'

'Have you written to others besides your sister?'

'Seldom, princess; I do not remember.'

'You know the obligation of signatures to letters?'

'Ah!'

'You have been remiss in not writing to me, child.'

'Oh, princess!  I did not dare to.'

'You have not written to me?'

'Ah!  princess, how dared I?'

'Are you speaking truthfully?'

The unhappy girls stood trembling.  Ottilia spared them the leap into the
gulfs of confession.  Her intuitive glance, assisted by a combination of
minor facts, had read the story of their misdeeds in a minute.  She sent
them down to the carriage, suffering her culprits to kiss her fingers;
while she said to one: 'This might be a fable of a pair of mice.'

When she was gone, after many fits of musing, the signification of it was
revealed to my slower brain.  I felt that it could not but be an
additional shock to the regal pride of such a woman that these little
maidens should have been permitted to act forcibly on her destiny.  The
mystery of the letters was easily explained as soon as a direct suspicion
fell on one of the girls who lived in my neighbourhood and the other who
was near the princess's person.  Doubtless the revelation of their
effective mouse plot had its humiliating bitterness for her on a day of
heavy oppression, smile at it as she subsequently might.  The torture of
heart with which I twisted the meaning of her words about the pair of
mice to imply that the pair had conspired to make a net for an eagle and
had enmeshed her, may have struck a vein of the truth.  I could see no
other antithesis to the laudable performance of the single mouse of
fable.  Lieschen, when she next appeared in the character of nurse, met
my inquiries by supplicating me to imitate her sister's generous
mistress, and be merciful.

She remarked by-and-by, of her own accord: 'Princess Ottilia does not
regret that she had us educated.'

A tender warmth crept round me in thinking that a mind thus lofty would
surely be, however severe in its insight, above regrets and recantations.




CHAPTER XXXIV

I GAIN A PERCEPTION OF PRINCELY STATE

I had a visit from Prince Ernest, nominally one of congratulation on my
escape.  I was never in my life so much at any man's mercy: he might have
fevered me to death with reproaches, and I expected them on hearing his
name pronounced at the door.  I had forgotten the ways of the world.  For
some minutes I listened guardedly to his affable talk.  My thanks for the
honour done me were awkward, as if they came upon reflection.  The prince
was particularly civil and cheerful.  His relative, he said, had written
of me in high terms--the very highest, declaring that I was blameless in
the matter, and that, though he had sent the horse back to my stables, he
fully believed in the fine qualities of the animal, and acknowledged his
fault in making it a cause of provocation.  To all of which I assented
with easy nods.

'Your Shakespeare, I think,' said the prince, 'has a scene of young
Frenchmen praising their horses.  I myself am no stranger to the
enthusiasm: one could not stake life and honour on a nobler brute.
Pardon me if I state my opinion that you young Englishmen of to-day are
sometimes rather overbearing in your assumption of a superior knowledge
of horseflesh.  We Germans in the Baltic provinces and in the Austrian
cavalry think we have a right to a remark or two; and if we have not
suborned the testimony of modern history, the value of our Hanoverian
troopers is not unknown to one at least of your Generals.  However, the
odds are that you were right and Otto wrong, and he certainly put himself
in the wrong to defend his ground.'

I begged him to pass a lenient sentence upon fiery youth.  He assured me
that he remembered his own.  Our interchange of courtesies was cordially
commonplace: we walked, as it were, arm-in-arm on thin ice, rivalling one
another's gentlemanly composure.  Satisfied with my discretion, the
prince invited me to the lake-palace, and then a week's shooting in
Styria to recruit.  I thanked him in as clear a voice as I could command:

'Your Highness, the mine flourishes, I trust?'

'It does; I think I may say it does,' he replied.  'There is always the
want of capital.  What can be accomplished, in the present state of
affairs, your father performs, on the whole, well.  You smile--but I mean
extraordinarily well.  He has, with an accountant at his elbow, really
the genius of management.  He serves me busily, and, I repeat, well.  A
better employment for him than the direction of Court theatricals?'

'Undoubtedly it is.'

'Or than bestriding a bronze horse, personifying my good ancestor!  Are
you acquainted with the Chancellor von Redwitz?'

'All I know of him, sir, is that he is fortunate to enjoy the particular
confidence of his master.'

'He has a long head.  But, now, he is a disappointing man in action;
responsibility overturns him.  He is the reverse of Roy, whose advice I
do not take, though I'm glad to set him running.  Von Redwitz is in the
town.  He shall call on you, and amuse an hour or so of your
convalescence.'

I confessed that I began to feel longings for society.

Prince Ernest was kind enough to quit me without unmasking.  I had not to
learn that the simplest visits and observations of ruling princes signify
more than lies on the surface.  Interests so highly personal as theirs
demand from them a decent insincerity.

Chancellor von Redwitz called on me, and amused me with secret anecdotes
of all the royal Houses of Germany, amusing chiefly through the
veneration he still entertained for them.  The grave senior was doing his
utmost to divert one of my years.  The immoralities of blue blood, like
the amours of the Gods, were to his mind tolerable, if not beneficial to
mankind, and he presumed I should find them toothsome.  Nay, he besought
me to coincide in his excuses of a widely charming young archduchess, for
whom no estimable husband of a fitting rank could anywhere be discovered,
so she had to be bestowed upon an archducal imbecile; and hence--and
hence--Oh, certainly!  Generous youth and benevolent age joined hands of
exoneration over her.  The princess of Satteberg actually married, under
covert, a colonel of Uhlans at the age of seventeen; the marriage was
quashed, the colonel vanished, the princess became the scandalous Duchess
of Ilm-Ilm, and was surprised one infamous night in the outer court of
the castle by a soldier on guard, who dragged her into the guard-room and
unveiled her there, and would have been summarily shot for his pains but
for the locket on his breast, which proved him to be his sovereign's
son.--A perfect romance, Mr. Chancellor.  We will say the soldier son
loved a delicate young countess in attendance on the duchess.  The
countess spies the locket, takes it to the duchess, is reprimanded, when
behold!  the locket opens, and Colonel von Bein appears as in his
blooming youth, in Lancer uniform.--Young sir, your piece of romance has
exaggerated history to caricature.  Romances are the destruction of human
interest.  The moment you begin to move the individuals, they are
puppets.  'Nothing but poetry, and I say it who do not read it'--
(Chancellor von Redwitz is the speaker)'nothing but poetry makes romances
passable: for poetry is the everlastingly and embracingly human.  Without
it your fictions are flat foolishness, non-nourishing substance--a
species of brandy and gruel!--diet for craving stomachs that can support
nothing solider, and must have the weak stuff stiffened.  Talking of
poetry, there was an independent hereditary princess of Leiterstein in
love with a poet!--a Leonora d'Este!--This was no Tasso.  Nevertheless,
she proposed to come to nuptials.  Good, you observe?  I confine myself
to the relation of historical circumstances; in other words, facts; and
of good or bad I know not.'

Chancellor von Redwitz smoothed the black silk stocking of his crossed
leg, and set his bunch of seals and watch-key swinging.  He resumed,
entirely to amuse me,

'The Princess Elizabeth of Leiterstein promised all the qualities which
the most solicitous of paternal princes could desire as a guarantee for
the judicious government of the territory to be bequeathed to her at his
demise.  But, as there is no romance to be extracted from her story,
I may as well tell you at once that she did not espouse the poet.'

'On the contrary, dear Mr. Chancellor, I am interested in the princess.
Proceed, and be as minute as you please.'

'It is but a commonplace excerpt of secret historical narrative buried
among the archives of the Family, my good Mr. Richmond.  The Princess
Elizabeth thoughtlessly pledged her hand to the young sonneteer.  Of
course, she could not fulfil her engagement.'

'Why not?'

'You see, you are impatient for romance, young gentleman.'

'Not at all, Mr. Chancellor.  I do but ask a question.'

'You fence.  Your question was dictated by impatience.'

'Yes, for the facts and elucidations!

'For the romance, that is.  You wish me to depict emotions.'

Hereupon this destroyer of temper embrowned his nostrils with snuff,
adding,--'I am unable to.'

'Then one is not to learn why the princess could not fulfil her
engagement?'

'Judged from the point of view of the pretender to the supreme honour of
the splendid alliance, the fault was none of hers.  She overlooked his
humble, his peculiarly dubious, birth.'

'Her father interposed?'

'No.'

'The Family?'

'Quite inefficacious to arrest her determinations.'

'What then--what was in her way?'

'Germany.'

'What?'

'Great Germany, young gentleman.  I should have premised that, besides
mental, she had eminent moral dispositions,--I might term it the
conscience of her illustrious rank.  She would have raised the poet to
equal rank beside her had she possessed the power.  She could and did
defy the Family, and subdue her worshipping father, the most noble
prince, to a form of paralysis of acquiescence--if I make myself
understood.  But she was unsuccessful in her application for the sanction
of the Diet.'

'The Diet?'

'The German Diet.  Have you not lived among us long enough to know that
the German Diet is the seat of domestic legislation for the princely
Houses of Germany?  A prince or a princess may say, "I will this or
that."  The Diet says, "Thou shalt not"; pre-eminently, "Thou shalt not
mix thy blood with that of an impure race, nor with blood of inferiors."
Hence, we have it what we see it, a translucent flood down from the
topmost founts of time.  So we revere it.  "Qua man and woman," the Diet
says, by implication, "do as you like, marry in the ditches, spawn
plentifully.  Qua prince and princess, No!  Your nuptials are nought.
Or would you maintain them a legal ceremony, and be bound by them, you
descend, you go forth; you are no reigning sovereign, you are a private
person."  His Serene Highness the prince was thus prohibited from
affording help to his daughter.  The princess was reduced to the decision
either that she, the sole child born of him in legal wedlock, would
render him qua prince childless, or that she would--in short, would have
her woman's way.  The sovereignty of Leiterstein continued
uninterruptedly with the elder branch.  She was a true princess.'

'A true woman,' said I, thinking the sneer weighty.

The Chancellor begged me to recollect that he had warned me there was no
romance to be expected.

I bowed; and bowed during the remainder of the interview.

Chancellor von Redwitz had performed his mission.  The hours of my
convalescence were furnished with food for amusement sufficient to
sustain a year's blockade; I had no further longing for society, but I
craved for fresh air intensely.

Did Ottilia know that this iron law, enforced with the might of a whole
empire, environed her, held her fast from any motion of heart and will?
I could not get to mind that the prince had hinted at the existence of
such a law.  Yet why should he have done so?  The word impossible, in
which he had not been sparing when he deigned to speak distinctly,
comprised everything.  More profitable than shooting empty questions at
the sky was the speculation on his project in receiving me at the palace,
and that was dark.  My father, who might now have helped me, was off on
duty again.

I found myself driving into Sarkeld with a sense of a whirlwind round my
head; wheels in multitudes were spinning inside, striking sparks for
thoughts.  I met an orderly in hussar uniform of blue and silver,
trotting on his errand.  There he was; and whether many were behind him
or he stood for the army in its might, he wore the trappings of an old
princely House that nestled proudly in the bosom of its great jealous
Fatherland.  Previously in Sarkeld I had noticed members of the
diminutive army to smile down on them.  I saw the princely arms and
colours on various houses and in the windows of shops.  Emblems of a
small State, they belonged to the history of the Empire.  The Court-
physician passed with a bit of ribbon in his buttonhole.  A lady driving
in an open carriage encouraged me to salute her.  She was the wife of the
Prince's Minister of Justice.  Upon what foundation had I been building?

A reflection of the ideas possessing me showed Riversley, my undecorated
home of rough red brick, in the middle of barren heaths.  I entered the
palace, I sent my respects to the prince.  In return, the hour of dinner
was ceremoniously named to me: ceremony damped the air.  I had been
insensible to it before, or so I thought, the weight was now so crushing.
Arms, emblems, colours, liveries, portraits of princes and princesses of
the House, of this the warrior, that the seductress, burst into sudden
light.  What had I to do among them?

The presence of the living members of the Family was an extreme physical
relief.

For the moment, beholding Ottilia, I counted her but as one of them.  She
welcomed me without restraint.

We chattered pleasantly at the dinner-table.

'Ah!  You missed our French troupe,' said the margravine.'

'Yes,' said I, resigning them to her.  She nodded:

'And one very pretty little woman they had, I can tell you--for a
Frenchwoman.'

'You thought her pretty?  Frenchwomen know what to do with their brains
and their pins, somebody has said.'

'And exceedingly well said, too.  Where is that man Roy?  Good things
always remind me of him.'

The question was addressed to no one in particular.  The man happened to
be my father, I remembered.  A second allusion to him was answered by
Prince Ernest:

'Roy is off to Croatia to enrol some dozens of cheap workmen.  The
strength of those Croats is prodigious, and well looked after they work.
He will be back in three or four or more days.'

'You have spoilt a good man,' rejoined the margravine; 'and that reminds
me of a bad one--a cutthroat.  Have you heard of that creature, the
princess's tutor?  Happily cut loose from us, though!  He has published a
book--a horror!  all against Scripture and Divine right!  Is there any
one to defend him now, I should like to ask?'

'I,' said Ottilia.

'Gracious me! you have not read the book?'

'Right through, dear aunt, with all respect to you.'

'It 's in the house?'

'It is in my study.'

'Then I don't wonder!  I don't wonder!' the margravine exclaimed.

'Best hear what the enemy has to say,' Prince Ernest observed.

'Excellently argued, papa, supposing that he be an enemy.'

'An enemy as much as the fox is the enemy of the poultry-yard, and the
hound is the enemy of the fox!' said the margravine.

'I take your illustration, auntie,' said Ottilia.  'He is the enemy of
chickens, and only does not run before the numbers who bark at him.  My
noble old Professor is a resolute truth-seeker: he raises a light to show
you the ground you walk on.  How is it that you, adoring heroes as you
do, cannot admire him when he stands alone to support his view of the
truth!  I would I were by him!  But I am, whenever I hear him abused.'

'I daresay you discard nothing that the wretch has taught you!'

'Nothing!  nothing!' said Ottilia, and made my heart live.

The grim and taciturn Baroness Turckems, sitting opposite to her, sighed
audibly.

'Has the princess been trying to convert you?' the margravine asked her.

'Trying?  no, madam.  Reading?  yes.'

'My good Turckems!  you do not get your share of sleep?'

'It is her Highness the princess who despises sleep.'

'See there the way with your free-thinkers!  They commence by treading
under foot the pleasantest half of life, and then they impose their bad
habits on their victims.  Ottilia!  Ernest!  I do insist upon having
lights extinguished in the child's apartments by twelve o'clock at
midnight.'

'Twelve o'clock is an extraordinary latitude for children,' said Ottilia,
smiling.

The prince, with a scarce perceptible degree of emphasis, said,

'Women born to rule must be held exempt from nursery restrictions.'

Here the conversation opened to let me in.  More than once the margravine
informed me that I was not the equal of my father.

'Why,' said she, 'why can't you undertake this detestable coal-mine, and
let your father disport himself?'

I suggested that it might be because I was not his equal.  She
complimented me for inheriting a spark of Roy's brilliancy.

I fancied there was a conspiracy to force me back from my pretensions by
subjecting me to the contemplation of my bare self and actual condition.
Had there been, I should have suffered from less measured strokes.  The
unconcerted design to humiliate inferiors is commonly successfuller than
conspiracy.

The prince invited me to smoke with him, and talked of our gradual
subsidence in England to one broad level of rank through the intermixture
by marriage of our aristocracy, squirearchy, and merchants.

'Here it is not so,' he said; 'and no democratic rageings will make it
so.  Rank, with us, is a principle.  I suppose you have not read the
Professor's book?  It is powerful--he is a powerful man.  It can do no
damage to the minds of persons destined by birth to wield authority--
none, therefore, to the princess.  I would say to you--avoid it.  For
those who have to carve their way, it is bad.  You will enter your
Parliament, of course?  There you have a fine career.'

He asked me what I had made of Chancellor von Redwitz.

I perceived that Prince Ernest could be cool and sagacious in repairing
what his imprudence or blindness had left to occur: that he must have
enlightened his daughter as to her actual position, and was most
dexterously and devilishly flattering her worldly good sense by letting
it struggle and grow, instead of opposing her.  His appreciation of her
intellect was an idolatry; he really confided in it, I knew; and this
reacted upon her.  Did it?  My hesitations and doubts, my fantastic
raptures and despair, my loss of the power to appreciate anything at its
right value, revealed the madness of loving a princess.

There were preparations for the arrival of an important visitor.  The
margravine spoke of him emphatically.  I thought it might be her
farcically pompous way of announcing my father's return, and looked
pleased, I suppose, for she added, 'Do you know Prince Hermann?  He
spends most of his time in Eberhardstadt.  He is cousin of the King, a
wealthy branch; tant soit peu philosophe, a ce qu'on dit; a traveller.
They say he has a South American complexion.  I knew him a boy; and his
passion is to put together what Nature has unpieced, bones of fishes and
animals.  Il faut passer le temps.  He adores the Deluge.  Anything
antediluvian excites him.  He can tell us the "modes" of those days; and,
if I am not very much misinformed, he still expects us to show him the
very latest of these.  Happily my milliner is back from Paris.  Ay, and
we have fossils in our neighbourhood, though, on my honour, I don't know
where--somewhere; the princess can guide him, and you can help at the
excavations.  I am told he would go through the crust of earth for the
backbone of an idio--ilio-something-saurus.'

I scrutinized Prince Hermann as rarely my observation had dwelt on any
man.  He had the German head, wide, so as seemingly to force out the
ears; honest, ready, interested eyes in conversation; parched lips; a
rather tropically-coloured skin; and decidedly the manners of a gentleman
to all, excepting his retinue of secretaries, valets, and chasseurs--his
'blacks,' he called them.  They liked him.  One could not help liking
him.

'You study much?' he addressed the princess at table.

She answered: 'I throw aside books, now you have come to open the earth
and the sea.'

From that time the topics started on every occasion were theirs; the rest
of us ran at their heels, giving tongue or not.

To me Prince Hermann was perfectly courteous.  He had made English
friends on his travels; he preferred English comrades in adventure to any
other: thought our East Indian empire the most marvellous thing the world
had seen, and our Indian Government cigars very smokeable upon
acquaintance.  When stirred, he bubbled with anecdote.  'Not been there,'
was his reply to the margravine's tentatives for gossip of this and that
of the German Courts.  His museum, hunting, and the Opera absorbed and
divided his hours.  I guessed his age to be mounting forty.  He seemed
robust; he ate vigorously.  Drinking he conscientiously performed as an
accompanying duty, and was flushed after dinner, burning for tobacco and
a couch for his length.  Then he talked of the littleness of Europe and
the greatness of Germany; logical postulates fell in collapse before him.
America to America, North and South; India to Europe.  India was for the
land with the largest sea-board.  Mistress of the Baltic, of the North
Sea and the East, as eventually she must be, Germany would claim to take
India as a matter of course, and find an outlet for the energies of the
most prolific and the toughest of the races of mankind,--the purest, in
fact, the only true race, properly so called, out of India, to which it
would return as to its source, and there create an empire magnificent in
force and solidity, the actual wedding of East and West; an empire firm
on the ground and in the blood of the people, instead of an empire of
aliens, that would bear comparison to a finely fretted cotton-hung
palanquin balanced on an elephant's back, all depending on the docility
of the elephant (his description of Great Britain's Indian Empire).
'And mind me,' he said, 'the masses of India are in character elephant
all over, tail to proboscis! servile till they trample you, and not so
stupid as they look.  But you've done wonders in India, and we can't
forget it.  Your administration of Justice is worth all your battles
there.'

This was the man: a milder one after the evaporation of his wine in
speech, and peculiarly moderate on his return, exhaling sandal-wood,
to the society of the ladies.

Ottilia danced with Prince Hermann at the grand Ball given in honour of
him.  The wives and daughters of the notables present kept up a buzz of
comment on his personal advantages, in which, I heard it said, you saw
his German heart, though he had spent the best years of his life abroad.
Much court was paid to him by the men.  Sarkeld visibly expressed
satisfaction.  One remark, 'We shall have his museum in the town!' left
me no doubt upon the presumed object of his visit: it was uttered and
responded to with a depth of sentiment that showed how lively would be
the general gratitude toward one who should exhilarate the place by
introducing cases of fish-bones.

So little did he think of my presence, that returning from a ride one
day, he seized and detained the princess's hand.  She frowned with pained
surprise, but unresistingly, as became a young gentlewoman's dignity.
Her hand was rudely caught and kept in the manner of a boisterous wooer--
a Harry the Fifth or lusty Petruchio.  She pushed her horse on at a
bound.  Prince Hermann rode up head to head with her gallantly, having
now both hands free of the reins, like an Indian spearing the buffalo--
it was buffalo courtship; and his shout of rallying astonishment at her
resistance, 'What?  What?' rang wildly to heighten the scene, she leaning
constrained on one side and he bending half his body's length; a strange
scene for me to witness.

They proceeded with old Schwartz at their heels doglike.  It became a
question for me whether I should follow in the bitter track, and further
the question whether I could let them escape from sight.  They wound up
the roadway, two figures and one following, now dots against the sky, now
a single movement in the valley, now concealed, buried under billows of
forest, making the low noising of the leaves an intolerable whisper of
secresy, and forward I rushed again to see them rounding a belt of firs
or shadowed by rocks, solitary on shorn fields, once more dipping to the
forest, and once more emerging, vanishing.  When I had grown sure of
their reappearance from some point of view or other, I spied for them in
vain.  My destiny, whatever it might be, fluttered over them; to see them
seemed near the knowing of it, and not to see them, deadly.  I galloped,
so intent on the three in the distance, that I did not observe a horseman
face toward me, on the road: it was Prince Hermann.  He raised his hat; I
stopped short, and he spoke:

'Mr. Richmond, permit me to apologize to you.  I have to congratulate
you, it appears.  I was not aware.--However, the princess has done me the
favour to enlighten me.  How you will manage, I can't guess, but that is
not my affair.  I am a man of honour; and, on my honour, I conceived that
I was invited here to decide, as my habit is, on the spot, if I would, or
if I would not.  I speak clearly to you, no doubt.  There could be no
hesitation in the mind of a man of sense.  My way is prompt and blunt;
I am sorry I gave you occasion to reflect on it.  There!  I have been
deceived--deceived myself, let's say.  Sharp methods play the devil with
you now and then.  To speak the truth,--perhaps you won't care to listen
to it,--family arrangements are the best; take my word for it, they are
the best.  And in the case of princesses of the Blood!--Why, look you,
I happen to be suitable.  It 's a matter of chance, like your height,
complexion, constitution.  One is just what one is born to be, eh?  You
have your English notions, I my German; but as a man of the world in the
bargain, and "gentleman," I hope, I should say, that to take a young
princess's fancy, and drag her from her station is not--of course, you
know that the actual value of the title goes if she steps down?  Very
well.  But enough said; I thought I was in a clear field.  We are used to
having our way cleared for us, nous autres.  I will not detain you.'

We saluted gravely, and I rode on at a mechanical pace, discerning by
glimpses the purport of what I had heard, without drawing warmth from it.
The man's outrageously royal way of wooing, in contempt of minor
presences and flimsy sentiment, made me jealous of him, notwithstanding
his overthrow.

I was in the mood to fall entirely into my father's hands, as I did by
unbosoming myself to him for the first time since my heart had been under
the charm.  Fresh from a rapid course of travel, and with the sense of
laying the prince under weighty obligations, he made light of my
perplexity, and at once delivered himself bluntly: 'She plights her hand
to you in the presence of our good Peterborough.'  His plans were shaped
on the spot.  'We start for England the day after to-morrow to urge on
the suit, Richie.  Our Peterborough is up at the chateau.  The Frau
Feldmarschall honours him with a farewell invitation: you have a private
interview with the princess at midnight in the library, where you are
accustomed to read, as a student of books should, my boy at a touch of
the bell, or mere opening of the door, I see that Peterborough comes to
you.  It will not be a ceremony, but a binding of you both by your word
of honour before a ghostly gentleman.'  He informed me that his foresight
had enlisted and detained Peterborough for this particular moment and
identical piece of duty, which seemed possible, and in a singular manner
incited me to make use of Peterborough.  For the princess still denied me
the look of love's intelligence, she avoided me, she still kept to the
riddle, and my delicacy went so far that I was restrained from writing.
I agreed with my father that we could not remain in Germany; but how
could I quit the field and fly to England on such terms?  I composed the
flattest letter ever written, requesting the princess to meet me about
midnight in the library, that I might have the satisfaction of taking my
leave of her; and this done, my spirits rose, and it struck me my father
was practically wise, and I looked on Peterborough as an almost
supernatural being.  If Ottilia refused to come, at least I should know
my fate.  Was I not bound in manly honour to be to some degree
adventurous?

So I reasoned in exclamations, being, to tell truth, tired of seeming to
be what I was not quite, of striving to become what I must have divined
that I never could quite attain to.  So my worthier, or ideal, self fell
away from me.  I was no longer devoted to be worthy of a woman's love,
but consenting to the plot to entrap a princess.  I was somewhat
influenced, too, by the consideration, which I regarded as a glimpse of
practical wisdom, that Prince Ernest was guilty of cynical astuteness in
retaining me as his guest under manifold disadvantages.  Personal pride
stood up in arms, and my father's exuberant spirits fanned it.  He dwelt
loudly on his services to the prince, and his own importance and my
heirship to mighty riches.  He made me almost believe that Prince Ernest
hesitated about rejecting me; nor did it appear altogether foolish to
think so, or why was I at the palace?  I had no head for reflections.

My father diverted me by levelling the whole battery of his comic mind
upon Peterborough, who had a heap of manuscript, directed against
heretical German theologians, to pack up for publication in his more
congenial country: how different, he ejaculated, from this nest--this
forest of heresy, where pamphlets and critical essays were issued without
let or hindrance, and, as far as he could see, no general reprobation of
the Press, such as would most undoubtedly, with one voice, hail any
strange opinions in our happy land at home!  Whether he really understood
the function my father prepared him for, I cannot say.  The invitation to
dine and pass a night at the lake-palace flattered him immensely.

We went up to the chateau to fetch him.

A look of woe was on Peterborough's countenance when we descended at the
palace portals: he had forgotten his pipe.

'You shall smoke one of the prince's,' my father said. Peterborough
remarked to me,--'We shall have many things to talk over in England.'

'No tobacco allowed on the premises at Riversley, I 'm afraid,' said I.

He sighed, and bade me jocosely to know that he regarded tobacco as just
one of the consolations of exiles and bachelors.

'Peterborough, my good friend, you are a hero!' cried my father.  'He
divorces tobacco to marry!'

'Permit me,' Peterborough interposed, with an ingenuous pretension to
subtle waggery, in itself very comical,--'permit me; no legitimate union
has taken place between myself and tobacco!'

'He puts an end to the illegitimate union between himself and tobacco
that he may marry according to form!' cried my father.

We entered the palace merrily, and presently Peterborough, who had worn a
studious forehead in the midst of his consenting laughter, observed,
'Well, you know, there is more in that than appears on the surface.'

His sweet simpleton air of profundity convulsed me.  I handed my father
the letter addressed to the princess to entrust it to the charge of one
of the domestics, thinking carelessly at the time that Ottilia now stood
free to make appointments and receive communications, and moreover that I
was too proud to condescend to subterfuge, except this minor one, in
consideration for her, of making it appear that my father, and not I, was
in communication with her.  My fit of laughter clung.  I dressed
chuckling.  The margravine was not slow to notice and comment on my
hilarious readiness.

'Roy,' she said, 'you have given your son spirit.  One sees he has your
blood when you have been with him an hour.'

'The season has returned, if your Highness will let it be Spring,' said
my father.

'Far fetched!--from the Lower Danube!' she ejaculated in mock scorn to
excite his sprightliness, and they fell upon a duologue as good as wit
for the occasion.

Prince Hermann had gone.  His departure was mentioned with the ordinary
commonplaces of regret.  Ottilia was unembarrassed, both in speaking of
him and looking at me.  We had the Court physician and his wife at table,
Chancellor von Redwitz and his daughter, and General Happenwyll, chief of
the prince's contingent, a Prussian at heart, said to be a good officer
on the strength of a military book of some sort that he had full leisure
to compose.  The Chancellor's daughter and Baroness Turckems enclosed me.

I was questioned by the baroness as to the cause of my father's
unexpected return.  'He is generally opportune,' she remarked.

'He goes with me to England,' I said.

'Oh! he goes,' said she; and asked why we were honoured with the presence
of Mr. Peterborough that evening.  There had always been a smouldering
hostility between her and my father.

To my surprise, the baroness spoke of Ottilia by her name.

'Ottilia must have mountain air.  These late hours destroy her
complexion.  Active exercise by day and proper fatigue by night time--
that is my prescription.'

'The princess,' I replied, envying Peterborough, who was placed on one
side of her, 'will benefit, I am sure, from mountain air.  Does she read
excessively?  The sea--'

'The sea I pronounce bad for her--unwholesome,' returned the baroness.
'It is damp.'

I laughed.

'Damp,' she reiterated.  'The vapours, I am convinced, affect mind and
body.  That excursion in the yacht did her infinite mischief.  The
mountains restored her.  They will again, take my word for it.  Now take
you my word for it, they will again.  She is not too strong in
constitution, but in order to prescribe accurately one must find out
whether there is seated malady.  To ride out in the night instead of
reposing!  To drive on and on, and not reappear till the night of the
next day--I ask you, is it sensible?  Does it not approach mania?'

'The princess--?' said I.

'Ottilia has done that.'

'Baroness, can I believe you?--and alone?'

A marvellous twinkle of shuffle appeared in the small slate-coloured eyes
I looked at under their roofing of thick black eyebrows.

'Alone,' she said.  'That is, she was precautious to have her giant to
protect her from violence.  There you have a glimmering of reason in her;
and all of it that I can see.'

'Old Schwartz is a very faithful servant,' said I, thinking that she
resembled the old Warhead in visage.

'A dog's obedience to the master's whims you call faithfulness!  Hem!'
The baroness coughed dryly.

I whispered: 'Does Prince Ernest--is he aware?'

'You are aware,' retorted the baroness, 'that what a man idolizes he
won't see flaw in.  Remember, I am something here, or I am nothing.'

The enigmatical remark was received by me decorously as a piece of
merited chastisement.  Nodding with gravity, I expressed regrets that the
sea did not please her, otherwise I could have offered her a yacht for a
cruise.  She nodded stiffly.  Her mouth shut up a smile, showing more of
the door than the ray.  The dinner, virtually a German supper, ended in
general conversation on political affairs, preceded and supported by a
discussion between the Prussian-hearted General and the Austrian-hearted
margravine.  Prince Ernest, true to his view that diplomacy was the
weapon of minor sovereigns, held the balance, with now a foot in one
scale, now in the other; a politic proceeding, so long as the rival
powers passively consent to be weighed.

We trifled with music, made our bow to the ladies, and changed garments
for the smoking-room.  Prince Ernest smoked his one cigar among guests.
The General, the Chancellor, and the doctor, knew the signal for
retirement, and rose simultaneously with the discharge of his cigar-end
in sparks on the unlit logwood pile.  My father and Mr. Peterborough kept
their chairs.

There was, I felt with relief, no plot, for nothing had been definitely
assented to by me.  I received Prince Ernest's proffer of his hand, on
making my adieux to him, with a passably clear conscience.

I went out to the library.  A man came in for orders; I had none to give.
He saw that the shutters were fixed and the curtains down, examined my
hand-lamp, and placed lamps on the reading-desk and mantel-piece.  Bronze
busts of sages became my solitary companions.  The room was long, low and
dusky, voluminously and richly hung with draperies at the farther end,
where a table stood for the prince to jot down memoranda, and a sofa to
incline him to the relaxation of romance-reading.  A door at this end led
to the sleeping apartments of the West wing of the palace.  Where I sat
the student had ranges of classical volumes in prospect and classic
heads; no other decoration to the walls.  I paced to and fro and should
have flung myself on the sofa but for a heap of books there covered from
dust, perhaps concealed, that the yellow Parisian volumes, of which I
caught sight of some new dozen, might not be an attraction to the eyes of
chance-comers.  At the lake-palace the prince frequently gave audience
here.  He had said to me, when I stated my wish to read in the library,
'You keep to the classical department?'  I thought it possible he might
not like the coloured volumes to be inspected; I had no taste for a
perusal of them.  I picked up one that fell during my walk, and flung it
back, and disturbed a heap under cover, for more fell, and there I let
them lie.

Ottilia did not keep me waiting.




CHAPTER XXXV

THE SCENE IN THE LAKE-PALACE LIBRARY

I was humming the burden of Gothe's Zigeunerlied, a favourite one with me
whenever I had too much to think of, or nothing.  A low rush of sound
from the hall-doorway swung me on my heel, and I saw her standing with a
silver lamp raised in her right hand to the level of her head, as if she
expected to meet obscurity.  A thin blue Indian scarf mufed her throat
and shoulders.  Her hair was loosely knotted.  The lamp's full glow
illumined and shadowed her.  She was like a statue of Twilight.

I went up to her quickly, and closed the door, saying, 'You have come';
my voice was not much above a breath.

She looked distrustfully down the length of the room; 'You were speaking
to some one?'

'No.'

'You were speaking.'

'To myself, then, I suppose.'

I remembered and repeated the gipsy burden.

She smiled faintly and said it was the hour for Anna and Ursel and Kith
and Liese to be out.

Her hands were gloved, a small matter to tell of.

We heard the portico-sentinel challenged and relieved.

'Midnight,' I said.

She replied: 'You were not definite in your directions about the
minutes.'

'I feared to name midnight.'

'Why?'

'Lest the appointment of midnight--I lose my knowledge of you!--should
make you reflect, frighten you.  You see, I am inventing a reason; I
really cannot tell why, if it was not that I hoped to have just those few
minutes more of you.  And now they're gone.  I would not have asked you
but that I thought you free to act.'

'I am.'

'And you come freely?'

'A "therefore" belongs to every grant of freedom.'

'I understand: your judgement was against it.'

'Be comforted,' she said; 'it is your right to bid me come, if you think
fit.'

One of the sofa-volumes fell.  She caught her breath; and smiled at her
foolish alarm.

I told her that it was my intention to start for England in the morning;
that this was the only moment I had, and would be the last interview: my
rights, if I possessed any, and I was not aware that I did, I threw down.

'You throw down one end of the chain,' she said.

'In the name of heaven, then,' cried I, 'release yourself.'

She shook her head.  'That is not my meaning.'

Note the predicament of a lover who has a piece of dishonesty lurking in
him.  My chilled self-love had certainly the right to demand the
explanation of her coldness, and I could very well guess that a word or
two drawn from the neighbourhood of the heart would fetch a warmer
current to unlock the ice between us, but feeling the coldness I
complained of to be probably a suspicion, I fixed on the suspicion as a
new and deeper injury done to my loyal love for her, and armed against
that I dared not take an initiative for fear of unexpectedly justifying
it by betraying myself.

Yet, supposing her inclination to have become diverted, I was ready
frankly to release her with one squeeze of hands and take all the pain of
she pain, and I said: 'Pray, do not speak of chains.'

'But they exist.  Things cannot be undone for us two by words.'

The tremble as of a strung wire in the strenuous pitch of her voice
seemed to say she was not cold, though her gloved hand resting its
finger-ends on the table, her restrained attitude, her very calm eyes,
declared the reverse.  This and that sensation beset me in turn.

We shrank oddly from uttering one another's Christian name.  I was the
first with it; my 'Ottilia !' brought soon after 'Harry' on her lips, and
an atmosphere about us much less Arctic.

'Ottilia, you have told me you wish me to go to England.'

'I have.'

'We shall be friends.'

'Yes, Harry; we cannot be quite divided; we have that knowledge for our
present happiness.'

'The happy knowledge that we may have our bone to gnaw when food's
denied.  It is something.  One would like possibly, after expulsion out
of Eden, to climb the gates to see how the trees grow there.  What I
cannot imagine is the forecasting of any joy in the privilege.'

'By nature or system, then, you are more impatient than I, for I can,'
said Ottilia.  She added: 'So much of your character I divined early.
It was part of my reason for wishing you to work.  You will find that
hard work in England--but why should I preach to you Harry, you have
called me here for some purpose?'

'I must have detained you already too long.'

'Time is not the offender.  Since I have come, the evil----'

'Evil?  Are not your actions free?'

'Patience, my friend.  The freer my actions, the more am I bound to
deliberate on them.  I have the habit of thinking that my deliberations
are not in my sex's fashion of taking counsel of the nerves and the
blood.

In truth, Harry, I should not have come but for my acknowledgement of
your right to bid me come.'

'You know, princess, that in honouring me with your attachment, you
imperil your sovereign rank?'

'I do.'

'What next?'

'Except that it is grievously in peril, nothing!'

'Have you known it all along?'

'Dimly-scarcely.  To some extent I knew it, but it did not stand out in
broad daylight.  I have been learning the world's wisdom recently.  Would
you have had me neglect it?  Surely much is due to my father?  My
relatives have claims on me.  Our princely Houses have.  My country has.'

'Oh, princess, if you are pleading----'

'Can you think that I am?'

The splendour of her high nature burst on me with a shock.

I could have fallen to kiss her feet, and I said indifferently: 'Not
pleading, only it is evident the claims--I hate myself for bringing you
in antagonism with them.  Yes, and I have been learning some worldly
wisdom; I wish for your sake it had not been so late.  What made me
overleap the proper estimate of your rank!  I can't tell; but now that I
know better the kind of creature--the man who won your esteem when you
knew less of the world!'--

'Hush!  I have an interest in him, and do not suffer him to be spurned,'
Ottilia checked me.  'I, too, know him better, and still, if he is
dragged down I am in the dust; if he is abused the shame is mine.' Her
face bloomed.

Her sweet warmth of colour was transfused through my veins.

'We shall part in a few minutes.  I have a mind to beg a gift of you.'

'Name it.'

'That glove.'

She made her hand bare and gave me, not the glove, but the hand.

'Ah!  but this I cannot keep.'

'Will you have everything spoken?' she said, in a tone that would have
been reproachful had not tenderness melted it.  'There should be a spirit
between us, Harry, to spare the task.  You do keep it, if you choose.  I
have some little dread of being taken for a madwoman, and more--an actual
horror of behaving ungratefully to my generous father.  He has proved
that he can be indulgent, most trusting and considerate for his daughter,
though he is a prince; my duty is to show him that I do not forget I am a
princess.  I owe my rank allegiance when he forgets his on my behalf, my
friend!  You are young.  None but an inexperienced girl hoodwinked by her
tricks of intuition, would have dreamed you superior to the passions of
other men.  I was blind; I am regretful--take my word as you do my hand--
for no one's sake but my father's.  You and I are bound fast; only, help
me that the blow may be lighter for him; if I descend from the place I
was born to, let me tell him it is to occupy one I am fitted for, or
should not at least feel my Family's deep blush in filling.  To be in the
midst of life in your foremost England is, in my imagination, very
glorious.  Harry, I remember picturing to myself when I reflected upon
your country's history--perhaps a year after I had seen the two "young
English gentlemen," that you touch the morning and evening star, and wear
them in your coronet, and walk with the sun West and East!  Child's
imagery; but the impression does not wear off.  If I rail at England, it
is the anger of love.  I fancy I have good and great things to speak to
the people through you.'

There she stopped.  The fervour she repressed in speech threw a glow over
her face, like that on a frosty bare autumn sky after sunset.

I pressed my lips to her hand.

In our silence another of the fatal yellow volumes thumped the floor.

She looked into my eyes and asked,

'Have we been speaking before a witness?'

So thoroughly had she renovated me, that I accused and reproved the
lurking suspicion with a soft laugh.

'Beloved!  I wish we had been.'

'If it might be,' she said, divining me and musing.

'Why not?'

She stared.

'How?  What do you ask?'

The look on my face alarmed her.  I was breathless and colourless, with
the heart of a hawk eyeing his bird--a fox, would be the truer
comparison, but the bird was noble, not one that cowered.  Her beauty and
courage lifted me into high air, in spite of myself, and it was a huge
weight of greed that fell away from me when I said,

'I would not urge it for an instant.  Consider--if you had just plighted
your hand in mine before a witness!'

'My hand is in yours; my word to you is enough.'

'Enough.  My thanks to heaven for it!  But consider--a pledge of fidelity
that should be my secret angel about me in trouble and trial; my wedded
soul!  She cannot falter, she is mine for ever, she guides me, holds me
to work, inspirits me!--she is secure from temptation, from threats, from
everything--nothing can touch, nothing move her, she is mine!  I mean, an
attested word, a form, that is--a betrothal.  For me to say--my beloved
and my betrothed!  You hear that?  Beloved!  is a lonely word:--
betrothed!  carries us joined up to death.  Would you?--I do but ask to
know that you would.  To-morrow I am loose in the world, and there 's a
darkness in the thought of it almost too terrible.  Would you?--one sworn
word that gives me my bride, let men do what they may!  I go then singing
to battle--sure!--Remember, it is but the question whether you would.'

'Harry, I would, and will,' she said, her lips shuddering--'wait'--for a
cry of joy escaped me--'I will look you me in the eyes and tell me you
have a doubt of me.'

I looked: she swam in a mist.


We had our full draught of the divine self-oblivion which floated those
ghosts of the two immortal lovers through the bounds of their purgatorial
circle, and for us to whom the minutes were ages, as for them to whom all
time was unmarked, the power of supreme love swept out circumstance.
Such embraces cast the soul beyond happiness, into no known region of
sadness, but we drew apart sadly, even as that involved pair of bleeding
recollections looked on the life lost to them.  I knew well what a height
she dropped from when the senses took fire.  She raised me to learn how
little of fretful thirst and its reputed voracity remains with love when
it has been met midway in air by a winged mate able to sustain, unable to
descend farther.

And it was before a witness, though unviewed by us.

The farewell had come.  Her voice was humbled.

Never, I said, delighting in the now conscious bravery of her eyes
engaging mine, shadowy with the struggle, I would never doubt her, and I
renounced all pledges.  To be clear in my own sight as well as in hers, I
made mention of the half-formed conspiracy to obtain her plighted troth
in a binding manner.  It was not necessary for me to excuse myself; she
did that, saying, 'Could there be a greater proof of my darling's
unhappiness?  I am to blame.'

We closed hands for parting.  She hesitated and asked if my father was
awake; then promptly to my answer:

'I will see him.  I have treated you ill.  I have exacted too much
patience.  The suspicion was owing to a warning I had this evening,
Harry; a silly warning to beware of snares; and I had no fear of them,
believe me, though for some moments, and without the slightest real
desire to be guarded, I fancied Harry's father was overhearing me.  He is
your father, dearest: fetch him to me.  My father will hear of this from
my lips--why not he?  Ah!  did I suspect you ever so little?  I will
atone for it; not atone, I will make it my pleasure; it is my pride that
has hurt you both.  O my lover!  my lover!  Dear head, dear eyes!
Delicate and noble that you are!  my own stronger soul!  Where was my
heart?  Is it sometimes dead, or sleeping?  But you can touch it to life.
Look at me--I am yours.  I consent, I desire it; I will see him.  I will
be bound.  The heavier the chains, oh!  the better for me.  What am I, to
be proud of anything not yours, Harry?  and I that have passed over to
you!  I will see him at once.'

A third in the room cried out, 'No, not that--you do not!'

The tongue was German and struck on us like a roll of unfriendly musketry
before we perceived the enemy.  'Princess Ottilia!  you remember your
dignity or I defend you and it, think of me what you will!'

Baroness Turckems, desperately entangled by the sofa-covering, rushed
into the ray of the lamps and laid her hand on the bell-rope.  In a
minute we had an alarm sounding, my father was among us, there was a mad
play of chatter, and we stood in the strangest nightmare-light that ever
ended an interview of lovers.




CHAPTER XXXVI

HOMEWARD AND HOME AGAIN

The room was in flames, Baroness Turckems plucking at the bell-rope, my
father looking big and brilliant.

'Hold hand!' he shouted to the frenzied baroness.

She counter-shouted; both of them stamped feet; the portico sentinel
struck the butt of his musket on the hall-doors; bell answered bell along
the upper galleries.

'Foolish woman, be silent!' cried my father.

'Incendiary!' she half-shrieked.

He turned to the princess, begging her to retire, but she stared at him,
and I too, after having seen him deliberately apply the flame of her lamp
to the curtains, deemed him mad.  He was perfectly self-possessed, and
said, 'This will explain the bell!' and fetched a deep breath, and again
urged the princess to retire.

Peterborough was the only one present who bethought him of doing
fireman's duty.  The risk looked greater than it was.  He had but to tear
the lighted curtains down and trample on them.  Suddenly the baroness
called out, 'The man is right!  Come with me, princess; escape, your
Highness, escape!  And you,' she addressed me--'you rang the bell, you!'

'To repair your error, baroness,' said my father.

'I have my conscience pure; have you?' she retorted.

He bowed and said, 'The fire will also excuse your presence on the spot,
baroness.'

'I thank my God I am not so cool as you,' said she.

'Your warmth'--he bent to her--'shall always be your apology, baroness.'

Seeing the curtains extinguished, Ottilia withdrew.  She gave me no
glance.

All this occurred before the night-porter, who was going his rounds,
could reach the library.  Lacqueys and maids were soon at his heels.  My
father met Prince Ernest with a florid story of a reckless student,
either asleep or too anxious to secure a particular volume, and showed
his usual consideration by not asking me to verify the narrative.  With
that, and with high praise of Peterborough, as to whose gallantry I heard
him deliver a very circumstantial account, he, I suppose, satisfied the
prince's curiosity, and appeased him, the damage being small compared
with the uproar.  Prince Ernest questioned two or three times, 'What set
him ringing so furiously?' My father made some reply.

Ottilia's cloud-pale windows were the sole greeting I had from her on my
departure early next morning, far wretcheder than if I had encountered a
misfortune.  It was impossible for me to deny that my father had shielded
the princess: she would never have run for a menace.  As he remarked,
the ringing of the bell would not of itself have forced her to retreat,
and the nature of the baroness's alarm demanded nothing less than a
conflagration to account for it to the household.  But I felt humiliated
on Ottilia's behalf, and enraged on my own.  And I had, I must confess, a
touch of fear of a man who could unhesitatingly go to extremities, as he
had done, by summoning fire to the rescue.  He assured me that moments
such as those inspired him and were the pride of his life, and he was
convinced that, upon reflection, 'I should rise to his pitch.' He deluded
himself with the idea of his having foiled Baroness Turckems, nor did I
choose to contest it, though it struck me that she was too conclusively
the foiler.  She must have intercepted the letter for the princess.  I
remembered acting carelessly in handing it to my father for him to
consign it to one of the domestics, and he passed it on with a flourish.
Her place of concealment was singularly well selected under the sofa-
cover, and the little heaps of paper-bound volumes.  I do not fancy she
meant to rouse the household; her notion probably was to terrorize the
princess, that she might compel her to quit my presence.  In rushing to
the bell-rope, her impetuosity sent her stumbling on it with force, and
while threatening to ring, and meaning merely to threaten, she rang; and
as it was not a retractable act, she continued ringing, and the more
violently upon my father's appearance.  Catching sight of Peterborough at
his heels, she screamed a word equivalent to a clergyman.  She had lost
her discretion, but not her wits.

For any one save a lover--thwarted as I was, and perturbed by the shadow
falling on the princess--my father's Aplomb and promptness in conjuring a
check to what he assumed to be a premeditated piece of villany on the
part of Baroness Turckems, might have seemed tolerably worthy of
admiration.  Me the whole scene affected as if it had burnt my skin.  I
loathed that picture of him, constantly present to me, of his shivering
the glass of Ottilia's semi-classical night-lamp, gravely asking her
pardon, and stretching the flame to the curtain, with large eyes blazing
on the baroness.  The stupid burlesque majesty of it was unendurable to
thought.  Nevertheless, I had to thank him for shielding Ottilia, and I
had to brood on the fact that I had drawn her into a situation requiring
such a shield.  He, meanwhile, according to his habit, was engaged in
reviewing the triumphs to come.  'We have won a princess!'  And what
England would say, how England would look, when, on a further journey,
I brought my princess home, entirely occupied his imagination, to my
excessive torture--a state of mind for which it was impossible to ask his
mercy.  His sole link with the past appeared to be this notion that he
had planned all the good things in store for us.  Consequently I was
condemned to hear of the success of the plot, until--for I had not the
best of consciences--I felt my hand would be spell-bound in the attempt
to write to the princess; and with that sense of incapacity I seemed to
be cut loose from her, drifting back into the desolate days before I saw
her wheeled in her invalid chair along the sands and my life knew
sunrise.

But whatever the mood of our affections, so it is with us island
wanderers: we cannot gaze over at England, knowing the old country to be
close under the sea-line, and not hail it, and partly forget ourselves in
the time that was.  The smell of sea-air made me long for the white
cliffs, the sight of the white cliffs revived pleasant thoughts of
Riversley, and thoughts of Riversley thoughts of Janet, which were
singularly and refreshingly free from self-accusations.  Some love for my
home, similar to what one may have for Winter, came across me, and some
appreciation of Janet as well, in whose society was sure to be at least
myself, a creature much reduced in altitude, but without the cramped
sensations of a man on a monument.  My hearty Janet!  I thanked her then
for seeing me of my natural height.

Some hours after parting with my father in London, I lay down to sleep in
my old home, feeling as if I had thrown off a coat of armour.  I awoke
with a sailor's song on my lips.  Looking out of window at the well-known
features of the heaths and dark firs, and waning oak copses, and the
shadowy line of the downs stretching their long whale backs South to
West, it struck me that I had been barely alive of late.  Indeed one who
consents to live as I had done, in a hope and a retrospect, will find his
life slipping between the two, like the ships under the striding
Colossus.  I shook myself, braced myself, and saluted every one at the
breakfast table with the frankness of Harry Richmond.  Congratulated on
my splendid spirits, I was confirmed in the idea that I enjoyed them,
though I knew of something hollow which sent an echo through me at
intervals.  Janet had become a fixed inmate of the house.  'I've bought
her, and I shall keep her; she's the apple of my eye,' said the squire,
adding with characteristic scrupulousness, 'if apple's female.'  I asked
her whether she had heard from Temple latterly.  'No; dear little
fellow!' cried she, and I saw in a twinkling what it was that the squire
liked in her, and liked it too.  I caught sight of myself, as through a
rift of cloud, trotting home from the hunt to a glad, frank, unpretending
mate, with just enough of understanding to look up to mine.  For a second
or so it was pleasing, as a glance out of his library across hill and
dale will be to a strained student.  Our familiarity sanctioned a comment
on the growth of her daughter-of-the-regiment moustache, the faintest
conceivable suggestion of a shadow on her soft upper lip, which a poet
might have feigned to have fallen from her dark thick eyebrows.

'Why, you don't mean to say, Hal, it's not to your taste?' said the
squire.

'No,' said I, turning an eye on my aunt Dorothy, 'I've loved it all my
life.'

The squire stared at me to make sure of this, muttered that it was to his
mind a beauty, and that it was nothing more on Janet's lip than down on a
flower, bloom on a plum.  The poetical comparisons had the effect of
causing me to examine her critically.  She did not raise a spark of
poetical sentiment in my bosom.  She had grown a tall young woman, firmly
built, light of motion, graceful perhaps; but it was not the grace of
grace: the grace of simplicity, rather.  She talked vivaciously and
frankly, and gave (to friends) her whole eyes and a fine animation in
talking; and her voice was a delight to friends; there was always the
full ring of Janet in it, and music also.  She still lifted her lip when
she expressed contempt or dislike of persons; nor was she cured of her
trick of frowning.  She was as ready as ever to be flattered; that was
evident.  My grandfather's praise of her she received with a rewarding
look back of kindness; she was not discomposed by flattery, and threw
herself into no postures, nor blushed very deeply.  'Thank you for
perceiving my merits,' she seemed to say; and to be just I should add
that one could fancy her saying, you see them because you love me.  She
wore her hair in a plain knot, peculiarly neatly rounded away from the
temples, which sometimes gave to a face not aquiline a look of swiftness.
The face was mobile, various, not at all suggestive of bad temper, in
spite of her frowns.  The profile of it was less assuring than the front,
because of the dark eyebrows' extension and the occasional frown, but
that was not shared by the mouth, which was, I admitted to myself, a
charming bow, running to a length at the corners like her eyebrows, quick
with smiles.  The corners of the mouth would often be in movement,
setting dimples at work in her cheek, while the brows remained fixed, and
thus at times a tender meditative air was given her that I could not
think her own.  Upon what could she possibly reflect?  She had not a
care, she had no education, she could hardly boast an idea--two at a time
I was sure she never had entertained.  The sort of wife for a fox-hunting
lord, I summed up, and hoped he would be a good fellow.

Peterborough was plied by the squire for a description of German women.
Blushing and shooting a timid look from under his pendulous eyelids at my
aunt, indicating that he was prepared to go the way of tutors at
Riversley, he said he really had not much observed them.

'They're a whitey-brown sort of women, aren't they?' the squire
questioned him, 'with tow hair and fish eyes, high o' the shoulder, bony,
and a towel skin and gone teeth, so I've heard tell.  I've heard that's
why the men have all taken to their beastly smoking.'

Peterborough ejaculated: 'Indeed!  sir, really!' He assured my aunt that
German ladies were most agreeable, cultivated persons, extremely
domesticated, retiring; the encomiums of the Roman historian were as well
deserved by them in the present day as they had been in the past;
decidedly, on the whole, Peterborough would call them a virtuous race.

'Why do they let the men smoke, then?' said the squire.  'A pretty style
o' courtship.  Come, sit by my hearth, ma'am; I 'll be your chimney--
faugh!  dirty rascals!'

Janet said: 'I rather like the smell of cigars.'

'Like what you please, my dear--he'll be a lucky dog,' the squire
approved her promptly, and asked me if I smoked.

I was not a stranger to the act, I confessed.

'Well'--he took refuge in practical philosophy--'a man must bring some
dirt home from every journey: only don't smoke me out, mercy's sake.'

Here was a hint of Janet's influence with him, and of what he expected
from my return to Riversley.

Peterborough informed me that he suffered persecution over the last
glasses of Port in the evening, through the squire's persistent inquiries
as to whether a woman had anything to do with my staying so long abroad.
'A lady, sir?' quoth Peterborough.  'Lady, if you like,' rejoined the
squire.  'You parsons and petticoats must always mince the meat to hash
the fact.'  Peterborough defended his young friend Harry's moral
reputation, and was amazed to hear that the squire did not think highly
of a man's chastity.  The squire acutely chagrined the sensitive
gentleman by drawling the word after him, and declaring that he tossed
that kind of thing into the women's wash-basket.  Peterborough, not
without signs of indignation, protesting, the squire asked him point-
blank if he supposed that Old England had been raised to the head of the
world by such as he.  In fine, he favoured Peterborough with a lesson in
worldly views.  'But these,' Peterborough said to me, 'are not the views,
dear Harry--if they are the views of ladies of any description, which I
take leave to doubt--not the views of the ladies you and I would esteem.
For instance, the ladies of this household.'  My aunt Dorothy's fate was
plain.

In reply to my grandfather's renewed demand to know whether any one of
those High-Dutch women had got hold of me, Peterborough said: 'Mr.
Beltham, the only lady of whom it could be suspected that my friend Harry
regarded her with more than ordinary admiration was Hereditary-Princess
of one of the ancient princely Houses of Germany.'  My grandfather
thereupon said, 'Oh!' pushed the wine, and was stopped.

Peterborough chuckled over this 'Oh!' and the stoppage of further
questions, while acknowledging that the luxury of a pipe would help to
make him more charitable.  He enjoyed the Port of his native land, but he
did, likewise, feel the want of one whiff or so of the less restrictive
foreigner's pipe; and he begged me to note the curiosity of our worship
of aristocracy and royalty; and we, who were such slaves to rank, and
such tyrants in our own households,--we Britons were the great sticklers
for freedom!  His conclusion was, that we were not logical.  We would
have a Throne, which we would not allow the liberty to do anything to
make it worthy of rational veneration: we would have a peerage, of which
we were so jealous that it formed almost an assembly of automatons; we
would have virtuous women, only for them to be pursued by immoral men.
Peterborough feared, he must say, that we were an inconsequent people.
His residence abroad had so far unhinged him; but a pipe would have
stopped his complainings.

Moved, perhaps, by generous wine, in concert with his longing for
tobacco, he dropped an observation of unwonted shrewdness; he said: 'The
squire, my dear Harry, a most honourable and straightforward country
gentleman, and one of our very wealthiest, is still, I would venture to
suggest, an example of old blood that requires--I study race--varying,
modifying, one might venture to say, correcting; and really, a friend
with more privileges than I possess, would or should throw him a hint
that no harm has been done to the family by an intermixture .  .  .  old
blood does occasionally need it--you know I study blood--it becomes too
coarse, or, in some cases, too fine.  The study of the mixture of blood
is probably one of our great physical problems.'

Peterborough commended me to gratitude for the imaginative and chivalrous
element bestowed on me by a father that was other than a country squire;
one who could be tolerant of innocent habits, and not of guilty ones--
a further glance at the interdicted pipe.  I left him almost whimpering
for it.

The contemplation of the curious littleness of the lives of men and women
lived in this England of ours, made me feel as if I looked at them out of
a palace balcony-window; for no one appeared to hope very much or to
fear; people trotted in their different kinds of harness; and I was
amused to think of my heart going regularly in imitation of those about
me.  I was in a princely state of mind indeed, not disinclined for a time
to follow the general course of life, while despising it.  An existence
without colour, without anxious throbbing, without salient matter for
thought, challenged contempt.  But it was exceedingly funny.  My aunt
Dorothy, the squire, and Janet submitted to my transparent inward
laughter at them, patiently waiting for me to share their contentment, in
the deluded belief that the hour would come.  The principal items of news
embraced the death of Squire Gregory Bulsted, the marriage of this and
that young lady, a legal contention between my grandfather and Lady Maria
Higginson, the wife of a rich manufacturer newly located among us, on
account of a right of encampment on Durstan heath, my grandfather taking
side with the gipsies, and beating her ladyship--a friend of Heriot's, by
the way.  Concerning Heriot, my aunt Dorothy was in trouble.  She could
not, she said, approve his behaviour in coming to this neighbourhood at
all, and she hinted that I might induce him to keep away.  I mentioned
Julia Bulsted's being in mourning, merely to bring in her name
tentatively.

'Ay, mourning's her outer rig, never doubt,' said the squire.  'Flick
your whip at her, she 's a charitable soul, Judy Bulsted!  She knits
stockings for the poor.  She'd down and kiss the stump of a sailor on a
stick o' timber.  All the same, she oughtn't to be alone.  Pity she
hasn't a baby.  You and I'll talk it over by-and-by, Harry.'

Kiomi was spoken of, and Lady Maria Higginson, and then Heriot.

'M-m-m-m rascal!' hummed the squire.  'There's three, and that's not
enough for him.  Six months back a man comes over from Surreywards, a
farm he calls Dipwell, and asks after you, Harry; rigmaroles about a
handsome lass gone off .  .  .  some scoundrel !  You and I'll talk it
over by-and-by, Harry.'

Janet raised and let fall her eyebrows.  The fiction, that so much having
been said, an immediate show of reserve on such topics preserved her in
ignorance of them, was one she subscribed to merely to humour the squire.
I was half in doubt whether I disliked or admired her want of decent
hypocrisy.  She allowed him to suppose that she did not hear, but spoke
as a party to the conversation.  My aunt Dorothy blamed Julia.  The
squire thundered at Heriot; Janet, liking both, contented herself with
impartial comments.

'I always think in these cases that the women must be the fools,' she
said.  Her affectation was to assume a knowledge of the world and all
things in it.  We rode over to Julia's cottage, on the outskirts of the
estate now devolved upon her husband.  Irish eyes are certainly
bewitching lights.  I thought, for my part, I could not do as the captain
was doing, serving his country in foreign parts, while such as these were
shining without a captain at home.  Janet approved his conduct, and was
right.  'What can a wife think the man worth who sits down to guard his
house-door?' she answered my slight innuendo.  She compared the man to a
kennel-dog.  'This,' said I, 'comes of made-up matches,' whereat she was
silent.

Julia took her own view of her position.  She asked me whether it was not
dismal for one who was called a grass widow, and was in reality a salt-
water one, to keep fresh, with a lapdog, a cook, and a maid-servant, and
a postman that passed the gate twenty times for twice that he opened it,
and nothing to look for but this disappointing creature day after day!
At first she was shy, stole out a coy line of fingers to be shaken, and
lisped; and out of that mood came right-about-face, with an exclamation
of regret that she supposed she must not kiss me now.  I projected, she
drew back.  'Shall Janet go?' said I.  'Then if nobody's present I 'll be
talked of,' said she, moaning queerly.  The tendency of her hair to creep
loose of its bands gave her handsome face an aspect deliriously wild.  I
complimented her on her keeping so fresh, in spite of her salt-water
widowhood.  She turned the tables on me for looking so powerful, though I
was dying for a foreign princess.

'Oh!  but that'll blow over,' she said; 'anything blows over as long as
you don't go up to the altar'; and she eyed her ringed finger, woebegone,
and flashed the pleasantest of smiles with the name of her William.
Heriot, whom she always called Walter Heriot, was, she informed me,
staying at Durstan Hall, the new great house, built on a plot of ground
that the Lancashire millionaire had caught up, while the squire and the
other landowners of the neighbourhood were sleeping.  'And if you get
Walter Heriot to come to you, Harry Richmond, it'll be better for him,
I'm sure,' she added, and naively:

'I 'd like to meet him up at the Grange.' Temple, she said, had left the
Navy and was reading in London for the Bar--good news to me.

'You have not told us anything about your princess, Harry,' Janet
observed on the ride home.

'Do you take her for a real person, Janet?'

'One thinks of her as a snow-mountain you've been admiring.'

'Very well; so let her be.'

'Is she kind and good?'

'Yes.'

'Does she ride well?'

'She rides remarkably well.'

'She 's fair, I suppose?'

'Janet, if I saw you married to Temple, it would be the second great wish
of my heart.'

'Harry, you're a bit too cruel, as Julia would say.'

'Have you noticed she gets more and more Irish?'

'Perhaps she finds it is liked.  Some women can adapt themselves .  .  .
they 're the happiest.  All I meant to ask you is, whether your princess
is like the rest of us?'

'Not at all,' said I, unconscious of hurting.

'Never mind.  Don't be hard on Julia.  She has the making of a good
woman--a girl can see that; only she can't bear loneliness, and doesn't
understand yet what it is to be loved by a true gentleman.  Persons of
that class can't learn it all at once.'

I was pained to see her in tears.  Her figure was straight, and she spoke
without a quaver of her voice.

'Heriot's an excellent fellow,' I remarked.

'He is.  I can't think ill of my friends,' said she.

'Dear girl, is it these two who make you unhappy?'

'No; but dear old grandada!  .  .  .'

The course of her mind was obvious.  I would rather have had her less
abrupt and more personal in revealing it.  I stammered something.

'Heriot does not know you as I do,' she said, strangling a whimper.
'I was sure it was serious, though one's accustomed to associate
princesses with young men's dreams.  I fear, Harry, it will half break
our dear old grandada's heart.  He is rough, and you have often been
against him, for one unfortunate reason.  If you knew him as I do you
would pity him sincerely.  He hardly grumbled at all at your terribly
long absence.  Poor old man!  he hopes on.'

'He's incurably unjust to my father.'

'Your father has been with you all the time, Harry?  I guessed it.'

'Well?'

'It generally bodes no good to the Grange.  Do pardon me for saying that.
I know nothing of him; I know only that the squire is generous, and THAT
I stand for with all my might.  Forgive me for what I said.'

'Forgive you--with all my heart.  I like you all the better.  You 're a
brave partisan.  I don't expect women to be philosophers.'

'Well, Harry, I would take your side as firmly as anybody's.'

'Do, then; tell the squire how I am situated.'

'Ah!' she half sighed, 'I knew this was coming.'

'How could it other than come?  You can do what you like with the squire.
I'm dependent on him, and I am betrothed to the Princess Ottilia.  God
knows how much she has to trample down on her part.  She casts off--to
speak plainly, she puts herself out of the line of succession, and for
whom? for me.  In her father's lifetime she will hardly yield me her
hand; but I must immediately be in a position to offer mine.  She may:
who can tell?  she is above all women in power and firmness.  You talk of
generosity; could there be a higher example of it?'

'I daresay; I know nothing of princesses,' Janet murmured.  'I don't
quite comprehend what she has done.  The point is, what am I to do?'

'Prepare him for it.  Soothe him in advance.  Why, dear Janet, you can
reconcile him to anything in a minute.'

'Lie to him downright?'

'Now what on earth is the meaning of that, and why can't you speak
mildly?'

'I suppose I speak as I feel.  I'm a plain speaker, a plain person.  You
don't give me an easy task, friend Harry.'

'If you believe in his generosity, Janet, should you be afraid to put it
to proof?'

'Grandada's generosity, Harry?  I do believe in it as I believe in my own
life.  It happens to be the very thing I must keep myself from rousing in
him, to be of any service to you.  Look at the old house!' She changed
her tone.  'Looking on old Riversley with the eyes of my head even, I
think I'm looking at something far away in the memory.  Perhaps the deep
red brick causes it.  There never was a house with so many beautiful
creepers.  Bright as they are, you notice the roses on the wall.  There's
a face for me forever from every window; and good-bye, Riversley !
Harry, I'll obey your wishes.'

So saying, she headed me, trotting down the heath-track.




CHAPTER XXXVII

JANET RENOUNCES ME

An illness of old Sewis, the butler,--amazingly resembling a sick monkey
in his bed,--kept me from paying a visit to Temple and seeing my father
for several weeks, during which time Janet loyally accustomed the squire
to hear of the German princess, and she did it with a decent and
agreeable cheerfulness that I quite approved of.  I should have been
enraged at a martyr-like appearance on her part, for I demanded a
sprightly devotion to my interests, considering love so holy a thing,
that where it existed, all surrounding persons were bound to do it homage
and service.  We were thrown together a great deal in attending on poor
old Sewis, who would lie on his pillows recounting for hours my father's
midnight summons of the inhabitants of Riversley, and his little Harry's
infant expedition into the world.  Temple and Heriot came to stay at the
Grange, and assisted in some rough scene-painting--torrid colours
representing the island of Jamaica.  We hung it at the foot of old
Sewis's bed.  He awoke and contemplated it, and went downstairs the same
day, cured, he declared: the fact being that the unfortunate picture
testified too strongly to the reversal of all he was used to in life, in
having those he served to wait on him.  The squire celebrated his
recovery by giving a servants' ball.  Sewis danced with the handsomest
lass, swung her to supper, and delivered an extraordinary speech,
entirely concerning me, and rather to my discomposure, particularly so
when it was my fate to hear that the old man had made me the heir of his
savings.  Such was his announcement, in a very excited voice, but
incidentally upon a solemn adjuration to the squire to beware of his
temper--govern his temper and not be a turncoat.

We were present at the head of the supper-table to hear our healths
drunk.  Sewis spoke like a half-caste oblivious of his training, and of
the subjects he was at liberty to touch on as well.  Evidently there was
a weight of foreboding on his mind.  He knew his master well.  The squire
excused him under the ejaculation, 'Drunk, by the Lord!' Sewis went so
far as to mention my father 'He no disgrace, sar, he no disgrace, I say!
but he pull one way, old house pull other way, and 'tween 'em my little
Harry torn apieces, squire.  He set out in the night "You not enter it
any more!"  Very well.  I go my lawyer next day.  You see my Will,
squire.  Years ago, and little Harry so high.  Old Sewis not the man to
change.  He no turncoat, squire.  God bless you, my master; you
recollect, and ladies tell you if you forget, old Sewis no turncoat.  You
hate turncoat.  You taught old Sewis, and God bless you, and Mr. Harry,
and British Constitution, all Amen!'

With that he bounded to bed.  He was dead next morning.

The squire was humorous over my legacy.  It amounted to about seventeen
hundred pounds invested in Government Stock, and he asked me what I meant
to do with it; proposed a Charity to be established on behalf of decayed
half-castes, insisting that servants' money could never be appropriated
to the uses of gentlemen.  All the while he was muttering, 'Turncoat!
eh?  turncoat?'--proof that the word had struck where it was aimed.  For
me, after thinking on it, I had a superstitious respect for the legacy,
so I determined, in spite of the squire's laughter over 'Sixty pounds per
annum!' to let it rest in my name: I saw for the first time the
possibility that I might not have my grandfather's wealth to depend upon.
He warned me of growing miserly.  With my father in London, living freely
on my property, I had not much fear of that.  However, I said discreetly,
'I don't mind spending when I see my way.'

'Oh! see your way,' said he.  'Better a niggard than a chuckfist.  Only,
there 's my girl: she 's good at accounts.  One 'll do for them, Harry?--
ha'n't been long enough at home yet?'

Few were the occasions when our conversation did not diverge to this sort
of interrogation.  Temple and Heriot, with whom I took counsel, advised
me to wait until the idea of the princess had worn its way into his
understanding, and leave the work to Janet.  'Though,' said Heriot to me
aside, 'upon my soul, it's slaughter.' He believed that Janet felt
keenly.  But then, she admired him, and so they repaid one another.

I won my grandfather's confidence in practical matters on a trip we took
into Wales.  But it was not enough for me to be a man of business, he
affirmed; he wanted me to have some ambition; why not stand for our
county at the next general election?  He offered me his Welsh borough if
I thought fit to decline a contest.  This was to speak as mightily as a
German prince.  Virtually, in wealth and power, he was a prince; but of
how queer a kind!  He was immensely gratified by my refraining to look
out for my father on our return journey through London, and remarked,
that I had not seen him for some time, he supposed.  To which I said, no,
I had not, He advised me to let the fellow run his length.  Suggesting
that he held it likely I contributed to 'the fellow's' support: he said
generously, 'Keep clear of him, Hal: I add you a thousand a year to your
allowance,' and damned me for being so thoughtful over it.  I found
myself shuddering at a breath of anger from him.  Could he not with a
word dash my hopes for ever?  The warning I had taken from old Sewis
transformed me to something like a hypocrite, and I dare say I gave the
squire to understand, that I had not seen my father for a very long
period and knew nothing of his recent doings.

'Been infernally quiet these last two or three years,' the squire
muttered of the object of his aversion.  'I heard of a City widow last,
sick as a Dover packet-boat 'bout the fellow!  Well, the women are
ninnies, but you're a man, Harry; you're not to be taken in any longer,
eh?'

I replied that I knew my father better now, and was asked how the deuce
I knew him better; it was the world I knew better after my stay on the
Continent.

I contained myself enough to say, 'Very well, the world, sir.'

'Flirted with one of their princesses?' He winked.

'On that subject I will talk to you some other time,' said I.

'Got to pay an indemnity?  or what?' He professed alarm, and pushed for
explanations, with the air of a man of business ready to help me if need
were.  'Make a clean breast of it, Harry.  You 're not the son of Tom
Fool the Bastard for nothing, I'll swear.  All the same you're Beltham;
you're my grandson and heir, and I'll stand by you.  Out with 't!  She's
a princess, is she?'

The necessity for correcting his impressions taught me to think the
moment favourable.  I said, 'I am engaged to her, sir.'

He returned promptly: 'Then you'll break it off.'

I shook my head.

'Why, you can't jilt my girl at home!' said he.

'Do you find a princess objectionable, sir?'

'Objectionable?  She's a foreigner.  I don't know her.  I never saw her.
Here's my Janet I've brought up for you, under my own eyes, out of the
way of every damned soft-sawderer, safe and plump as a melon under a
glass, and you fight shy of her, and go and engage yourself to a
foreigner I don't know and never saw!  By George, Harry, I'll call in a
parson to settle you soon as ever we sight Riversley.  I'll couple you,
by George, I will! 'fore either of you know whether you're on your legs
or your backs.'

We were in the streets of London, so he was obliged to moderate his
vehemence.

'Have you consulted Janet?' said I.

'Consulted her?  ever since she was a chick with half a feather on.'

'A chick with half a feather on,' I remarked, 'is not always of the same
mind as a piece of poultry of full plumage.'

'Hang your sneering and your talk of a fine girl, like my Janet, as a
piece of poultry, you young rooster!  You toss your head up like a cock
too conceited to crow.  I 'll swear the girl 's in love with you.  She
does you the honour to be fond of you.  She 's one in a million.  A
handsome girl, straight-backed, honest, just a dash, and not too much, of
our blood in her.'

'Consult her again, sir,' I broke in.  'You will discover she is not of
your way of thinking.'

'Do you mean to say she's given you a left-hander, Harry?'

'I have only to say that I have not given her the option.'

He groaned going up the steps of his hotel, faced me once or twice, and
almost gained my sympathy by observing, 'When we're boys, the old ones
worry us; when we're old ones, the boys begin to tug!'  He rarely spoke
so humanely,--rarely, at least, to me.

For a wonder, he let the matter drop: possibly because he found me
temperate.  I tried the system on him with good effect during our stay in
London; that is, I took upon myself to be always cool, always courteous,
deliberate in my replies, and not uncordial, though I was for
representing the reserved young man.  I obtained some praise for my style
and bearing among his acquaintances.  To one lady passing an encomium on
me, he said, 'Oh, some foreign princess has been training him,' which
seemed to me of good augury.

My friends Temple and Heriot were among the Riversley guests at
Christmas.  We rode over to John Thresher's, of whom we heard that the
pretty Mabel Sweetwinter had disappeared, and understood that suspicion
had fallen upon one of us gentlemen.  Bob, her brother, had gone the way
of the bravest English fellows of his class-to America.  We called on the
miller, a soured old man.  Bob's evasion affected him more than Mabel's,
Martha Thresher said, in derision of our sex.  I was pained to hear from
her that Bob supposed me the misleader of his sister; and that he had, as
she believed, left England, to avoid the misery of ever meeting me again,
because he liked me so much.  She had been seen walking down the lanes
with some one resembling me in figure.  Heriot took the miller's view,
counting the loss of one stout young Englishman to his country of far
greater importance than the escapades of dozens of girls, for which
simple creatures he had no compassion: he held the expression of it a
sham.  He had grown coxcombical.  Without talking of his conquests, he
talked largely of the ladies who were possibly in the situation of
victims to his grace of person, though he did not do so with any unctuous
boasting.  On the contrary, there was a rather taking undertone of regret
that his enfeebled over-fat country would give her military son no
worthier occupation.  He laughed at the mention of Julia Bulsted's name.
'She proves, Richie, marriage is the best of all receipts for women, just
as it's the worst for men.  Poor Billy Bulsted, for instance, a first-
rate seaman, and his heart's only half in his profession since he and
Julia swore their oath; and no wonder,--he made something his own that
won't go under lock and key.  No military or naval man ought ever to
marry.'

'Stop,' said Temple, 'is the poor old country------  How about continuing
the race of heroes?'

Heriot commended him to rectories, vicarages, and curates' lodgings for
breeding grounds, and coming round to Julia related one of the racy
dialogues of her married life.  'The saltwater widow's delicious.  Billy
rushes home from his ship in a hurry.  What's this Greg writes me?--That
he 's got a friend of his to drink with him, d' ye mean, William?--
A friend of yours, ma'am.--And will you say a friend of mine is not a
friend of yours, William?--Julia, you're driving me mad!--And is that far
from crazy, where you said I drove you at first sight of me, William?
Back to his ship goes Billy with a song of love and constancy.'

I said nothing of my chagrin at the behaviour of the pair who had
furnished my first idea of the romantic beauty of love.

'Why does she talk twice as Irish as she used to, Heriot?'

'Just to coax the world to let her be as nonsensical as she likes.  She's
awfully dull; she has only her nonsense to amuse her.  I repeat: soldiers
and sailors oughtn't to marry.  I'm her best friend.  I am, on my honour:
for I 'm going to make Billy give up the service, since he can't give her
up.  There she is!' he cried out, and waved his hat to a lady on
horseback some way down the slope of a road leading to the view of our
heathland:

'There's the only girl living fit to marry a man and swear she 'll stick
to him through life and death.'

He started at a gallop.  Temple would have gone too at any possible
speed, for he knew as well as I did that Janet was the girl alone capable
of winning a respectful word from Heriot; but I detained him to talk of
Ottilia and my dismal prospect of persuading the squire to consent to my
proposal for her, and to dower her in a manner worthy a princess.  He
doled out his yes and no to me vacantly.  Janet and Heriot came at a
walking pace to meet us, he questioning her, she replying, but a little
differently from her usual habit of turning her full face to the speaker.
He was evidently startled, and, to judge from his posture, repeated his
question, as one would say, 'You did this?'  She nodded, and then uttered
some rapid words, glanced at him, laughed shyly, and sank her features
into repose as we drew near.  She had a deep blush on her face.  I
thought it might be, that Janet and her loud champion had come to
particular terms, a supposition that touched me with regrets for Temple's
sake.  But Heriot was not looking pleased.  It happened that whatever
Janet uttered struck a chord of opposition in me.  She liked the Winter
and the Winter sunsets, had hopes of a frost for skating, liked our
climate, thought our way of keeping Christmas venerable, rejoiced in
dispensing the squire's bounties--called them bounties, joined Heriot
in abusing foreign countries to the exaltation of her own: all this with
'Well, Harry, I'm sorry you don't think as we do.  And we do, don't we?'
she addressed him.

'I reserve a point,' he said, and not playfully.

She appeared distressed, and courted a change of expression in his
features, and I have to confess that never having seen her gaze upon
any one save myself in that fashion, which was with her very winning,
especially where some of her contralto tones of remonstrance or entreaty
aided it, I felt as a man does at a neighbour's shadow cast over his
rights of property.

Heriot dropped to the rear: I was glad to leave her with Temple, and glad
to see them canter ahead together on the sand of tie heaths.

'She has done it,' Heriot burst out abruptly.  'She has done it!' he said
again.  'Upon my soul, I never wished in my life before that I was a
marrying man: I might have a chance of ending worth something.  She has
won the squire round with a thundering fib, and you're to have the German
if you can get her.  Don't be in a hurry.  The squire 'll speak to you
to-night: but think over it.  Will you?  Think what a girl this is.  I
believe on my honour no man ever had such an offer of a true woman.
Come, don't think it's Heriot speaking--I've always liked her, of course.
But I have always respected her, and that's not of course.  Depend upon
it, a woman who can be a friend of men is the right sort of woman to make
a match with.  Do you suppose she couldn't have a dozen fellows round her
at the lift of her finger? the pick of the land!  I'd trust her with an
army.  I tell you, Janet Ilchester 's the only girl alive who'll double
the man she marries.  I don't know another who wouldn't make the name of
wife laugh the poor devil out of house and company.  She's firm as a
rock; and sweet as a flower on it!  Will that touch you?  Bah!  Richie,
let's talk like men.  I feel for her because she's fond of you, and I
know what it is when a girl like that sets her heart on a fellow.
There,' he concluded, 'I 'd ask you to go down on your knees and pray
before you decide against her!'

Heriot succeeded in raising a certain dull indistinct image in my mind of
a well-meaning girl, to whom I was bound to feel thankful, and felt so.
I thanked Heriot, too, for his friendly intentions.  He had never seen
the Princess Ottilia.  And at night I thanked my grandfather.  He bore
himself, on the whole, like the good and kindly old gentleman Janet loved
to consider him.  He would not stand in my light, he said, recurring to
that sheet-anchor of a tolerant sentence whenever his forehead began to
gather clouds.  He regretted that Janet was no better than her sex in her
preference for rakes, and wished me to the deuce for bringing Heriot into
the house, and not knowing when I was lucky.  'German grandchildren, eh!'
he muttered.  No Beltham had ever married a foreigner.  What was the time
fixed between us for the marriage?  He wanted to see his line safe before
he died.  'How do I know this foreign woman'll bear?' he asked, expecting
an answer.  His hand was on the back of a chair, grasping and rocking it;
his eyes bent stormily on the carpet; they were set blinking rapidly
after a glance at me.  Altogether his self-command was creditable to
Janet's tuition.

Janet met me next day, saying with some insolence (so it struck me from
her liveliness): 'Well, it's all right, Harry?  Now you'll be happy, I
hope.  I did not shine in my reply.  Her amiable part appeared to be to
let me see how brilliant and gracious the commonplace could be made to
look.  She kept Heriot at the Grange, against the squire's remonstrance
and her mother's.  'It 's to keep him out of harm's way: the women he
knows are not of the best kind for him,' she said, with astounding
fatuity.  He submitted, and seemed to like it.  She must be teaching
Temple to skate figures in the frost, with a great display of good-
humoured patience, and her voice at musical pitches.  But her principal
affectation was to talk on matters of business with Mr. Burgin and Mr.
Trewint, the squire's lawyer and bailiff, on mines and interest, on money
and economical questions; not shrinking from politics either, until the
squire cries out to the males assisting in the performance, 'Gad, she 's
a head as good as our half-dozen put together,' and they servilely joined
their fragmentary capitals in agreement.  She went so far as to retain
Peterborough to teach her Latin.  He was idling in the expectation of a
living in the squire's gift.

The annoyance for me was that I could not detach myself from a
contemplation of these various scenes, by reverting to my life in
Germany.  The preposterous closing of my interview with Ottilia blocked
the way, and I was unable to write to her--unable to address her even in
imagination, without pangs of shame at the review of the petty conspiracy
I had sanctioned to entrap her to plight her hand to me, and without
perpetually multiplying excuses for my conduct.  So to escape them I was
reduced to study Janet, forming one of her satellites.  She could say to
me impudently, with all the air of a friendly comrade, 'Had your letter
from Germany yet, Harry?'  She flew--she was always on the chase.  I saw
her permit Heriot to kiss her hand, and then the squire appeared, and
Heriot and she burst into laughter, and the squire, with a puzzled face,
would have the game explained to him, but understood not a bit of it,
only growled at me; upon which Janet became serious and chid him.  I was
told by my aunt Dorothy to admire this behaviour of hers.  One day she
certainly did me a service: a paragraph in one of the newspapers spoke of
my father, not flatteringly: 'Richmond is in the field again,' it
commenced.  The squire was waiting for her to hand the paper to him.
None of us could comprehend why she played him off and denied him his
right to the first perusal of the news; she was voluble, almost witty,
full of sprightly Roxalana petulance.

'This paper,' she said, 'deserves to be burnt,' and she was allowed to
burn it--money article, mining column as well--on the pretext of an
infamous anti-Tory leader, of which she herself composed the first
sentence to shock the squire completely.  I had sight of that paper some
time afterwards.  Richmond was in the field again, it stated, with mock
flourishes.  But that was not the worst.  My grandfather's name was down
there, and mine, and Princess Ottilia's.  My father's connection with the
court of Eppenwelzen-Sarkeld was alluded to as the latest, and next to
his winning the heiress of Riversley, the most successful of his
ventures, inasmuch as his son, if rumour was to be trusted, had obtained
the promise of the hand of the princess.  The paragraph was an excerpt
from a gossiping weekly journal, perhaps less malevolent than I thought
it.  There was some fun to be got out of a man who, the journal in
question was informed, had joined the arms of England and a petty German
principality stamped on his plate and furniture.

My gratitude to Janet was fervent enough when I saw what she had saved me
from.  I pressed her hand and held it.  I talked stupidly, but I made my
cruel position intelligible to her, and she had the delicacy, on this
occasion, to keep her sentiments regarding my father unuttered.  We sat
hardly less than an hour side by side--I know not how long hand in hand.
The end was an extraordinary trembling in the limb abandoned to me.  It
seized her frame.  I would have detained her, but it was plain she
suffered both in her heart and her pride.  Her voice was under fair
command-more than mine was.  She counselled me to go to London, at once.
'I would be off to London if I were you, Harry,'--for the purpose of
checking my father's extravagances,--would have been the further wording,
which she spared me; and I thanked her, wishing, at the same time,
that she would get the habit of using choicer phrases whenever there
might, by chance, be a stress of emotion between us.  Her trembling,
and her 'I'd be off,' came into unpleasant collision in the recollection.

I acknowledge to myself that she was a true and hearty friend.  She
listened with interest to my discourse on the necessity of my being in
Parliament before I could venture to propose formally for the hand of the
princess, and undertook to bear the burden of all consequent negotiations
with my grandfather.  If she would but have allowed me to speak of
Temple, instead of saying, 'Don't, Harry, I like him so much!' at the
very mention of his name, I should have sincerely felt my indebtedness to
her, and some admiration of her fine spirit and figure besides.  I could
not even agree with my aunt Dorothy that Janet was handsome.  When I had
to grant her a pardon I appreciated her better.




CHAPTER XXXVIII

MY BANKERS' BOOK

The squire again did honour to Janet's eulogy and good management of him.

'And where,' said she, 'would you find a Radical to behave so generously,
Harry, when it touches him so?'

He accorded me his permission to select my side in politics, merely
insisting that I was never to change it, and this he requested me to
swear to, for (he called the ghost of old Sewis to witness) he abhorred a
turncoat.

'If you're to be a Whig, or a sneaking half-and-half, I can't help you
much,' he remarked.  'I can pop a young Tory in for my borough, maybe;
but I can't insult a number of independent Englishmen by asking them to
vote for the opposite crew; that's reasonable, eh?  And I can't promise
you plumpers for the county neither.  You can date your Address from
Riversley.  You'll have your house in town.  Tell me this princess of
yours is ready with her hand, and,' he threw in roughly, 'is a
respectable young woman, I'll commence building.  You'll have a house fit
for a prince in town and country, both.'

Temple had produced an effect on him by informing him that 'this princess
of mine' was entitled to be considered a fit and proper person, in rank
and blood, for an alliance with the proudest royal Houses of Europe, and
my grandfather was not quite destitute of consolation in the prospect I
presented to him.  He was a curious study to me, of the Tory mind, in its
attachment to solidity, fixity, certainty, its unmatched generosity
within a limit, its devotion to the family, and its family eye for the
country.  An immediate introduction to Ottilia would have won him to
enjoy the idea of his grandson's marriage; but not having seen her, he
could not realize her dignity, nor even the womanliness of a 'foreign
woman.'

'Thank God for one thing,' he said: 'we shan't have that fellow
bothering--shan't have the other half of your family messing the
business.  You'll have to account for him to your wife as you best can.
I 've nothing to do with him, mind that.  He came to my house, stole my
daughter, crazed her wits, dragged us all .  .  .'

The excuse to turn away from the hearing of abuse of my father was too
good to be neglected, though it was horribly humiliating that I should
have to take advantage of it--vexatious that I should seem chargeable
with tacit lying in allowing the squire to suppose the man he hated to be
a stranger to the princess.  Not feeling sure whether it might be common
prudence to delude him even passively, I thought of asking Janet for her
opinion, but refrained.  A stout deceiver has his merits, but a feeble
hypocrite applying to friends to fortify him in his shifts and
tergiversations must provoke contempt.  I desired that Janet might
continue to think well of me.  I was beginning to drop in my own esteem,
which was the mirror of my conception of Ottilia's view of her lover.

Now, had I consulted Janet, I believe the course of my history would have
been different, for she would not then, I may imagine, have been guilty
of her fatal slip of the tongue that threw us into heavy seas when we
thought ourselves floating on canal waters.  A canal barge (an image to
me of the most perfect attainable peace), suddenly, on its passage
through our long fir-woods, with their scented reeds and flowing rushes,
wild balsam and silky cotton-grass beds, sluiced out to sea and storm,
would be somewhat in my likeness soon after a single luckless observation
had passed at our Riversley breakfast-table one Sunday morning.

My aunt Dorothy and Mr. Peterborough were conversing upon the varieties
of Christian sects, and particularly such as approached nearest to
Anglicanism, together with the strange, saddening fact that the Christian
religion appeared to be more divided than, Peterborough regretted to say,
the forms of idolatry established by the Buddha, Mahomet, and other
impostors.  He claimed the audacious merit for us, that we did not
discard the reason of man we admitted man's finite reason to our school
of faith, and it was found refractory.  Hence our many divisions.

'The Roman Catholics admit reason?' said Janet, who had too strong a turn
for showing her keenness in little encounters with Peterborough.

'No,' said he; 'the Protestants.' And, anxious to elude her, he pressed
on to enchain my aunt Dorothy's attention.  Janet plagued him meanwhile;
and I helped her.  We ran him and his schoolboy, the finite refractory,
up and down, until Peterborough was glad to abandon him, and Janet said,
'Did you preach to the Germans much?' He had officiated in Prince
Ernest's private chapel: not, he added in his egregious modesty, not that
he personally wished to officiate.

'It was Harry's wish?' Janet said, smiling.

'My post of tutor,' Peterborough hastened to explain, 'was almost
entirely supernumerary.  The circumstances being so, I the more readily
acquiesced in the title of private chaplain, prepared to fulfil such
duties as devolved upon me in that capacity, and acting thereon I
proffered my occasional services.  Lutheranism and Anglicanism are not,
doubtless you are aware, divided on the broader bases.  We are common
Protestants.  The Papacy, I can assure you, finds as little favour with
one as with the other.  Yes, I held forth, as you would say, from time to
time.  My assumption of the title of private chaplain, it was thought,
improved the family dignity--that is, on our side.'

'Thought by Harry?' said Janet; and my aunt Dorothy said, 'You and Harry
had a consultation about it?'

'Wanted to appear as grand as they could,' quoth the squire.

Peterborough signified an assent, designed to modify the implication.
'Not beyond due bounds, I trust, sir.'

'Oh!  now I understand,' Janet broke out in the falsetto notes of a
puzzle solved in the mind.  'It was his father!  Harry proclaiming his
private chaplain!'

'Mr. Harry's father did first suggest--' said Peterborough, but her
quickly-altered features caused him to draw in his breath, as she had
done after one short laugh.

My grandfather turned a round side-eye on me, hard as a cock's.

Janet immediately started topics to fill Peterborough's mouth: the
weather, the walk to church, the probable preacher.  'And, grandada,'
said she to the squire, who was muttering ominously with a grim under-
jaw, 'His private chaplain!' and for this once would not hear her,
'Grandada, I shall drive you over to see papa this afternoon.' She talked
as if nothing had gone wrong.  Peterborough, criminal red, attacked a
jam-pot for a diversion.  'Such sweets are rare indeed on the Continent,'
he observed to my aunt Dorothy.  'Our homemade dainties are matchless.'

'Private chaplain!' the squire growled again.

'It's you that preach this afternoon,' Janet said to Peterborough.  'Do
you give us an extempore sermon?'

'You remind me, Miss Ilchester, I must look to it; I have a little
trimming to do.'

Peterborough thought he might escape, but the squire arrested him.
'You'll give me five minutes before you're out of the house, please.
D' ye smoke on Sundays?'

'Not on Sundays, sir,' said Peterborough, openly and cordially, as to
signify that they were of one mind regarding the perniciousness of Sunday
smoking.

'See you don't set fire to my ricks with your foreign chaplain's tricks.
I spied you puffing behind one t' other day.  There,' the squire
dispersed Peterborough's unnecessary air of abstruse recollection, 'don't
look as though you were trying to hit on a pin's head in a bushel of
oats.  Don't set my ricks on fire--that 's all.'

'Mr. Peterborough,' my aunt Dorothy interposed her voice to soften this
rough treatment of him with the offer of some hot-house flowers for his
sitting-room.

' Oh, I thank you!' I heard the garlanded victim lowing as I left him to
the squire's mercy.

Janet followed me out.  'It was my fault, Harry.  You won't blame him, I
know.  But will he fib?  I don't think he's capable of it, and I'm sure
he can't run and double.  Grandada will have him fast before a minute is
over.'

I told her to lose no time in going and extracting the squire's promise
that Peterborough should have his living,--so much it seemed possible to
save.

She flew back, and in Peterborough's momentary absence, did her work.
Nothing could save the unhappy gentleman from a distracting scene and
much archaic English.  The squire's power of vituperation was notorious:
he could be more than a match for roadside navvies and predatory tramps
in cogency of epithet.  Peterborough came to me drenched, and wailing
that he had never heard such language,--never dreamed of it.  And to find
himself the object of it!--and, worse, to be unable to conscientiously
defend himself!  The pain to him was in the conscience,--which is, like
the spleen, a function whose uses are only to be understood in its
derangement.  He had eased his conscience to every question right out,
and he rejoiced to me at the immense relief it gave him. Conscientiously,
he could not deny that he knew the squire's objection to my being in my
father's society; and he had connived at it 'for reasons, my dearest
Harry, I can justify to God and man, but not--I had to confess as much--
not, I grieve to say, to your grandfather.  I attempted to do justice to
the amiable qualities of the absent.  In a moment I was assailed with
epithets that .  .  .  and not a word is to be got in when he is so
violent.  One has to make up one's mind to act Andromeda, and let him be
the sea-monster, as somebody has said; I forget the exact origin of the
remark.'

The squire certainly had a whole ocean at command.  I strung myself to
pass through the same performance.  To my astonishment I went
unchallenged.  Janet vehemently asserted that she had mollified the angry
old man, who, however, was dark of visage, though his tongue kept
silence.  He was gruff over his wine-glass the blandishments of his
favourite did not brighten him.  From his point of view he had been
treated vilely, and he was apparently inclined to nurse his rancour and
keep my fortunes trembling in the balance.  Under these circumstances it
was impossible for me to despatch a letter to Ottilia, though I found
that I could write one now, and I sat in my room writing all day,--most
eloquent stuff it was.  The shadow of misfortune restored the sense of my
heroical situation, which my father had extinguished, and this unlocked
the powers of speech.  I wrote so admirably that my wretchedness could
enjoy the fine millinery I decorated it in.  Then to tear the noble
composition to pieces was a bitter gratification.  Ottilia's station
repelled and attracted me mysteriously.  I could not separate her from
it, nor keep my love of her from the contentions into which it threw me.
In vain I raved, 'What is rank?' There was a magnet in it that could at
least set me quivering and twisting, behaving like a man spellbound, as
madly as any hero of the ballads under a wizard's charm.

At last the squire relieved us.  He fixed that side-cast cock's eye of
his on me, and said, 'Where 's your bankers' book, sir?'

I presumed that it was with my bankers, but did not suggest the
possibility that my father might have it in his custody; for he had a
cheque-book of his own, and regulated our accounts.  Why not?  I thought,
and flushed somewhat defiantly.  The money was mine.

'Any objection to my seeing that book?' said the squire.

'None whatever, sir.'

He nodded.  I made it a point of honour to write for the book to be sent
down to me immediately.

The book arrived, and the squire handed it to me to break the cover,
insisting, 'You're sure you wouldn't rather not have me look at it?'

'Quite,' I replied.  The question of money was to me perfectly
unimportant.  I did not see a glimpse of danger in his perusing the list
of my expenses.

''Cause I give you my word I know nothing about it now,' he said.

I complimented him on his frank method of dealing, and told him to look
at the book if he pleased, but with prudence sufficiently awake to check
the declaration that I had not once looked at it myself.

He opened it.  We had just assembled in the hall, where breakfast was
laid during Winter, before a huge wood fire.  Janet had her teeth on her
lower lip, watching the old man's face.  I did not condescend to be
curious; but when I turned my head to him he was puffing through thin
lips, and then his mouth crumpled in a knob.  He had seen sights.

'By George, I must have breakfast 'fore I go into this!' he exclaimed,
and stared as if he had come out of an oven.

Dorothy Beltham reminded him that Prayers had not been read.

'Prayers!' He was about to objurgate, but affirmatived her motion to ring
the bell for the servants, and addressed Peterborough: 'You read 'em
abroad every morning?'

Peterborough's conscience started off on its inevitable jog-trot at a
touch of the whip.  'A-yes; that is--oh, it was my office.' He had to
recollect with exactitude:

'I should specify exceptions; there were intervals .  .  .'

'Please, open your Bible,' the squire cut him short; 'I don't want a
damned fine edge on everything.'

Partly for an admonition to him, or in pure nervousness, Peterborough
blew his nose monstrously: an unlucky note; nothing went well after it.
'A slight cold,' he murmured and resumed the note, and threw himself
maniacally into it.  The unexpected figure of Captain Bulsted on tiptoe,
wearing the ceremonial depressed air of intruders on these occasions,
distracted our attention for a moment.

'Fresh from ship, William?' the squire called out.

The captain ejaculated a big word, to judge of it from the aperture, but
it was mute as his footing on the carpet, and he sat and gazed devoutly
toward Peterborough, who had waited to see him take his seat, and must
now, in his hurry to perform his duty, sweep the peccant little redbound
book to the floor.  'Here, I'll have that,' said the squire.  'Allow me,
sir,' said Peterborough; and they sprang into a collision.

'Would you jump out of your pulpit to pick up an old woman's umbrella?'
the squire asked him in wrath, and muttered of requiring none of his
clerical legerdemain with books of business.  Tears were in
Peterborough's eyes.  My aunt Dorothy's eyes dwelt kindly on him to
encourage him, but the man's irritable nose was again his enemy.

Captain Bulsted chanced to say in the musical voice of inquiry: ' Prayers
are not yet over, are they?'

'No, nor never will be with a parson blowing his horn at this rate,' the
squire rejoined.  'And mind you,' he said to Peterborough, after
dismissing the servants, to whom my aunt Dorothy read the morning lessons
apart, 'I'd not have had this happen, sir, for money in lumps.  I've
always known I should hang the day when my house wasn't blessed in the
morning by prayer.  So did my father, and his before him.  Fiddle!  sir,
you can't expect young people to wear decent faces when the parson's
hopping over the floor like a flea, and trumpeting as if the organ-pipe
wouldn't have the sermon at any price.  You tried to juggle me out of
this book here.'

'On my!--indeed, sir, no!' Peterborough proclaimed his innocence, and it
was unlikely that the squire should have suspected him.

Captain Bulsted had come to us for his wife, whom he had not found at
home on his arrival last midnight.

'God bless my soul,' said the squire, 'you don't mean to tell me she's
gone off, William?'

'Oh! dear, no, sir,' said the captain, 'she's only cruising.'

The squire recommended a draught of old ale.  The captain accepted it.
His comportment was cheerful in a sober fashion, notwithstanding the
transparent perturbation of his spirit.  He answered my aunt Dorothy's
questions relating to Julia simply and manfully, as became a gallant
seaman, cordially excusing his wife for not having been at home to
welcome him, with the singular plea, based on his knowledge of the sex,
that the nearer she knew him to be the less able was she to sit on her
chair waiting like Patience.  He drank his ale from the hands of
Sillabin, our impassive new butler, who had succeeded Sewis, the squire
told him, like a Whig Ministry the Tory; proof that things were not
improving.

'I thought, sir, things were getting better,' said the captain.

'The damnedest mistake ever made, William.  How about the Fall of Man,
then?  eh?  You talk like a heathen Radical.  It's Scripture says we're
going from better to worse, and that's Tory doctrine.  And stick to the
good as long as you can!  Why, William, you were a jolly bachelor once.'

'Sir, and ma'am,' the captain bowed to Dorothy Beltham, 'I have, thanks
to you, never known happiness but in marriage, and all I want is my
wife.'

The squire fretted for Janet to depart.  'I 'm going, grandada,' she
said.  'You'll oblige me by not attending to any matter of business
to-day.  Give me that book of Harry's to keep for you.'

'How d' ye mean, my dear?'

'It 's bad work done on a Sunday, you know.'

'So it is.  I'll lock up the book.'

'I have your word for that, grandada,' said Janet.

The ladies retired, taking Peterborough with them.

'Good-bye to the frocks!  and now, William, out with your troubles,' said
the squire.

The captain's eyes were turned to the door my aunt Dorothy had passed
through.

'You remember the old custom, sir!'

'Ay, do I, William.  Sorry for you then; infernally sorry for you now,
that I am!  But you've run your head into the halter.'

'I love her, sir; I love her to distraction.  Let any man on earth say
she's not an angel, I flatten him dead as his lie.  By the way, sir, I am
bound in duty to inform you I am speaking of my wife.'

'To be sure you are, William, and a trim schooner-yacht she is.'

'She 's off, sir; she's off!'

I thought it time to throw in a word.  'Captain Bulsted, I should hold
any man but you accountable to me for hinting such things of my friend.'

'Harry, your hand,' he cried, sparkling.

'Hum; his hand!' growled the squire.  'His hand's been pretty lively on
the Continent, William.  Here, look at this book, William, and the bundle
o' cheques!  No, I promised my girl.  We'll go into it to-morrow, he and
I, early.  The fellow has shot away thousands and thousands--been
gallivanting among his foreign duchesses and countesses.  There 's a
petticoat in that bank-book of his; and more than one, I wager.  Now he's
for marrying a foreign princess--got himself in a tangle there, it
seems.'

'Mightily well done, Harry!' Captain Bulsted struck a terrific encomium
on my shoulder, groaning, 'May she be true to you, my lad!'

The squire asked him if he was going to church that morning.

'I go to my post, sir, by my fireside,' the captain replied; nor could he
be induced to leave his post vacant by the squire's promise to him of a
sermon that would pickle his temper for a whole week's wear and tear.
He regretted extremely that he could not enjoy so excellent a trial of
his patience, but he felt himself bound to go to his post and wait.

I walked over to Bulsted with him, and heard on the way that it was
Heriot who had called for her and driven her off.  'The man had been,
I supposed,' Captain Bulsted said, 'deputed by some of you to fetch her
over to Riversley.  My servants mentioned his name.  I thought it
adviseable not to trouble the ladies with it to-day.'  He meditated.
'I hoped I should find her at the Grange in the morning, Harry.  I slept
on it, rather than startle the poor lamb in the night.'

I offered him to accompany him at once to Heriot's quarters.

'What!  and let my wife know I doubted her fidelity.  My girl shall never
accuse me of that.'

As it turned out, Julia had been taken by Heriot on a visit to Lady Maria
Higginson, the wife of the intrusive millionaire, who particularly
desired to know her more intimately.  Thoughtless Julia, accepting the
impudent invitation without scruple, had allowed herself to be driven
away without stating the place of her destination.  She and Heriot were
in the Higginsons' pew at church.  Hearing from Janet of her husband's
arrival, she rushed home, and there, instead of having to beg
forgiveness, was summoned to grant pardon.  Captain Bulsted had drawn
largely on Squire Gregory's cellar to assist him in keeping his post.

The pair appeared before us fondling ineffably next day, neither one
of them capable of seeing that our domestic peace at the Grange was
unseated.  'We 're the two wretchedest creatures alive; haven't any of
ye to spare a bit of sympathy for us?' Julia began.  'We 're like on a
pitchfork.  There's William's duty to his country, and there 's his
affection for me, and they won't go together, because Government, which
is that horrid Admiralty, fears pitching and tossing for post-captains'
wives.  And William away, I 'm distracted, and the Admiralty's hair's on
end if he stops.  And, 'deed, Miss Beltham, I'm not more than married to
just half a husband.'

The captain echoed her, 'Half!  but happy enough for twenty whole ones,
if you'll be satisfied, my duck.'

Julia piteously entreated me, for my future wife's sake, not to take
service under Government.  As for the Admiralty, she said, it had no
characteristic but the abominable one, that it hated a woman.  The squire
laid two or three moderately coarse traps for the voluble frank creature,
which she evaded with surprising neatness, showing herself more awake
than one would have imagined her.  Janet and I fancied she must have come
with the intention to act uxorious husband and Irish wife for the
distinct purpose of diverting the squire's wrath from me, for he greatly
delighted in the sight of merry wedded pairs.  But they were as simple as
possible in their display of happiness.

It chanced that they came opportunely.  My bankers' book had been the
theme all the morning, and an astonishing one to me equally with my
grandfather: Since our arrival in England, my father had drawn nine
thousand pounds.  The sums expended during our absence on the Continent
reached the perplexing figures of forty-eight thousand.  I knew it too
likely, besides, that all debts were not paid.  Self--self--self drew for
thousands at a time; sometimes, as the squire's convulsive forefinger
indicated, for many thousands within a week.  It was incomprehensible to
him until I, driven at bay by questions and insults, and perceiving that
concealment could not long be practised, made a virtue of the situation
by telling him (what he in fact must have seen) that my father possessed
a cheque-book as well as I, and likewise drew upon the account.  We had
required the money; it was mine, and I had sold out Bank Stock and
Consols,--which gave very poor interest, I remarked cursorily-and had
kept the money at my bankers', to draw upon according to our necessities.
I pitied the old man while speaking.  His face was livid; language died
from his lips.  He asked to have little things explained to him--the two
cheque-books, for instance,--and what I thought of doing when this money
was all gone: for he supposed I did not expect the same amount to hand
every two years; unless, he added, I had given him no more than a couple
of years' lease of life when I started for my tour.  'Then the money's
gone!' he summed up; and this was the signal for redemanding
explanations.  Had he not treated me fairly and frankly in handing over
my own to me on the day of my majority?  Yes.

'And like a fool, you think--eh?'

'I have no such thought in my head, sir.'

'You have been keeping that fellow in his profligacy, and you 're keeping
him now.  Why, you 're all but a beggar! .  .  .  Comes to my house,
talks of his birth, carries off my daughter, makes her mad, lets her
child grow up to lay hold of her money, and then grips him fast and pecks
him, fleeces him!  .  .  .  You 're beggared--d 'ye know that?  He's had
the two years of you, and sucked you dry.  What were you about?  What
were you doing?  Did you have your head on?  You shared cheque-books?
good!  .  .  .  The devil in hell never found such a fool as you!  You
had your house full of your foreign bonyrobers--eh?  Out with it!  How
did you pass your time?  Drunk and dancing?'

By such degrees my grandfather worked himself up to the pitch for his
style of eloquence.  I have given a faint specimen of it.  When I took
the liberty to consider that I had heard enough, he followed me out of
the library into the hall, where Janet stood.  In her presence, he
charged the princess and her family with being a pack of greedy
adventurers, conspirators with 'that fellow' to plunder me; and for a
proof of it, he quoted my words, that my father's time had been spent in
superintending the opening of a coal-mine on Prince Ernest's estate.
'That fellow pretending to manage a coal-mine!'  Could not a girl see it
was a shuffle to hoodwink a greenhorn?  And now he remembered it was
Colonel Goodwin and his daughter who had told him of having seen 'the
fellow' engaged in playing Court-buffoon to a petty German prince, and
performing his antics, cutting capers like a clown at a fair.

'Shame!' said Janet.

'Hear her!' The squire turned to me.

But she cried: 'Oh!  grandada, hear yourself!  or don't, be silent.  If
Harry has offended you, speak like one gentleman to another.  Don't rob
me of my love for you: I haven't much besides that.'

'No, because of a scoundrel and his young idiot!'

Janet frowned in earnest, and said: 'I don't permit you to change the
meaning of the words I speak.'

He muttered a proverb of the stables.  Reduced to behave temperately, he
began the whole history of my bankers' book anew--the same queries, the
same explosions and imprecations.

'Come for a walk with me, dear Harry,' said Janet.

I declined to be protected in such a manner, absurdly on my dignity; and
the refusal, together possibly with some air of contemptuous independence
in the tone of it, brought the squire to a climax.  'You won't go out and
walk with her?  You shall go down on your knees to her and beg her to
give you her arm for a walk.  By God! you shall, now, here, on the spot,
or off you go to your German princess, with your butler's legacy, and
nothing more from me but good-bye and the door bolted.  Now, down with
you!'

He expected me to descend.

'And if he did, he would never have my arm.' Janet's eyes glittered hard
on the squire.

'Before that rascal dies, my dear, he shall whine like a beggar out in
the cold for the tips of your fingers!'

'Not if he asks me first,' said Janet.

This set him off again.  He realized her prospective generosity, and
contrasted it with my actual obtuseness.  Janet changed her tactics.  She
assumed indifference.  But she wanted experience, and a Heriot to help
her in playing a part.  She did it badly--overdid it; so that the old
man, now imagining both of us to be against his scheme for uniting us,
counted my iniquity as twofold.  Her phrase, 'Harry and I will always be
friends,' roused the loudest of his denunciations upon me, as though
there never had been question of the princess, so inveterate was his
mind's grasp of its original designs.  Friends!  Would our being friends
give him heirs by law to his estate and name?  And so forth.  My aunt
Dorothy came to moderate his invectives.  In her room the heavily-
burdened little book of figures was produced, and the items read aloud;
and her task was to hear them without astonishment, but with a business-
like desire to comprehend them accurately, a method that softened the
squire's outbursts by degrees.  She threw out hasty running commentaries:
'Yes, that was for a yacht'; and 'They were living at the Court of a
prince'; such and such a sum was 'large, but Harry knew his grandfather
did not wish him to make a poor appearance.'

'Why, do you mean to swear to me, on your oath, Dorothy Beltham,' said
the squire, amazed at the small amazement he created 'you think these two
fellows have been spending within the right margin?  What'll be women's
ideas next!'

'No,' she answered demurely.  'I think Harry has been extravagant, and
has had his lesson.  And surely it is better now than later?  But you
are, not making allowances for his situation as the betrothed of a
princess.'

'That 's what turns your head,' said he; and she allowed him to have the
notion, and sneer at herself and her sex.

'How about this money drawn since he came home?' the squire persisted.

My aunt Dorothy reddened.  He struck his finger on the line marking the
sum, repeating his demand; and at this moment Captain Bulsted and Julia
arrived.  The ladies manoeuvred so that the captain and the squire were
left alone together.  Some time afterward the captain sent out word that
he begged his wife's permission to stay to dinner at the Grange, and
requested me to favour him by conducting his wife to Bulsted: proof, as
Julia said, that the two were engaged in a pretty hot tussle.  She was
sure her William would not be the one to be beaten.

I led her away, rather depressed by the automaton performance assigned to
me; from which condition I awoke with a touch of horror to find myself
paying her very warm compliments; for she had been coquettish and
charming to cheer me, and her voice was sweet.  We reached a point in our
conversation I know not where, but I must have spoken with some warmth.
'Then guess,' said she, 'what William is suffering for your sake now,
Harry'; that is, 'suffering in remaining away from me on your account';
and thus, in an instant, with a skill so intuitive as to be almost
unconscious, she twirled me round to a right sense of my position, and
set me reflecting, whether a love that clad me in such imperfect armour
as to leave me penetrable to these feminine graces--a plump figure,
swinging skirts, dewy dark eyelids, laughing red lips--could indeed be
absolute love.  And if it was not love of the immortal kind, what was I?
I looked back on the thought like the ship on its furrow through the
waters, and saw every mortal perplexity, and death under.  My love of
Ottilia delusion?  Then life was delusion!  I contemplated Julia in
alarm, somewhat in the light fair witches were looked on when the faggots
were piled for them.  The sense of her unholy attractions abased and
mortified me: and it set me thinking on the strangeness of my disregard
of Mdlle. Jenny Chassediane when in Germany, who was far sprightlier,
if not prettier, and, as I remembered, had done me the favour to make
discreet play with her eyelids in our encounters, and long eyes in
passing.  I caught myself regretting my coldness of that period; for
which regrets I could have swung the scourge upon my miserable flesh.
Ottilia's features seemed dying out of my mind.  'Poor darling Harry!'
Julia sighed.  'And d' ye know, the sight of a young man far gone in love
gives me the trembles?'  I rallied her concerning the ladder scene in my
old schooldays, and the tender things she had uttered to Heriot.  She
answered, 'Oh, I think I got them out of poets and chapters about
lovemaking, or I felt it very much.  And that's what I miss in William;
he can't talk soft nice nonsense.  I believe him, he would if he could,
but he 's like a lion of the desert--it 's a roar!'

I rejoiced when we heard the roar.  Captain Bulsted returned to take
command of his ship, not sooner than I wanted him, and told us of a
fierce tussle with the squire.  He had stuck to him all day, and up to 11
P.M.  'By George! Harry, he had to make humble excuses to dodge out of
eyeshot a minute.  Conquered him over the fourth bottle!  And now all's
right.  He'll see your dad.  "In a barn?"  says the squire.  "Here 's to
your better health, sir," I bowed to him; "gentlemen don't meet in barns;
none but mice and traps make appointments there."  To shorten my story,
my lad, I have arranged for the squire and your excellent progenitor to
meet at Bulsted: we may end by bringing them over a bottle of old Greg's
best.  "See the boy's father," I kept on insisting.  The point is, that
this confounded book must be off your shoulders, my lad.  A dirty dog may
wash in a duck-pond.  You see, Harry, the dear old squire may set up your
account twenty times over, but he has a right to know how you twirl the
coin.  He says you don't supply the information.  I suggest to him that
your father can, and will.  So we get them into a room together.  I'll be
answerable for the rest.  And now top your boom, and to bed here: off in
the morning and tug the big vessel into port here!  And, Harry, three
cheers, and another bottle to crown the victory, if you 're the man for
it?'

Julia interposed a decided negative to the proposal; an ordinarily
unlucky thing to do with bibulous husbands, and the captain looked
uncomfortably checked; but when he seemed to be collecting to assert
himself, the humour of her remark, 'Now, no bravado, William,' disarmed
him.

'Bravado, my sweet chuck?'

'Won't another bottle be like flashing your sword after you've won the
day?' said she.

He slung his arm round her, and sent a tremendous whisper into my ear--
'A perfect angel!'

I started for London next day, more troubled aesthetically regarding the
effect produced on me by this order of perfect angels than practically
anxious about material affairs, though it is true that when I came into
proximity with my father, the thought of his all but purely mechanical
power of making money spin, fly, and vanish, like sparks from a fire-
engine, awakened a serious disposition in me to bring our monetary
partnership to some definite settlement.  He was living in splendour,
next door but one to the grand establishment he had driven me to from
Dipwell in the old days, with Mrs. Waddy for his housekeeper once more,
Alphonse for his cook.  Not living on the same scale, however, the
troubled woman said.  She signified that it was now the whirlwind.
I could not help smiling to see how proud she was of him, nevertheless,
as a god-like charioteer--in pace, at least.

'Opera to-night,' she answered my inquiries for him, admonishing me by
her tone that I ought not to be behindhand in knowing his regal rules and
habits.  Praising his generosity, she informed me that he had spent one
hundred pounds, and offered a reward of five times the sum, for the
discovery of Mabel Sweetwinter.  'Your papa never does things by halves,
Mr. Harry!' Soon after she was whimpering, 'Oh, will it last?' I was
shown into the room called 'The princess's room,' a miracle of furniture,
not likely to be occupied by her, I thought, the very magnificence of the
apartment striking down hope in my heart like cold on a nerve.  Your papa
says the whole house is to be for you, Mr. Harry, when the happy day
comes.'  Could it possibly be that he had talked of the princess?  I took
a hasty meal and fortified myself with claret to have matters clear with
him before the night was over.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Decent insincerity
Discreet play with her eyelids in our encounters
Excellent is pride; but oh! be sure of its foundations
I do not defend myself ever
Nations at war are wild beasts
Only true race, properly so called, out of India--German
Some so-called laws of honour
They are little ironical laughter--Accidents
War is only an exaggerated form of duelling
Winter mornings are divine.  They move on noiselessly




End of this Project Gutenberg Etext of Adventures of Harry Richmond, v5
by George Meredith






THE ADVENTURES OF HARRY RICHMOND

By George Meredith



BOOK 6.

XXXIX.    I SEE MY FATHER TAKING THE TIDE AND AM CARRIED ON IT MYSELF
XL.       MY FATHER'S MEETING WITH MY GRANDFATHER
XLI.      COMMENCEMENT OF THE SPLENDOURS AND PERPLEXITIES OF MY FATHER'S
          GRAND PARADE
XLII.     THE MARQUIS OF EDBURY AND HIS PUPPET
XLIII.    I BECOME ONE OF THE CHOSEN OF THE NATION
XLIV.     MY FATHER IS MIRACULOUSLY RELIEVED BY FORTUNE



CHAPTER XXXIX

I SEE MY FATHER TAKING THE TIDE AND AM CARRIED ON IT MYSELF

My father stood in the lobby of the Opera, holding a sort of open court,
it appeared to me, for a cluster of gentlemen hung round him; and I had
presently to bow to greetings which were rather of a kind to flatter me,
leading me to presume that he was respected as well as marvelled at.
The names of Mr. Serjeant Wedderburn, Mr. Jennings, Lord Alton,
Sir Weeton Slater, Mr. Monterez Williams, Admiral Loftus, the Earl of
Witlington, were among those which struck my ear, and struck me as good
ones.  I could not perceive anything of the air of cynical satellites in
these gentlemen--on the contrary, they were cordially deferential.  I
felt that he was encompassed by undoubted gentlemen, and my warmer
feelings to my father returned when I became sensible of the pleasant
sway he held over the circle, both in speaking and listening.  His
sympathetic smile and semi-droop of attention; his readiness, when
occasion demanded it, to hit the key of the subject and help it on with
the right word; his air of unobtrusive appreciation; his sensibility to
the moment when the run of conversation depended upon him--showed
inimitable art coming of natural genius; and he did not lose a shade of
his superior manner the while.  Mr. Serjeant Wedderburn, professionally
voluble, a lively talker, brimming with anecdote, but too sparkling,
too prompt, too full of personal relish of his point, threw my father's
urbane supremacy into marked relief; and so in another fashion did the
Earl of Witlington, 'a youth in the season of guffaws,' as Jorian DeWitt
described him, whom a jest would seize by the throat, shaking his sapling
frame.  Jorian strolled up to us goutily.  No efforts of my father's
would induce him to illustrate his fame for repartee, so it remained
established.  'Very pretty waxwork,' he said to me of our English
beauties swimming by.  'Now, those women, young Richmond, if they were
inflammable to the fiftieth degree, that is, if they had the fiftieth
part of a Frenchwoman in them, would have canvassed society on the great
man's account long before this, and sent him to the top like a bubble.
He wastes his time on them.  That fat woman he's bowing to is Viscountess
Sedley, a porcine empress, widow of three, with a soupcon of bigamy to
flavour them.  She mounted from a grocer's shop, I am told.  Constitution
has done everything for that woman.  So it will everywhere--it beats the
world!  Now he's on all-fours to Lady Rachel Stokes, our pure
aristocracy; she walks as if she were going through a doorway, and
couldn't risk an eyelid.  I 'd like to see her tempting St. Anthony.
That's little Wreckham's wife: she's had as many adventures as Gil Blas
before he entered the Duke of Lerma's service.'  He reviewed several
ladies, certainly not very witty when malignant, as I remembered my
father to have said of him.  'The style of your Englishwoman is to keep
the nose exactly at one elevation, to show you're born to it.  They
daren't run a gamut, these women.  These Englishwomen are a fiction!  The
model of them is the nursery-miss, but they're like the names of true
lovers cut on the bark of a tree--awfully stiff and longitudinal with the
advance of time.  We've our Lady Jezebels, my boy!  They're in the pay of
the bishops, or the police, to make vice hideous.  The rest do the same
for virtue, and get their pay for it somewhere, I don't doubt; perhaps
from the newspapers, to keep up the fiction.  I tell you, these
Englishwomen have either no life at all in them, or they're nothing but
animal life.  'Gad, how they dizen themselves!  They've no other use for
their fingers.  The wealth of this country's frightful!'

Jorian seemed annoyed that he could not excite me to defend my
countrywomen; but I had begun to see that there was no necessity for the
sanguine to encounter the bilious on their behalf, and was myself
inclined to be critical.  Besides I was engaged in watching my father,
whose bearing toward the ladies he accosted did not dissatisfy my
critical taste, though I had repeated fears of seeing him overdo it.  He
summoned me to an introduction to the Countess Szezedy, a merry little
Hungarian dame.

'So,' said she at once, speaking German, 'you are to marry the romantic
head, the Princess Ottilia of Eppenwelzen!  I know her well.  I have met
her in Vienna.  Schone Seele, and bas bleu!  It's just those that are won
with a duel.  I know Prince Otto too.'  She prattled away, and asked me
whether the marriage was to take place in the Summer.  I was too
astounded to answer.

'No date is yet fixed,' my father struck in.

'It's the talk of London,' she said.

Before I could demand explanations of my father with regard to this
terrible rumour involving Ottilia, I found myself in the box of the City
widow, Lady Sampleman, a grievous person, of the complexion of the
autumnal bramble-leaf, whose first words were: 'Ah!  the young suitor!
And how is our German princess?'  I had to reply that the theme was more
of German princes than princesses in England.  'Oh! but,' said she, 'you
are having a--shall I call it--national revenge on them?  "I will take
one of your princesses," says you; and as soon as said done!  I'm dying
for a sight of her portrait.  Captain DeWitt declares her heavenly--I
mean, he says she is fair and nice, quite a lady-that of course!  And
never mind her not being rich.  You can do the decoration to the match.
H'm,' she perused my features; 'pale!  Lovelorn?  Excuse an old friend of
your father's.  One of his very oldest, I'd say, if it didn't impugn.
As such, proud of your alliance.  I am.  I speak of it everywhere--
everywhere.'

Here she dramatized the circulation of the gossip.  'Have you heard the
news?  No, what?  Fitz-George's son marries a princess of the German
realm.  Indeed!  True as gospel.  And how soon?  In a month; and now you
will see the dear, neglected man command the Court .  .  .  .'

I looked at my father: I felt stifling with confusion and rage.  He leant
over to her, imparting some ecstatic news about a great lady having
determined to call on her to regulate the affairs of an approaching grand
Ball, and under cover of this we escaped.

'If it were not,' said he, 'for the Chassediane--you are aware, Richie,
poor Jorian is lost to her?--he has fallen at her quicksilver feet.
She is now in London.  Half the poor fellow's income expended in
bouquets!  Her portrait, in the character of the widow Lefourbe, has
become a part of his dressing apparatus; he shaves fronting her playbill.
His first real affaire de coeur, and he is forty-five!  So he is taken in
the stomach.  That is why love is such a dangerous malady for middle age.
As I said, but for Jenny Chassediane, our Sampleman would be the fortune
for Jorian.  I have hinted it on both sides.  Women, Richie, are cleverer
than the illustrious Lord Nelson in not seeing what their inclinations
decline to see, and Jorian would do me any service in the world except
that one.  You are restless, my son?'

I begged permission to quit the house, and wait for him outside.  He, in
return, begged me most urgently to allow myself to be introduced to Lady
Edbury, the stepmother of Lord Destrier, now Marquis of Edbury; and,
using conversational pressure, he adjured me not to slight this lady,
adding, with more significance than the words conveyed, 'I am taking the
tide, Richie.'  The tide took me, and I bowed to a lady of impressive
languor, pale and young, with pleasant manners, showing her character
in outline, like a glove on the hand, but little of its quality.  She
accused my father of coming direct from 'that person's' box.  He replied
that he never forsook old friends.  'You should,' was her rejoinder.
It suggested to me an image of one of the sister Fates cutting a thread.

My heart sank when, from Lady Edbury too, I heard the allusion to Germany
and its princess.  'Some one told me she was dark?'

'Blonde,' my father corrected the report.

Lady Edbury 'thought it singular for a German woman of the Blood to be a
brunette.  They had not much dark mixture among them, particularly in the
North.  Her name?  She had forgotten the name of the princess.'

My father repeated: 'The Princess Ottilia, Princess of Eppenwelzen-
Sarkeld.'

'Brunette, you say?'

'The purest blonde.'

'A complexion?'

'A complexion to dazzle the righteous!'

Lady Edbury threw a flying glance in a mirror: 'The unrighteous you leave
to us then?'

They bandied the weariful shuttlecock of gallantry.  I bowed and fled.
My excuse was that I had seen Anna Penrhys in an upper tier of boxes, and
I made my way to her, doubting how I should be welcomed.  'The happy
woman is a German princess, we hear!' she set me shivering.  Her welcome
was perfectly unreserved and friendly.

She asked the name of the lady whose box I had quitted, and after
bending her opera-glass on it for a moment, said, with a certain air of
satisfaction, 'She is young'; which led me to guess that Lady Edbury was
reputed to be Anna's successor; but why the latter should be flattered by
the former's youth was one of the mysteries for me then.  Her aunt was
awakened from sleep by the mention of my name.  'Is the man here?' she
exclaimed, starting.  Anna smiled, and talked to me of my father, saying,
that she was glad to see me at his right hand, for he had a hard battle
to fight.  She spoke of him with affectionate interest in his fortunes;
no better proof of his generosity as well as hers could have been given
me.  I promised her heartily I would not be guilty of letting our
intimacy drop, and handed the ladies down to the crush-room, where I saw
my father leading Lady Edbury to her carriage, much observed.  Destrier,
the young marquis, coming in to meet the procession from other haunts,
linked his arm to his friend Witlington's, and said something in my
hearing of old 'Duke Fitz,' which provoked, I fancied, signs of amusement
equivalent to tittering in a small ring of the select assembly.  Lady
Sampleman's carriage was called.  'Another victim,' said a voice.  Anna
Penrhys walked straight out to find her footman and carriage for herself.

I stood alone in the street, wondering, fretting, filled with a variety
of ugly sensations, when my father joined me humming an air of the opera.
'I was looking for Jorian, Richie.  He had our Sampleman under his
charge.  He is off to the Chassediane.  Well!  And well, Richie, you
could not bear the absence from your dada?  You find me in full sail on
the tide.  I am at home, if our fortunes demand it, in a little German
principality, but there is,' he threw out his chest, 'a breadth in
London; nowhere else do I breathe with absolute freedom--so largely: and
this is my battlefield.  By the way, Lady Edbury accounts you complete;
which is no more to say than that she is a woman of taste.  The instance:
she positively would not notice that you wear a dress-coat of a foreign
cut.  Correct it to-morrow; my tailor shall wait on you.  I meant to
point out to you that when a London woman has not taken note of that, the
face and the man have made the right impression on her.  Richie, dear
boy, how shall I speak the delight I have in seeing you!  My arm in
yours, old Richie!  strolling home from the Fashion: this seems to me
what I dreamt of!  All in sound health at the Grange?  She too, the best
of women?'

'I have come on very particular business,' I interposed briefly.

He replied, 'I am alive to you, Richie; speak.'

'The squire has seen my bankers' book.  He thinks I've been drawing
rather wildly: no doubt he's right.  He wants some sort of explanation.
He consents to an interview with you.  I have come to ask you to go down
to him, sir.'

'To-morrow morning, without an hour's delay, my dear boy.  Very agreeable
will be the sight of old Riversley.  And in the daylight!'

'He prefers to meet you at Bulsted.  Captain Bulsted offers his house for
the purpose.  I have to warn you, sir, that we stand in a very
exceptional position.  The squire insists upon having a full account
of the money rendered to him.'

'I invite him to London, Richie.  I refer him to Dettermain and Newson.
I request him to compute the value of a princess.'

'You are aware that he will not come to your invitation.'

'Tell me, then, how is he to understand what I have established by the
expenditure, my son?  I refer him to Dettermain and Newson.'

'But you must know that he sets his face against legal proceedings
involving exposure.'

'But surely, Richie, exposure is the very thing we court.  The innocent,
the unjustly treated, court it.  We would be talked about; you shall hear
of us!  And into the bargain an hereditary princess.  Upon my faith, Mr.
Beltham, I think you have mighty little to complain of.'

My temper was beginning to chafe at the curb.  'As regards any feeling
about the money, personally, sir, you know I have none.  But I must speak
of one thing.  I have heard to-night, I confess with as much astonishment
as grief, the name .  .  .  I could not have guessed that I should hear
the princess's name associated with mine, and quite openly.'

'As a matter of course.' He nodded, and struck out a hand in wavy motion.

'Well, sir, if you can't feel for her or her family, be good enough to
think of me, and remember that I object to it.'

'For you all,' said he, buoyantly; 'I feel for you all, and I will act
for you all.  I bring the princess to your arms, my dear boy.  You have
written me word that the squire gives her a royal dowry--have you not?
My combinations permit of no escape to any one of you.  Nay, 'tis done.
I think for you--I feel for you--I act for you.  By heaven, you shall be
happy!  Sigh, Richie, sigh; your destiny is now entrusted to me!'

'I daresay I'm wasting my breath, sir, but I protest against false
pretences.  You know well that you have made use of the princess's name
for your own purposes.'

'Most indubitably, Richie, I have; and are they not yours?  I must have
social authority to succeed in our main enterprise.  Possibly the
princess's name serves for a temporary chandelier to cast light on us.
She belongs to us.  For her sake, we are bringing the house she enters
into order.  Thus, Richie, I could tell Mr. Beltham: you and he supply
the money, the princess the name, and I the energy, the skilfulness, and
the estimable cause.  I pay the princess for the use of her name with the
dowry, which is royal; I pay you with the princess, who is royal too; and
I, Richie, am paid by your happiness most royally.  Together, it is past
contest that we win.--Here, my little one,' he said to a woman, and
dropped a piece of gold into her hand, 'on condition that you go straight
home.' The woman thanked him and promised.  'As I was observing, we are
in the very tide of success.  Curious!  I have a slight inclination to
melancholy.  Success, quotha?  Why, hundreds before us have paced the
identical way homeward at night under these lamps between the mansions
and the park.  The bare thought makes them resemble a double line of
undertakers.  The tomb is down there at the end of them--costly or not.
At the age of four, on my birthday, I was informed that my mother lay
dead in her bed.  I remember to this day my astonishment at her not
moving.  "Her heart is broken," my old nurse said.  To me she appeared
intact.  Her sister took possession of me, and of her papers, and the
wedding-ring--now in the custody of Dettermain and Newson--together with
the portraits of both my parents; and she, poor soul, to sustain me, as I
verily believe--she had a great idea of my never asking unprofitably for
anything in life--bartered the most corroborative of the testificatory
documents, which would now make the establishment of my case a
comparatively light task.  Have I never spoken to you of my boyhood?  My
maternal uncle was a singing-master and master of elocution.  I am
indebted to him for the cultivation of my voice.  He taught me an
effective delivery of my sentences.  The English of a book of his called
The Speaker is still to my mind a model of elegance.  Remittances of
money came to him from an unknown quarter; and, with a break or two, have
come ever since up to this period.  My old nurse-heaven bless her--
resumed the occupation of washing.  I have stood by her tub, Richie,
blowing bubbles and listening to her prophecies of my exalted fortune for
hours.  On my honour, I doubt, I seriously doubt, if I have ever been
happier.  I depend just now--I have to avow it to you--slightly upon
stimulants .  .  .  of a perfectly innocuous character.  Mrs. Waddy will
allow me a pint of champagne.  The truth is, Richie--you see these two or
three poor pensioners of mine, honi soit qui mal y pense--my mother has
had hard names thrown at her.  The stones of these streets cry out to me
to have her vindicated.  I am not tired; but I want my wine.'

He repeated several times before he reached his housedoor, that he wanted
his wine, in a manner to be almost alarming.  His unwonted effort of
memory, the singular pictures of him which it had flashed before me, and
a sort of impatient compassion, made me forget my wrath.  I saw him take
his restorative at one draught.  He lay down on a sofa, and his valet
drew his boots off and threw a cloak over him.  Lying there, he wished me
gaily good-night.  Mrs. Waddy told me that he had adopted this system of
sleeping for the last month.  'Bless you, as many people call on him at
night now as in the day,' she said; and I was induced to suppose he had
some connection with the Press.  She had implicit faith in his powers of
constitution, and would affirm, that he had been the death of dozens whom
the attraction had duped to imitate his habits.  'He is now a Field-
Marshal on his campaign.'  She betrayed a twinkle of humour.  He must
himself have favoured her with that remark.  The report of the house-door
frequently shutting in the night suggested the passage of his aides-de-
camp.

Early in the morning, I found him pacing through the open doors of the
dining-room and the library dictating to a secretary at a desk, now and
then tossing a word to Dettermain and Newson's chief clerk.  The floor
was strewn with journals.  He wore Hessian boots; a voluminous black
cloak hung loosely from his shoulders.

'I am just settling the evening papers,' he said after greeting me, with
a show of formality in his warmth; and immediately added, 'That will do,
Mr. Jopson.  Put in a note--" Mr. Harry Lepel Richmond of Riversley and
Twn-y-glas, my son, takes no step to official distinction in his native
land save through the ordinary Parliamentary channels."  Your pardon,
Richie; presently.  I am replying to a morning paper.'

'What's this?  Why print my name?' I cried.

'Merely the correction of an error.  I have to insist, my dear boy, that
you claim no privileges: you are apart from them.  Mr. Jopson, I beseech
you, not a minute's delay in delivering that.  Fetch me from the
printer's my pamphlet this afternoon.  Mr. Jacobs, my compliments to
Dettermain and Newson: I request them to open proceedings instanter, and
let the world know of it.  Good-morning, gentlemen.'

And now, turning to me, my father fenced me with the whole weight of his
sententious volubility, which was the force of a river.  Why did my name
appear in the papers?  Because I was his son.  But he assured me that he
carefully separated me from public companionship with his fortunes, and
placed me on the side of my grandfather, as a plain gentleman of England,
the heir of the most colossal wealth possible in the country.

'I dis-sociate you from me, Richie, do you see?  I cause it to be
declared that you need, on no account, lean on me.  Jopson will bring you
my pamphlet--my Declaration of Rights--to peruse.  In the Press, in
Literature, at Law, and on social ground, I meet the enemy, and I claim
my own; by heaven, I do!  And I will down to the squire for a
distraction, if you esteem it necessary, certainly.  Half-a-dozen .
words to him.  Why, do you maintain him to be insensible to a title for
you?  No, no.  And ask my friends.  I refer him to any dozen of my
friends to convince him I have the prize almost in my possession.  Why,
dear boy, I have witnesses, living witnesses, to the ceremony.  Am I,
tell me, to be deprived of money now, once again, for the eleventh time?
Oh!  And put aside my duty to you, I protest I am bound in duty to her
who bore me--you have seen her miniature: how lovely that dear woman was!
how gentle!--bound in duty to her to clear her good name.  This does not
affect you .  .  . '

'Oh, but it does,' he allowed me to plead.

'Ay, through your love for your dada.'

He shook me by both hands.  I was touched with pity, and at the same time
in doubt whether it was not an actor that swayed me; for I was
discontented, and could not speak my discontent; I was overborne,
overflowed.  His evasion of the matter of my objections relating to the
princess I felt to be a palpable piece of artfulness, but I had to
acknowledge to myself that I knew what his argument would be, and how
overwhelmingly his defence of it would spring forth.  My cowardice shrank
from provoking a recurrence to the theme.  In fact, I submitted
consciously to his masterful fluency and emotional power, and so I was
carried on the tide with him, remaining in London several days to witness
that I was not the only one.  My father, admitting that money served him
in his conquest of society, and defying any other man to do as much with
it as he did, replied to a desperate insinuation of mine, 'This money I
spend I am actually putting out to interest as much as, or more than,
your grandad.'  He murmured confidentially, 'I have alarmed the
Government.  Indeed, I have warrant for saying I am in communication with
its agents.  They are bribing me; they are positively bribing me, Richie.
I receive my stipend annually.  They are mighty discreet.  So am I.  But
I push them hard.  I take what they offer: I renounce none of my claims.'

Janet wrote that it would be prudent for me to return.

'I am prepared,' my father said.  'I have only to meet Mr. Beltham in a
room--I stipulate that it shall be between square walls--to win him.  The
squire to back us, Richie, we have command of the entire world.  His
wealth, and my good cause, and your illustrious union--by the way, it is
announced definitely in this morning's paper.'

Dismayed, I asked what was announced.

'Read,' said he.  'This will be something to hand to Mr. Beltham at our
meeting.  I might trace it to one of the embassies, Imperial or Royal.
No matter--there it is.'

I read a paragraph in which Ottilia's name and titles were set down; then
followed mine and my wealthy heirship, and--woe was me in the perusing of
it!--a roundabout vindication of me as one not likely to be ranked as the
first of English commoners who had gained the hand of an hereditary
foreign princess, though it was undoubtedly in the light of a commoner
that I was most open to the congratulations of my countrymen upon my
unparalleled felicity.  A display of historical erudition cited the noble
inferiors by birth who had caught princesses to their arms--Charles,
Humphrey, William, John.  Under this list, a later Harry!

The paragraph closed by fixing the nuptials to take place before the end
of the Season.

I looked at my father to try a struggle with him.  The whole man was
efflorescent.

'Can't it be stopped?' I implored him.

He signified the impossibility in a burst of gesticulations, motions of
the mouth, smiling frowns; various patterns of an absolute negative
beating down opposition.

'Things printed can never be stopped, Richie.  Our Jorian compares them
to babies baptized.  They have a soul from that moment, and go on for
ever!--an admirable word of Jorian's.  And a word to you, Richie.  Will
you swear to me by the veracity of your lover's heart, that paragraph
affords you no satisfaction?  He cannot swear it!' my father exclaimed,
seeing me swing my shoulder round, and he made me feel that it would have
been a false oath if I had sworn it.  But I could have sworn, that I had
rather we two were at the bottom of the sea than that it should come
under the princess's eyes.  I read it again.  It was in print.  It looked
like reality.  It was at least the realization of my dream.  But this
played traitor and accused me of being crowned with no more than a dream.
The sole practical thing I could do was to insist on our starting for
Riversley immediately, to make sure of my own position.  'Name your hour,
Richie,' my father said confidently: and we waited.

A rather plainer view of my father's position, as I inclined to think,
was afforded to me one morning at his breakfast-table, by a conversation
between him and Jorian DeWitt, who brought me a twisted pink note from
Mdlle. Chassediane, the which he delivered with the air of a dog made to
disgorge a bone, and he was very cool to me indeed.  The cutlets of
Alphonse were subject to snappish criticism.  'I assume,' he said, 'the
fellow knew I was coming?'

'He saw it in my handwriting of yesterday,' replied my father.  'But be
just to him, acknowledge that he is one of the few that perform their
daily duties with a tender conscience.'

'This English climate has bedevilled the fellow!  He peppers his dishes
like a mongrel Indian reared on mangoes.'

'Ring him up, ring him up, Jorian.  All I beg of you is not to disgust
him with life, for he quits any service in the world to come to me, and,
in fact, he suits me.'

'Exactly so: you spoil him.'

My father shrugged.  'The state of the case is, that your stomach is
growing delicate, friend Jorian.'

'The actual state of the case being, that my palate was never keener, and
consequently my stomach knows its business.'

'You should have tried the cold turbot with oil and capers.'

'Your man had better stick to buttered eggs, in my opinion.'

'Say, porridge!'

'No, I'll be hanged if I think he's equal to a bowl of porridge.'

'Careme might have confessed to the same!'

'With this difference,' cried Jorian in a heat, 'that he would never have
allowed the thought of any of your barbarous messes to occur to a man at
table.  Let me tell you, Roy, you astonish me: up till now I have never
known you guilty of the bad taste of defending a bad dish on your own
board.'

'Then you will the more readily pardon me, Jorian.'

'Oh, I pardon you,' Jorian sneered, tripped to the carpet by such ignoble
mildness.  'A breakfast is no great loss.'

My father assured him he would have a serious conversation with Alphonse,
for whom he apologized by saying that Alphonse had not, to his knowledge,
served as hospital cook anywhere, and was therefore quite possibly not
sufficiently solicitous for appetites and digestions of invalids.

Jorian threw back his head as though to discharge a spiteful sarcasm with
good aim; but turning to me, said, 'Harry, the thing must be done; your
father must marry.  Notoriety is the season for a pick and choice of the
wealthiest and the loveliest.  I refuse to act the part of warming-pan
any longer; I refuse point blank.  It's not a personal feeling on my
part; my advice is that of a disinterested friend, and I tell you
candidly, Roy, set aside the absurd exhibition of my dancing attendance
on that last rose of Guildhall,--egad, the alderman went like Summer, and
left us the very picture of a fruity Autumn,--I say you can't keep her
hanging on the tree of fond expectation for ever.  She'll drop.'

'Catch her, Jorian; you are on guard.'

'Upwards of three hundred thousand, if a penny, Roy Richmond!  Who?  I?
I am not a fortune-hunter.'

'Nor am I, friend Jorian.'

'No, it 's because you're not thorough: you 'll fall between the stools.'

My father remarked that he should visit this upon Mr. Alphonse.

'You shook off that fine Welsh girl, and she was in your hand--the act of
a madman!' Jorian continued.  'You're getting older: the day will come
when you're a flat excitement.  You know the first Lady Edbury spoilt one
of your best chances when you had the market.  Now you're trifling with
the second.  She's the head of the Light Brigade, but you might fix her
down, if she's not too much in debt.  You 're not at the end of your run,
I dare say.  Only, my good Roy, let me tell you, in life you mustn't wait
for the prize of the race till you touch the goal--if you prefer
metaphor.  You generally come forward about every seven years or so.
Add on another seven, and women'll begin to think.  You can't beat Time,
mon Roy.'

'So,' said my father, 'I touch the goal, and women begin to think, and I
can't beat time to them.  Jorian, your mind is in a state of confusion.
I do not marry.'

'Then, Roy Richmond, hear what a friend says .  .  .'

'I do not marry, Jorian, and you know my reasons.'

'Sentiments!'

'They are a part of my life.'

'Just as I remarked, you are not thorough.  You have genius and courage
out of proportion, and you are a dead failure, Roy; because, no sooner
have you got all Covent Garden before you for the fourth or fifth time,
than in go your hands into your pockets, and you say--No, there's an
apple I can't have, so I'll none of these; and, by the way, the apple
must be tolerably withered by this time.  And you know perfectly well
(for you don't lack common sense at a shaking, Roy Richmond), that you're
guilty of simple madness in refusing to make the best of your situation.
You haven't to be taught what money means.  With money--and a wife to
take care of it, mind you--you are pre-eminently the man for which you
want to be recognized.  Without it--Harry 'll excuse me, I must speak
plainly--you're a sort of a spectacle of a bob-cherry, down on your luck,
up on your luck, and getting dead stale and never bitten; a familiar
curiosity'

Jorian added, 'Oh, by Jove!  it's not nice to think of.' My father said:
'Harry, I am sure, will excuse you for talking, in your extreme
friendliness, of matters that he and I have not--and they interest us
deeply--yet thought fit to discuss.  And you may take my word for it,
Jorian, that I will give Alphonse his medical dose.  I am quite of your
opinion that the kings of cooks require it occasionally.  Harry will
inform us of Mdlle. Chassediane's commands.'

The contents of the letter permitted me to read it aloud.  She desired to
know how she could be amused on the Sunday.

'We will undertake it,' said my father.  'I depute the arrangements to
you, Jorian.  Respect the prejudices, and avoid collisions, that is all.'

Captain DeWitt became by convenient stages cheerful, after the pink slip
of paper had been made common property, and from a seriously-advising
friend, in his state of spite, relapsed to the idle and shadow-like
associate, when pleased.  I had to thank him for the gift of fresh
perceptions.  Surely it would be as well if my father could get a woman
of fortune to take care of him!

We had at my request a consultation with Dettermain and Newson on the eve
of the journey to Riversley, Temple and Jorian DeWitt assisting.  Strange
documentary evidence was unfolded and compared with the date of a royal
decree: affidavits of persons now dead; a ring, the ring; fans, and lace,
and handkerchiefs with notable initials; jewelry stamped 'To the Divine
Anastasia' from an adoring Christian name: old brown letters that
shrieked 'wife' when 'charmer' seemed to have palled; oaths of fidelity
ran through them like bass notes.  Jorian held up the discoloured sheets
of ancient paper saying:

'Here you behold the mummy of the villain Love.' Such love as it was--the
love of the privileged butcher for the lamb.  The burden of the letters,
put in epigram, was rattlesnake and bird.  A narrative of Anastasia's
sister, Elizabeth, signed and sealed, with names of witnesses appended,
related in brief bald English the history of the events which had killed
her.  It warmed pathetically when dwelling on the writer's necessity to
part with letters and papers of greater moment, that she might be enabled
to sustain and educate her sister's child.  She named the certificate;
she swore to the tampering with witnesses.  The number and exact
indication of the house where the ceremony took place was stated--a house
in Soho;--the date was given, and the incident on that night of the rape
of the beautiful Miss Armett by mad Lord Beaumaris at the theatre doors,
aided by masked ruffians, after Anastasia's performance of Zamira.

'There are witnesses I know to be still living, Mr. Temple,' my father
said, seeing the young student-at-law silent and observant.  'One of them
I have under my hand; I feed him.  Listen to this.'

He read two or three insufferable sentences from one of the love-
epistles, and broke down.  I was ushered aside by a member of the firm to
inspect an instrument prepared to bind me as surety for the costs of the
appeal.  I signed it.  We quitted the attorney's office convinced
(I speak of Temple and myself) that we had seen the shadow of something.




CHAPTER XL

MY FATHER'S MEETING WITH MY GRANDFATHER

My father's pleasure on the day of our journey to Bulsted was to drive me
out of London on a lofty open chariot, with which he made the circuit of
the fashionable districts, and caused innumerable heads to turn.  I would
have preferred to go the way of other men, to be unnoticed, but I was
subject to an occasional glowing of undefined satisfaction in the
observance of the universally acknowledged harmony existing between his
pretensions, his tastes and habits, and his person.  He contrived by I
know not what persuasiveness and simplicity of manner and speech to
banish from me the idea that he was engaged in playing a high stake; and
though I knew it, and he more than once admitted it, there was an ease
and mastery about him that afforded me some degree of positive comfort
still.  I was still most securely attached to his fortunes.  Supposing
the ghost of dead Hector to have hung over his body when the inflamed son
of Peleus whirled him at his chariot wheels round Troy, he would, with
his natural passions sobered by Erebus, have had some of my reflections
upon force and fate, and my partial sense of exhilaration in the
tremendous speed of the course during the whole of the period my father
termed his Grand Parade.  I showed just such acquiescence or resistance
as were superinduced by the variations of the ground.  Otherwise I was
spell-bound; and beyond interdicting any further public mention of my
name or the princess's, I did nothing to thwart him.  It would have been
no light matter.

We struck a station at a point half-way down to Bulsted, and found little
Kiomi there, thunder in her brows, carrying a bundle, and purchasing a
railway-ticket, not to travel in our direction.  She gave me the singular
answer that she could not tell me where her people were; nor would she
tell me whither she was going, alone, and by rail.  I chanced to speak of
Heriot.  One of her sheet-lightning flashes shot out.  'He won't be at
Bulsted,' she said, as if that had a significance.  I let her know we
were invited to Bulsted.  'Oh, she 's at home'; Kiomi blinked, and her
features twitched like whip-cord.  I saw that she was possessed by one of
her furies.  That girl's face had the art of making me forget beautiful
women, and what beauty was by comparison.

It happened that the squire came across us as we were rounding the slope
of larch and fir plantation near a part of the Riversley hollows, leading
to the upper heath-land, where, behind a semicircle of birches, Bulsted
lay.  He was on horseback, and called hoarsely to the captain's coachman,
who was driving us, to pull up.  'Here, Harry,' he sang out to me, in the
same rough voice, 'I don't see why we should bother Captain William.
It's a bit of business, not pleasure.  I've got the book in my pocket.
You ask--is it convenient to step into my bailiff's cottage hard by, and
run through it?  Ten minutes 'll tell me all I want to know.  I want it
done with.  Ask.'

My father stood up and bowed, bareheaded.

My grandfather struck his hat and bobbed.

'Mr. Beltham, I trust I see you well.'

'Better, sir, when I've got rid of a damned unpleasant bit o' business.'

'I offer you my hearty assistance.'

'Do you?  Then step down and come into my bailiff's.'

'I come, sir.'

My father alighted from the carriage.  The squire cast his gouty leg to
be quit of his horse, but not in time to check my father's advances and
ejaculations of condolence.

'Gout, Mr. Beltham, is a little too much a proof to us of a long line of
ancestry.'

His hand and arm were raised in the form of a splint to support the
squire, who glared back over his cheekbone, horrified that he could not
escape the contact, and in too great pain from arthritic throes to
protest: he resembled a burglar surprised by justice.  'What infernal
nonsense .  .  , fellow talking now?'  I heard him mutter between his
hoppings and dancings, with one foot in the stirrup and a toe to earth,
the enemy at his heel, and his inclination half bent upon swinging to the
saddle again.

I went to relieve him.  'Damn!  .  .  .  Oh, it's you,' said he.

The squire directed Uberly, acting as his groom, to walk his horse up and
down the turf fronting young Tom Eckerthy's cottage, and me to remain
where I was; then hobbled up to the door, followed at a leisurely march
by my father.  The door opened.  My father swept the old man in before
him, with a bow and flourish that admitted of no contradiction, and the
door closed on them.  I caught a glimpse of Uberly screwing his wrinkles
in a queer grimace, while he worked his left eye and thumb expressively
at the cottage, by way of communicating his mind to Samuel, Captain
Bulsted's coachman; and I became quite of his opinion as to the nature of
the meeting, that it was comical and not likely to lead to much.  I
thought of the princess and of my hope of her depending upon such an
interview as this.  From that hour when I stepped on the sands of the
Continent to the day of my quitting them, I had been folded in a dream:
I had stretched my hands to the highest things of earth, and here now was
the retributive material money-question, like a keen scythe-blade!

The cottage-door continued shut.  The heaths were darkening.  I heard a
noise of wheels, and presently the unmistakable voice of Janet saying,
'That must be Harry.'  She was driving my aunt Dorothy.  Both of them
hushed at hearing that the momentous duel was in progress.  Janet's first
thought was of the squire.  'I won't have him ride home in the dark,'
she said, and ordered Uberly to walk the horse home.  The ladies had a
ladies' altercation before Janet would permit my aunt to yield her place
and proceed on foot, accompanied by me.  Naturally the best driver of the
two kept the whip.  I told Samuel to go on to Bulsted, with word that we
were coming: and Janet, nodding bluntly, agreed to direct my father as to
where he might expect to find me on the Riversley road.  My aunt Dorothy
and I went ahead slowly: at her request I struck a pathway to avoid the
pony-carriage, which was soon audible; and when Janet, chattering to the
squire, had gone by, we turned back to intercept my father.  He was
speechless at the sight of Dorothy Beltham.  At his solicitation, she
consented to meet him next day; his account of the result of the
interview was unintelligible to her as well as to me.  Even after leaving
her at the park-gates, I could get nothing definite from him, save that
all was well, and that the squire was eminently practical; but he
believed he had done an excellent evening's work.  'Yes,' said he,
rubbing his hands, 'excellent!  making due allowances for the
emphatically commoner's mind we have to deal with.'  And then to change
the subject he dilated on that strange story of the man who, an enormous
number of years back in the date of the world's history, carried his
little son on his shoulders one night when the winds were not so
boisterous, though we were deeper in Winter, along the identical road we
traversed, between the gorsemounds, across the heaths, with yonder
remembered fir-tree clump in sight and the waste-water visible to
footfarers rounding under the firs.  At night-time he vowed, that as far
as nature permitted it, he had satisfied the squire--'completely
satisfied him, I mean,' he said, to give me sound sleep.  'No doubt of
it; no doubt of it, Richie.'

He won Julia's heart straight off, and Captain Bulsted's profound
admiration.  'Now I know the man I've always been adoring since you were
so high, Harry,' said she.  Captain Bulsted sighed: 'Your husband bows to
your high good taste, my dear.' They relished him sincerely, and between
them and him I suffered myself to be dandled once more into a state of
credulity, until I saw my aunt Dorothy in the afternoon subsequent to the
appointed meeting.  His deep respect and esteem for her had stayed him
from answering any of her questions falsely.  To that extent he had been
veracious.  It appeared, that driven hard by the squire, who would have
no waving of flags and lighting of fireworks in a matter of business, and
whose 'commoner's mind' chafed sturdily at a hint of the necessity for
lavish outlays where there was a princess to win, he had rallied on the
fiction that many of the cheques, standing for the bulk of the sums
expended, were moneys borrowed by him of me, which he designed to repay,
and was prepared to repay instantly--could in fact, the squire demanding
it, repay, as it were, on the spot; for behold, these borrowed moneys
were not spent; they were moneys invested in undertakings, put out to
high rates of interest; moneys that perhaps it would not be adviseable to
call in without a season of delay; still, if Mr. Beltham, acting for his
grandson and heir, insisted, it should be done.  The moneys had been
borrowed purely to invest them with profit on my behalf: a gentleman's
word of honour was pledged to it.

The squire grimly gave him a couple of months to make it good.

Dorothy Beltham and my father were together for about an hour at
Eckerthy's farm.  She let my father kiss her hand when he was bending to
take his farewell of her, but held her face away.  He was in manifest
distress, hardly master of his voice, begged me to come to him soon, and
bowing, with 'God bless you, madam, my friend on earth!' turned his heel,
bearing his elastic frame lamentably.  A sad or a culprit air did not
befit him: one reckoned up his foibles and errors when seeing him under a
partly beaten aspect.  At least, I did; not my dear aunt, who was
compassionate of him, however thoroughly she condemned his ruinous
extravagance, and the shifts and evasions it put him to.  She feared,
that instead of mending the difficulty, he had postponed merely to
exaggerate it in the squire's mind; and she was now of opinion that the
bringing him down to meet the squire was very bad policy, likely to
result in danger to my happiness; for, if the money should not be
forthcoming on the date named, all my father's faults would be
transferred to me as his accomplice, both in the original wastefulness
and the subterfuges invented to conceal it.  I recollected that a sum of
money had really been sunk in Prince Ernest's coal-mine.  My aunt said
she hoped for the best.

Mounting the heaths, we looked back on the long yellow road, where the
carriage conveying my father to the railway-station was visible, and
talked of him, and of the elements of antique tragedy in his history,
which were at that period, let me say, precisely what my incessant mental
efforts were strained to expel from the idea of our human life.  The
individual's freedom was my tenet of faith; but pity pleaded for him that
he was well-nigh irresponsible, was shamefully sinned against at his
birth, one who could charge the Gods with vindictiveness, and complain of
the persecution of natal Furies.  My aunt Dorothy advised me to take him
under my charge, and sell his house and furniture, make him live in
bachelor chambers with his faithful waiting-woman and a single
manservant.

'He will want money even to do that,' I remarked.

She murmured, 'Is there not some annual income paid to him?'

Her quick delicacy made her redden in alluding so closely to his personal
affairs, and I loved her for the nice feeling.  'It was not much,' I
said.  The miserable attempt to repair the wrongs done to him with this
small annuity angered me--and I remembered, little pleased, the foolish
expectations he founded on this secret acknowledgement of the justice of
his claims.  'We won't talk of it,' I pursued.  'I wish he had never
touched it.  I shall interdict him.'

'You would let him pay his debts with it, Harry?'

'I am not sure, aunty, that he does not incur a greater debt by accepting
it.'

'One's wish would be, that he might not ever be in need of it.'

'Ay, or never be caring to find the key of it.'

'That must be waste of time,' she said.

I meant something else, but it was useless to tell her so.




CHAPTER XLI

COMMENCEMENT OF THE SPLENDOURS AND PERPLEXITIES OF MY FATHER'S
GRAND PARADE

Janet, in reply to our inquiries as to the condition of the squire's
temper, pointed out in the newspaper a notification of a grand public
Ball to be given by my father, the first of a series of three, and said
that the squire had seen it and shrugged.  She thought there was no
positive cause for alarm, even though my father should fail of his word;
but expressed her view decidedly, that it was an unfortunate move to
bring him between the squire and me, and so she blamed Captain Bulsted.
This was partly for the reason that the captain and his wife, charmed by
my father, were for advocating his merits at the squire's table: our
ingenuity was ludicrously taxed to mystify him on the subject of their
extravagant eulogies.  They told him they had been invited, and were
going to the great London Balls.

'Subscription Balls?' asked the squire.

'No, sir,' rejoined the captain.

'Tradesmen's Balls, d' ye call 'em, then?'

'No, sir; they are Balls given by a distinguished gentleman.'

'Take care it's not another name for tradesmen's Balls, William.'

'I do not attend tradesmen's Balls, sir.'

'Take care o' that, William.'

The captain was very angry.  'What,' said he, turning to us, 'what does
the squire mean by telling an officer of the Royal Navy that he is
conducting his wife to a tradesmen's Ball?'

Julia threatened malicious doings for the insult.  She and the squire had
a controversy upon the explication of the word gentleman, she describing
my father's appearance and manners to the life.  'Now listen to me,
squire.  A gentleman, I say, is one you'd say, if he wasn't born a duke,
he ought to have been, and more shame to the title!  He turns the key of
a lady's heart with a twinkle of his eye.  He 's never mean--what he has
is yours.  He's a true friend; and if he doesn't keep his word, you know
in a jiffy it's the fault of affairs; and stands about five feet eleven:
he's a full-blown man': and so forth.

The squire listened, and perspired at finding the object of his
abhorrence crowned thus in the unassailable realms of the abstract.
Julia might have done it more elegantly; but her husband was rapturous
over her skill in portraiture, and he added: 'That's a gentleman, squire;
and that 's a man pretty sure to be abused by half the world.'

'Three-quarters, William,' said the squire; 'there's about the
computation for your gentleman's creditors, I suspect.'

'Ay, sir; well,' returned the captain, to whom this kind of fencing in
the dark was an affliction, 'we make it up in quality--in quality.'

'I 'll be bound you do,' said the squire; 'and so you will so long as
you 're only asked to dance to the other poor devils' fiddling.'

Captain Bulsted bowed.  'The last word to you, squire.'

The squire nodded.  'I 'll hand it to your wife, William.'

Julia took it graciously.  'A perfect gentleman! perfect! confound his
enemies!'

'Why, ma'am, you might keep from swearing,' the squire bawled.

'La!  squire,' said she, 'why, don't you know the National Anthem?'

'National Anthem, ma'am!  and a fellow, a velvet-tongued--confound him,
if you like.'

'And where's my last word, if you please?' Julia jumped up, and dropped a
provoking curtsey.

'You silly old grandada!' said Janet, going round to him; 'don't you see
the cunning woman wants to dress you in our garments, and means to boast
of it to us while you're finishing your wine?'

The old man fondled her.  I could have done the same, she bent over him
with such homely sweetness.  'One comfort, you won't go to these
gingerbread Balls,' he said.

'I'm not invited,' she moaned comically.

'No; nor shan't be, while I can keep you out of bad company.'

'But, grandada, I do like dancing.

'Dance away, my dear; I've no objection.'

'But where's the music?'

'Oh, you can always have music.'

'But where are my partners?'

The squire pointed at me.

'You don't want more than one at a time, eh?' He corrected his error:
'No, the fellow's engaged in another quadrille.  Mind you, Miss Janet,
he shall dance to your tune yet.  D' ye hear, sir?' The irritation
excited by Captain Bulsted and Julia broke out in fury.  'Who's that
fellow danced when Rome was burning?'

'The Emperor Nero,' said Janet.  'He killed Harry's friend Seneca in the
eighty-somethingth year of his age; an old man, and--hush, grandada!'
She could not check him.

'Hark you, Mr. Harry; dance your hardest up in town with your rips and
reps, and the lot of ye; all very fine while the burning goes on: you
won't see the fun of dancing on the ashes.  A nice king of Rome Nero was
next morning!  By the Lord, if I couldn't swear you'll be down on your
knees to an innocent fresh-hearted girl 's worth five hundred of the crew
you're for partnering now while you've a penny for the piper.'

Janet shut his mouth, kissed him, and held his wine up.  He drank, and
thumped the table.  'We 'll have parties here, too.  The girl shall have
her choice of partners: she shan't be kept in the background by a young
donkey.  Take any six of your own age, and six sensible men, to try you
by your chances.  By George, the whole dozen 'd bring you in non-compos.
You've only got the women on your side because of a smart face and
figure.'

Janet exclaimed indignantly, 'Grandada, I'm offended with you'; and
walked out on a high step.

'Come, if he has the women on his side,' said Captain Bulsted, mildly.

'He'll be able to go partnering and gallopading as long as his banker 'll
let him, William--like your gentleman!  That's true.  We shall soon see.'

'I leave my character in your hands, sir,' said I, rising.  'If you would
scold me in private, I should prefer it, on behalf of your guests; but I
am bound to submit to your pleasure, and under any circumstances I
remember, what you appear to forget, that you are my grandfather.'

So saying, I followed the ladies.  It was not the wisest of speeches, and
happened, Captain Bulsted informed me, to be delivered in my father's
manner, for the squire pronounced emphatically that he saw very little
Beltham in me.  The right course would have been for me to ask him then
and there whether I had his consent to start for Germany.  But I was the
sport of resentments and apprehensions; and, indeed, I should not have
gone.  I could not go without some title beyond that of the heir of great
riches.

Janet kept out of my sight.  I found myself strangely anxious to console
her: less sympathetic, perhaps, than desirous to pour out my sympathy in
her ear, which was of a very pretty shape, with a soft unpierced lobe.
We danced together at the Riversley Ball, given by the squire on the
night of my father's Ball in London.  Janet complimented me upon having
attained wisdom.  'Now we get on well,' she said.  'Grandada only wants
to see us friendly, and feel that I am not neglected.'

The old man, a martyr to what he considered due to his favourite, endured
the horror of the Ball until suppertime, and kept his eyes on us two.  He
forgot, or pretended to forget, my foreign engagement altogether, though
the announcement in the newspapers was spoken of by Sir Roderick and Lady
Echester and others.

'How do you like that?' he remarked to me, seeing her twirled away by one
of the young Rubreys.

'She seems to like it, sir,' I replied.

'Like it!' said he.  'In my day you wouldn't have caught me letting the
bloom be taken off the girl I cared for by a parcel o' scampish young
dogs.  Right in their arms!  Look at her build.  She's strong; she's
healthy; she goes round like a tower.  If you want a girl to look like a
princess!'

His eulogies were not undeserved.  But she danced as lightly and happily
with Mr. Fred Rubrey as with Harry Richmond.  I congratulated myself on
her lack of sentiment.  Later, when in London, where Mlle.  Jenny
Chassediane challenged me to perilous sarabandes, I wished that Janet had
ever so small a grain of sentiment, for a preservative to me.  Ottilia
glowed high and distant; she sent me no message; her image did not step
between me and disorder.  The whole structure of my idea of my superior
nature seemed to be crumbling to fragments; and beginning to feel in
despair that I was wretchedly like other men, I lost by degrees the sense
of my hold on her.  It struck me that my worst fears of the effect
produced on the princess's mind by that last scene in the lake-palace
must be true, and I abandoned hope.  Temple thought she tried me too
cruelly.  Under these circumstances I became less and less resolutely
disposed to renew the forlorn conflict with my father concerning his
prodigal way of living.  'Let it last as long as I have a penny to
support him!' I exclaimed.  He said that Dettermain and Newson were now
urging on his case with the utmost despatch in order to keep pace with
him, but that the case relied for its life on his preserving a great
appearance.  He handed me his division of our twin cheque-books, telling
me he preferred to depend on his son for supplies, and I was in the mood
to think this a partial security.

'But you can take what there is,' I said.

'On the contrary, I will accept nothing but minor sums--so to speak, the
fractional shillings; though I confess I am always bewildered by silver,'
said he.

I questioned him upon his means of carrying on his expenditure.  His
answer was to refer to the pavement of the city of London.  By paving
here and there he had, he informed me, made a concrete for the wheels to
roll on.  He calculated that he now had credit for the space of three new
years--ample time for him to fight his fight and win his victory.

'My tradesmen are not like the tradesmen of other persons,' he broke out
with a curious neigh of supreme satisfaction in that retinue.  'They
believe in me.  I have de facto harnessed them to my fortunes; and if you
doubt me on the point of success, I refer you to Dettermain and Newson.
All I stipulate for is to maintain my position in society to throw a
lustre on my Case.  So much I must do.  My failures hitherto have been
entirely owing to the fact that I had not my son to stand by me.'

'Then you must have money, sir.'

'Yes, money.'

'Then what can you mean by refusing mine?'

'I admit the necessity for it, my son.  Say you hand me a cheque for a
temporary thousand.  Your credit and mine in conjunction can replace it
before the expiration of the two months.  Or,' he meditated, 'it might be
better to give a bond or so to a professional lender, and preserve the
account at your bankers intact.  The truth is, I have, in my interview
with the squire, drawn in advance upon the, material success I have a
perfect justification to anticipate, and I cannot allow the old gentleman
to suppose that I retrench for the purpose of giving a large array of
figures to your bankers' book.  It would be sheer madness.  I cannot do
it.  I cannot afford to do it.  When you are on a runaway horse, I prefer
to say a racehorse,--Richie, you must ride him.  You dare not throw up
the reins.  Only last night Wedderburn, appealing to Loftus, a practical
sailor, was approved when he offered--I forget the subject-matter--the
illustration of a ship on a lee-shore; you are lost if you do not spread
every inch of canvas to the gale.  Retrenchment at this particular moment
is perdition.  Count our gains, Richie.  We have won a princess .  .  .'

I called to him not to name her.

He persisted: 'Half a minute.  She is won; she is ours.  And let me, in
passing,--bear with me one second--counsel you to write to Prince Ernest
instanter, proposing formally for his daughter, and, in your
grandfather's name, state her dowry at fifty thousand per annum.'

'Oh, you forget!' I interjected.

'No, Richie, I do not forget that you are off a leeshore; you are mounted
on a skittish racehorse, with, if you like, a New Forest fly operating
within an inch of his belly-girths.  Our situation is so far ticklish,
and prompts invention and audacity.'

'You must forget, sir, that in the present state of the squire's mind, I
should be simply lying in writing to the prince that he offers a dowry.'

'No, for your grandfather has yielded consent.'

'By implication, you know he withdraws it.'

'But if I satisfy him that you have not been extravagant?'

'I must wait till he is satisfied.'

'The thing is done, Richie, done.  I see it in advance--it is done!
Whatever befalls me, you, my dear boy, in the space of two months, may
grasp--your fortune.  Besides, here is my hand.  I swear by it, my son,
that I shall satisfy the squire.  I go farther; I say I shall have the
means to refund to you--the means, the money.  The marriage is announced
in our prints for the Summer--say early June.  And I undertake that you,
the husband of the princess, shall be the first gentleman in England--
that is, Europe.  Oh!  not ruling a coterie: not dazzling the world with
entertainments.' He thought himself in earnest when he said, 'I attach no
mighty importance to these things, though there is no harm I can perceive
in leading the fashion--none that I see in having a consummate style.
I know your taste, and hers, Richie, the noble lady's.  She shall govern
the intellectual world--your poets, your painters, your men of science.
They reflect a beautiful sovereign mistress more exquisitely than almost
aristocracy does.  But you head our aristocracy also.  You are a centre
of the political world.  So I scheme it.  Between you, I defy the Court
to rival you.  This I call distinction.  It is no mean aim, by heaven!
I protest, it is an aim with the mark in sight, and not out of range.'

He whipped himself up to one of his oratorical frenzies, of which a
cheque was the common fruit.  The power of his persuasiveness in speech,
backed by the spectacle of his social accomplishments, continued to
subdue me, and I protested only inwardly even when I knew that he was
gambling with fortune.  I wrote out many cheques, and still it appeared
to me that they were barely sufficient to meet the current expenses of
his household.  Temple and I calculated that his Grand Parade would try
the income of a duke, and could but be a matter of months.  Mention of it
reached Riversley from various quarters, from Lady Maria Higginson, from
Captain Bulsted and his wife, and from Sir Roderick Ilchester, who said
to me, with fine accentuation, 'I have met your father.'  Sir Roderick,
an Englishman reputed of good breeding, informed the son that he had
actually met the father in lofty society, at Viscountess Sedley's, at
Lady Dolchester's, at Bramham DeWitt's, and heard of him as a frequenter
of the Prussian and Austrian Embassy entertainments; and also that he was
admitted to the exclusive dinner-parties of the Countess de Strode,
'which are,' he observed, in the moderated tone of an astonishment
devoting itself to propagation, 'the cream of society.' Indubitably,
then, my father was an impostor: more Society proved it.  The squire
listened like one pelted by a storm, sure of his day to come at the
close of the two months.  I gained his commendation by shunning the
metropolitan Balls, nor did my father press me to appear at them.  It was
tacitly understood between us that I should now and then support him at
his dinner-table, and pass bowing among the most select of his great
ladies.  And this I did, and I felt at home with them, though I had to
bear with roughnesses from one or two of the more venerable dames, which
were not quite proper to good breeding.  Old Lady Kane, great-aunt of the
Marquis of Edbury, was particularly my tormentor, through her plain-
spoken comments on my father's legal suit; for I had to listen to her
without wincing, and agree in her general contempt of the Georges, and
foil her queries coolly, when I should have liked to perform Jorian
DeWitt's expressed wish to 'squeeze the acid out of her in one grip, and
toss her to the Gods that collect exhausted lemons.' She took
extraordinary liberties with me.

'Why not marry an Englishwoman?  Rich young men ought to choose wives
from their own people, out of their own sets.  Foreign women never get on
well in this country, unless they join the hounds to hunt the husband.'

She cited naturalized ladies famous for the pastime.  Her world and its
outskirts she knew thoroughly, even to the fact of my grandfather's
desire that I should marry Janet Ilchester.  She named a duke's daughter,
an earl's.  Of course I should have to stop the scandal: otherwise the
choice I had was unrestricted.  My father she evidently disliked, but she
just as much disliked an encounter with his invincible bonhomie and
dexterous tongue.  She hinted at family reasons for being shy of him,
assuring me that I was not implicated in them.

'The Guelph pattern was never much to my taste,' she said, and it
consoled me with the thought that he was not ranked as an adventurer in
the houses he entered.  I learned that he was supposed to depend chiefly
on my vast resources.  Edbury acted the part of informant to the
inquisitive harridan: 'Her poor dear good-for-nothing Edbury! whose only
cure would be a nice, well-conducted girl, an heiress.' She had cast her
eye on Anna Penrhys, but considered her antecedents doubtful.  Spotless
innocence was the sole receipt for Edbury's malady.  My father, in a fit
of bold irony, proposed Lady Kane for President of his Tattle and Scandal
Club,--a club of ladies dotted with select gentlemen, the idea of which
Jorian DeWitt claimed the merit of starting, and my father surrendered it
to him, with the reservation, that Jorian intended an association of
backbiters pledged to reveal all they knew, whereas the Club, in its
present form, was an engine of morality and decency, and a social
safeguard, as well as an amusement.  It comprised a Committee of
Investigation, and a Court of Appeal; its object was to arraign slander.
Lady Kane declined the honour.  'I am not a washerwoman,' she said to me,
and spoke of where dirty linen should be washed, and was distressingly
broad in her innuendoes concerning Edbury's stepmother.  This Club sat
and became a terror for a month, adding something to my father's
reputation.  His inexhaustible conversational art and humour gave it such
vitality as it had.  Ladies of any age might apply for admission when
well seconded: gentlemen under forty-five years were rigidly excluded,
and the seniors must also have passed through the marriage ceremony.

Outside tattle and scandal declared, that the Club was originated to
serve as a club for Lady Edbury, but I chose to have no opinion upon what
I knew nothing of.

These matters were all ephemeral, and freaks; they produced, however,
somewhat of the same effect on me as on my father, in persuading me that
he was born for the sphere he occupied, and rendering me rather callous
as to the sources of ways and means.  I put my name to a bond for several
thousand pounds, in conjunction with Lord Edbury, thinking my father
right in wishing to keep my cheque-book unworried, lest the squire should
be seized with a spasm of curiosity before the two months were over.
'I promise you I surprise him,' my father said repeatedly.  He did not
say how: I had the suspicion that he did not know.  His confidence and my
growing recklessness acted in unison.

Happily the newspapers were quiet.  I hoped consequently to find peace
at Riversley; but there the rumours of the Grand Parade were fabulous,
thanks to Captain Bulsted and Julia, among others.  These two again
provoked an outbreak of rage from the squire, and I, after hearing them,
was almost disposed to side with him; they suggested an inexplicable
magnificence, and created an image of a man portentously endowed with the
capacity to throw dust in the eyes.  No description of the Balls could
have furnished me with such an insight of their brilliancy as the
consuming ardour they awakened in the captain and his wife.  He reviewed
them: 'Princely entertainments!  Arabian Nights!'

She built them up piecemeal: 'The company!  the dresses!  the band!  the
supper!' The host was a personage supernatural.  'Aladdin's magician, if
you like,' said Julia, 'only-good!  A perfect gentleman!  and I'll say
again, confound his enemies.' She presumed, as she was aware she might
do, upon the squire's prepossession in her favour, without reckoning that
I was always the victim.

'Heard o' that new story 'bout a Dauphin?' he asked.

'A Dauphin?' quoth Captain Bulsted.  'I don't know the fish.'

'You've been in a pretty kettle of 'em lately, William.  I heard of it
yesterday on the Bench.  Lord Shale, our new Lord-Lieutenant, brought it
down.  A trick they played the fellow 'bout a Dauphin.  Serve him right.
You heard anything 'bout it, Harry?'

I had not.

'But I tell ye there is a Dauphin mixed up with him.  A Dauphin and Mr.
Ik Dine!'

'Mr. Ik Dine!' exclaimed the captain, perplexed.

'Ay, that's German lingo, William, and you ought to know it if you're a
loyal sailor--means "I serve."'

'Mr. Beltham,' said the captain, seriously, 'I give you my word of honour
as a man and a British officer, I don't understand one syllable of what
you're saying; but if it means any insinuation against the gentleman who
condescends to extend his hospitalities to my wife and me, I must, with
regret, quit the place where I have had the misfortune to hear it.'

'You stop where you are, William,' the squire motioned to him.  'Gad, I
shall have to padlock my mouth, or I shan't have a friend left soon .  .
.  confounded fellow. . .  I tell you they call him Mr. Ik Dine in town.
Ik Dine and a Dauphin!  They made a regular clown and pantaloon o' the
pair, I'm told.  Couple o' pretenders to Thrones invited to dine together
and talk over their chances and show their private marks.  Oho!  by-and-
by, William!  You and I!  Never a man made such a fool of in his life!'

The ladies retired.  The squire continued, in a furious whisper:

'They got the two together, William.  Who are you?  I'm a Dauphin; who
are you?  I'm Ik Dine, bar sinister.  Oh!  says the other, then I take
precedence of you!  Devil a bit, says the other; I've got more spots than
you.  Proof, says one.  You first, t' other.  Count, one cries.  T' other
sings out, Measles.  Better than a dying Dauphin, roars t' other; and
swore both of 'm 'twas nothing but Port-wine stains and pimples.  Ha!
ha!  And, William, will you believe it?--the couple went round begging
the company to count spots--ha!  ha! to prove their big birth!  Oh, Lord,
I'd ha' paid a penny to be there!  A Jack o' Bedlam Ik Dine damned
idiot!--makes name o' Richmond stink.' (Captain Bulsted shot a wild stare
round the room to make sure that the ladies had gone.) 'I tell ye,
William, I had it from Lord Shale himself only yesterday on the Bench.
He brought it to us hot from town--didn't know I knew the fellow; says
the fellow's charging and firing himself off all day and all night too-
can't make him out.  Says London's mad about him: lots o' women, the
fools!  Ha, ha!  a Dauphin!'

'Ah, well, sir,' Captain Bulsted supplicated feverishly, rubbing his
brows and whiskers.

'It 's true, William.  Fellow ought to be taken up and committed as a
common vagabond, and would be anywhere but in London.  I'd jail him 'fore
you cocked your eye twice.  Fellow came here and talked me over to grant
him a couple o' months to prove he hasn't swindled his son of every scrap
of his money.  We shall soon see.  Not many weeks to run!  And pretends
--fellow swears to me--can get him into Parliament; swears he'll get him
in 'fore the two months are over!  An infernal--'

'Please to recollect, sir; the old hereditary shall excuse you----'

'Gout, you mean, William?  By----'

'You are speaking in the presence of his son, sir, and you are trying the
young gentleman's affection for you hard.'

'Eh?  'Cause I'm his friend?  Harry,' my grandfather faced round on me,
'don't you know I 'm the friend you can trust?  Hal, did I ever borrow a
farthing of you?  Didn't I, the day of your majority, hand you the whole
of your inheritance from your poor broken-hearted mother, with interest,
and treat you like a man?  And never played spy, never made an inquiry,
till I heard the scamp had been fastening on you like a blood-sucker, and
singing hymns into the ears of that squeamish dolt of a pipe-smoking
parson, Peterborough--never thought of doing it!  Am I the man that
dragged your grandmother's name through the streets and soiled yours?'

I remarked that I was sensible of the debt of gratitude I owed to him,
but would rather submit to the scourge, or to destitution, than listen to
these attacks on my father.

'Cut yourself loose, Harry,' he cried, a trifle mollified.  'Don't season
his stew--d' ye hear?  Stick to decent people.  Why, you don't expect
he'll be locked up in the Tower for a finish, eh?  It'll be Newgate, or
the Bench.  He and his Dauphin--ha! ha!  A rascal crow and a Jack
Dauphin!'

Captain Bulsted reached me his hand.  'You have a great deal to bear,
Harry.  I commend you, my boy, for taking it manfully.'

'I say no more,' quoth the squire.  'But what I said was true.  The
fellow gives his little dinners and suppers to his marchionesses,
countesses, duchesses, and plays clown and pantaloon among the men.  He
thinks a parcel o' broidered petticoats 'll float him.  So they may till
a tradesman sent stark mad pops a pin into him.  Harry, I'd as lief hang
on to a fire-ship.  Here's Ilchester tells me .  .  .  and Ilchester
speaks of him under his breath now as if he were sitting in a pew funking
the parson.  Confound the fellow!  I say he's guilty of treason.  Pooh!
who cares!  He cuts out the dandies of his day, does he?  He's past
sixty, if he's a month.  It's all damned harlequinade.  Let him twirl off
one columbine or another, or a dozen, and then--the last of him!  Fellow
makes the world look like a farce.  He 's got about eight feet by five to
caper on, and all London gaping at him--geese!  Are you a gentleman and a
man of sense, Harry Richmond, to let yourself be lugged about in public--
by the Lord! like a pair of street-tumblers in spangled haunch-bags,
father and boy, on a patch of carpet, and a drum banging, and tossed and
turned inside out, and my God! the ass of a fellow strutting the ring
with you on his shoulder!  That's the spectacle. And you, Harry, now
I 'll ask you, do you mean your wife--egad, it'd be a pretty scene, with
your princess in hip-up petticoats, stiff as bottle-funnel top down'ards,
airing a whole leg, and knuckling a tambourine!'

'Not crying, my dear lad?' Captain Bulsted put his arm round me kindly,
and tried to catch a glimpse of my face.  I let him see I was not going
through that process.  'Whew!' said he, 'and enough to make any Christian
sweat!  You're in a bath, Harry.  I wouldn't expect the man who murdered
his godmother for one shilling and fivepence three-farthings the other
day, to take such a slinging, and think he deserved it.'

My power of endurance had reached its limit.

'You tell me, sir, you had this brutal story from the Lord-Lieutenant of
the county?'

'Ay, from Lord Shale.  But I won't have you going to him and betraying
our connection with a--'

'Halloo !' Captain Bulsted sang out to his wife on the lawn.  'And now,
squire, I have had my dose.  And you will permit me to observe, that I
find it emphatically what we used to call at school black-jack.'

'And you were all the better for it afterwards, William.'

'We did not arrive at that opinion, sir.  Harry, your arm.  An hour with
the ladies will do us both good.  The squire,' he murmured, wiping his
forehead as he went out, 'has a knack of bringing us into close proximity
with hell-fire when he pleases.'

Julia screamed on beholding us, 'Aren't you two men as pale as death!'

Janet came and looked.  'Merely a dose,' said the captain.  'We are
anxious to play battledore and shuttlecock madly.'

'So he shall, the dear!' Julia caressed him.  'We'll all have a
tournament in the wet-weather shed.'

Janet whispered to me, 'Was it--the Returning Thanks?'

'The what?' said I, with the dread at my heart of something worse than I
had heard.

She hailed Julia to run and fetch the battledores, and then told me she
had been obliged to confiscate the newspapers that morning and cast the
burden on post-office negligence.  'They reach grandada's hands by
afternoon post, Harry, and he finds objectionable passages blotted or cut
out; and as long as the scissors don't touch the business columns and the
debates, he never asks me what I have been doing.  He thinks I keep a
scrap-book.  I haven't often time in the morning to run an eye all over
the paper.  This morning it was the first thing I saw.'

What had she seen?  She led me out of view of the windows and showed me.

My father was accused of having stood up at a public dinner and returned
thanks on behalf of an Estate of the Realm: it read monstrously.  I
ceased to think of the suffering inflicted on me by my grandfather.

Janet and I, side by side with the captain and Julia, carried on the game
of battledore and shuttlecock, in a match to see whether the unmarried
could keep the shuttle flying as long as the married, with varying
fortunes.  She gazed on me, to give me the comfort of her sympathy, too
much, and I was too intent on the vision of my father either persecuted
by lies or guilty of hideous follies, to allow the match to be a fair
one.  So Julia could inform the squire that she and William had given the
unmarried pair a handsome beating, when he appeared peeping round one of
the shed-pillars.

'Of course you beat 'em,' said the squire.  'It 's not my girl's fault.'
He said more, to the old tune, which drove Janet away.

I remembered, when back in the London vortex, the curious soft beauty she
won from casting up her eyes to watch the descending feathers, and the
brilliant direct beam of those thick-browed, firm, clear eyes, with her
frown, and her set lips and brave figure, when she was in the act of
striking to keep up a regular quick fusilade.  I had need of calm
memories.  The town was astir, and humming with one name.




CHAPTER XLII

THE MARQUIS OF EDBURY AND HIS PUPPET

I passed from man to man, hearing hints and hesitations, alarming half-
remarks, presumed to be addressed to one who could supply the remainder,
and deduce consequences.  There was a clearer atmosphere in the street of
Clubs.  Jennings was the first of my father's more intimate acquaintances
to meet me frankly.  He spoke, though not with great seriousness, of the
rumour of a possible prosecution.  Sir Weeton Slater tripped up to us
with a mixed air of solicitude and restraint, asked whether I was well,
and whether I had seen the newspapers that morning; and on my informing
him that I had just come up from Riversley, on account of certain
rumours, advised me to remain in town strictly for the present.  He also
hinted at rumours of prosecutions.  'The fact is----' he began several
times, rendered discreet, I suppose, by my juvenility, fierte, and
reputed wealth.

We were joined by Admiral Loftus and Lord Alton.  They queried and
counterqueried as to passages between my father and the newspapers, my
father and the committee of his Club, preserving sufficient consideration
for me to avoid the serious matter in all but distant allusions; a point
upon which the breeding of Mr. Serjeant Wedderburn was not so accurate a
guide to him.  An exciting public scandal soon gathers knots of gossips
in Clubland.  We saw Wedderburn break from a group some way down the
pavement and pick up a fresh crumb of amusement at one of the doorsteps.
'Roy Richmond is having his benefit to-day!' he said, and repeated this
and that, half audible to me.  For the rest, he pooh-poohed the idea of
the Law intervening.  His 'How d' ye do, Mr. Richmond, how d' ye do?' was
almost congratulatory.  'I think we meet at your father's table to-night?
It won't be in the Tower, take my word for it.  Oh! the papers!  There's
no Act to compel a man to deny what appears in the papers.  No such luck
as the Tower!--though Littlepitt (Mr. Wedderburn's nickname for our
Premier) would be fool enough for that.  He would.  If he could turn
attention from his Bill, he'd do it.  We should have to dine off Boleyn's
block:--coquite horum obsonia he'd say, eh?''

Jennings espied my father's carriage, and stepped to speak a word to the
footman.  He returned, saying, with a puff of his cheeks: 'The Grand
Monarque has been sending his state equipage to give the old backbiting
cripple Brisby an airing.  He is for horse exercise to-day they've
dropped him in Courtenay Square.  There goes Brisby.  He'd take the good
Samaritan's shilling to buy a flask of poison for him.  He 'll use Roy's
carriage to fetch and carry for that venomous old woman Kane, I'll
swear.'

'She's a male in Scripture,' said Wedderburn, and this reminded me of an
anecdote that reminded him of another, and after telling them, he handed
round his hat for the laugh, as my father would have phrased it.

'Has her ladyship declared war?' Sir Weeton Slater inquired.

'No, that's not her preliminary to wageing it,' Wedderburn replied.
These high-pressure smart talkers had a moment of dulness, and he
bethought him that he must run into the Club for letters, and was busy at
Westminster, where, if anything fresh occurred between meridian and six
o'clock, he should be glad, he said, to have word of it by messenger,
that he might not be behind his Age.

The form of humour to express the speed of the world was common, but it
struck me as a terrible illustration of my father's.  I had still a sense
of pleasure in the thought that these intimates of his were gentlemen who
relished and, perhaps, really liked him.  They were not parasites; not
the kind of men found hanging about vulgar profligates.

I quitted them.  Sir Weeton Slater walked half-a-dozen steps beside me.
'May I presume on a friendly acquaintance with your father, Mr.
Richmond?' he said.  'The fact is--you will not be offended?--he is apt
to lose his head, unless the Committee of Supply limits him very
precisely.  I am aware that there is no material necessity for any
restriction.'  He nodded to me as to one of the marvellously endowed, as
who should say, the Gods presided at your birth.  The worthy baronet
struggled to impart his meaning, which was, that he would have me define
something like an allowance to my father, not so much for the purpose of
curtailing his expenditure--he did not venture upon private ground--as to
bridle my father's ideas of things possible for a private gentleman in
this country.  In that character none were like him.  As to his suit, or
appeal, he could assure me that Serjeant Wedderburn, and all who would or
could speak on the subject, saw no prospect of success; not any.  The
worst of it was, that it caused my father to commit himself in sundry
ways.  It gave a handle to his enemies.  It--he glanced at me
indicatively.

I thanked the well-meaning gentleman without encouraging him to continue.

'It led him to perform once more as a Statue of Bronze before the whole
of gaping London!' I could have added.  That scene on the pine-promontory
arose in my vision, followed by other scenes of the happy German days.
I had no power to conjure up the princess.

Jorian DeWitt was the man I wanted to see.  After applications at his
Club and lodgings I found him dragging his Burgundy leg in the Park,
on his road to pay a morning visit to his fair French enchantress.
I impeached him, and he pleaded guilty, clearly not wishing to take me
with him, nor would he give me Mlle. Jenny's address, which I had.  By
virtue of the threat that I would accompany him if he did not satisfy me,
I managed to extract the story of the Dauphin, aghast at the discovery of
its being true.  The fatal after-dinner speech he believed to have been
actually spoken, and he touched on that first.  'A trap was laid for him,
Harry Richmond; and a deuced clever trap it was.  They smuggled in
special reporters.  There wasn't a bit of necessity for the toast.
But the old vixen has shown her hand, so now he must fight.  He can beat
her single-handed on settees.  He'll find her a tartar at long bowls: she
sticks at nothing.  She blazes out, that he scandalizes her family.  She
has a dozen indictments against him.  You must stop in town and keep
watch.  There's fire in my leg to explode a powder-magazine a mile off!'

'Is it the Margravine of Rippau?' I inquired.  I could think of no other
waspish old woman.

'Lady Dane,' said Jorian.  'She set Edbury on to face him with the
Dauphin.  You don't fancy it came of the young dog "all of himself,"
do you?  Why, it was clever!  He trots about a briefless little
barrister, a scribbler, devilish clever and impudent, who does his farces
for him.  Tenby 's the fellow's name, and it's the only thing I haven't
heard him pun on.  Puns are the smallpox of the language;--we're cursed
with an epidemic.  By gad, the next time I meet him I 'll roar out for
vaccine matter.'

He described the dinner given by Edbury at a celebrated City tavern where
my father and this so-called Dauphin were brought together.  'Dinner to-
night,' he nodded, as he limped away on his blissful visit of ceremony to
sprightly Chassediane (a bouquet had gone in advance): he left me
stupefied.  The sense of ridicule enveloped me in suffocating folds,
howling sentences of the squire's Boeotian burlesque by fits.  I felt
that I could not but take the world's part against the man who allowed
himself to be made preposterous externally, when I knew him to be staking
his frail chances and my fortune with such rashness.  It was unpardonable
for one in his position to incur ridicule.  Nothing but a sense of duty
kept me from rushing out of London, and I might have indulged the impulse
advantageously.  Delay threw me into the clutches of Lady Kane herself,
on whom I looked with as composed a visage as I could command, while she
leaned out of her carriage chattering at me, and sometimes over my head
to passing gentlemen.

She wanted me to take a seat beside her, she had so much to say.  Was
there not some funny story abroad of a Pretender to the Throne of France?
she asked, wrinkling her crow'sfeet eyelids to peer at me, and wished to
have the particulars.  I had none to offer.  'Ah! well,' said she; 'you
stay in London?  Come and see me.  I'm sure you 're sensible.  You and I
can put our heads together.  He's too often in Courtenay Square, and he's
ten years too young for that, still.  He ought to have good advice.  Tell
me, how can a woman who can't guide herself help a man?--and the most
difficult man alive!  I'm sure you understand me.  I can't drive out in
the afternoon for them.  They make a crush here, and a clatter of
tongues!  .  .  .  That's my private grievance.  But he's now keeping
persons away who have the first social claim .  .  .  I know they can't
appear.  Don't look confused; no one accuses you.  Only I do say it 's
getting terribly hot in London for somebody.  Call on me.  Will you?'

She named her hours.  I bowed as soon as I perceived my opportunity.
Her allusions were to Lady Edbury, and to imputed usurpations of my
father's.  I walked down to the Chambers where Temple was reading Law,
for a refuge from these annoyances.  I was in love with the modest
shadowed life Temple lived, diligently reading, and glancing on the world
as through a dusky window, happy to let it run its course while he
sharpened his weapons.  A look at Temple's face told me he had heard
quite as much as was known in the West.  Dining-halls of lawyers are not
Cistercian; he was able to give me three distinct versions of the story
of the Dauphin.  No one could be friendlier.  Indeed Temple now urged me
forcibly to prevent my father from spending money and wearing his heart
out in vain, by stopping the case in Dettermain and Newson's hands.
They were respectable lawyers, he said, in a lawyer's ordinary tone when
including such of his species as are not black sheep.  He thought it
possible that my father's personal influence overbore their judgment.
In fact, nothing bound them to refuse to work for him, and he believed
that they had submitted their views for his consideration.

'I do wish he'd throw it up,' Temple exclaimed.  'It makes him enemies.
And just examining it, you see he could get no earthly good out of it: he
might as well try to scale a perpendicular rock.  But when I'm with him,
I'm ready to fancy what he pleases--I acknowledge that.  He has excess of
phosphorus, or he's ultra-electrical; doctors could tell us better than
lawyers.'  Temple spoke of the clever young barrister Tenby as the man
whom his father had heard laughing over the trick played upon 'Roy
Richmond.'  I conceived that I might furnish Mr. Tenby a livelier kind of
amusement, and the thought that I had once been sur le terrain, and had
bitterly regretted it, by no means deterred me from the idea of a second
expedition, so black was my mood.  A review of the circumstances, aided
by what reached my ears before the night went over, convinced me that
Edbury was my man.  His subordinate helped him to the instrument, and
possibly to the plot, but Edbury was the capital offender.

The scene of the prank was not in itself so bad as the stuff which a
cunning anecdotist could make out of it.  Edbury invited my father to a
dinner at a celebrated City tavern.  He kept his guests (Jennings, Jorian
DeWitt, Alton, Wedderburn, were among the few I was acquainted with who
were present) awaiting the arrival of a person for whom he professed
extraordinary respect.  The Dauphin of France was announced.  A mild,
flabby, amiable-looking old person, with shelving forehead and grey
locks--excellently built for the object, Jorian said--entered.  The Capet
head and embonpoint were there.  As far as a personal resemblance might
go, his pretensions to be the long-lost Dauphin were grotesquely
convincing, for, notwithstanding the accurate picture of the Family
presented by him, the man was a pattern bourgeois:--a sturdy impostor,
one would have thought, and I thought so when I heard of him; but I have
been assured that he had actually grown old in the delusion that he,
carrying on his business in the City of London, was the identical
Dauphin.

Edbury played his part by leading his poor old victim half way to meet
his other most honoured guest, hesitating then and craving counsel
whether he was right in etiquette to advance the Dauphin so far.  The
Dauphin left him mildly to decide the point: he was eminently mild
throughout, and seems to have thought himself in good faith surrounded by
believers and adherents.  Edbury's task soon grew too delicate for that
coarse boy.  In my father's dexterous hands he at once lost his
assumption of the gallantry of manner which could alone help him to
retain his advantage.  When the wine was in him he began to bawl.  I
could imagine the sort of dialogue he raised.  Bets on the Dauphin, bets
on Roy: they were matched as on a racecourse.  The Dauphin remembered
incidents of his residence in the Temple, with a beautiful juvenile
faintness: a conscientious angling for recollection, Wedderburn said.
Roy was requested to remember something, to drink and refresh his memory
infantine incidents were suggested.  He fenced the treacherous host
during dinner with superb complacency.

The Dauphin was of an immoveable composure.  He 'stated simple facts: he
was the Dauphin of France, providentially rescued from the Temple in the
days of the Terror.'  For this deliverance, somewhat to the consternation
of the others, he offered up a short prayer of thanksgiving over his
plate.  He had, he said, encountered incredulity.  He had his proofs.
He who had never been on the soil of France since early boyhood, spoke
French with a pure accent: he had the physical and moral constitution of
the Family: owing to events attending his infant days, he was timid.
Jorian imitated him:--'I start at the opening of a door; I see dark faces
in my sleep: it is a dungeon; I am at the knees of my Unfortunate Royal
Father, with my Beautiful Mother.' His French was quaint, but not absurd.
He became loquacious, apostrophizing vacancy with uplifted hand and eye.
The unwonted invitation to the society of noblemen made him conceive his
Dauphinship to be on the high road to a recognition in England, and he
was persuaded to drink and exhibit proofs: which were that he had the
constitution of the Family, as aforesaid, in every particular; that he
was peculiarly marked with testificatory spots; and that his mere aspect
inspired all members and branch members of the Family with awe and
stupefaction.  One of the latter hearing of him, had appointed to meet
him in a pastrycook's shop.  He met him, and left the place with a cloud
on his brow, showing tokens of respectful sympathy.

Conceive a monomaniacal obese old English citizen, given to lift hand and
eye and address the cornices, claiming to be an Illustrious Boy, and
calling on a beautiful historic mother and unfortunate Royal sire to
attest it!  No wonder the table was shaken with laughter.  He appealed to
Tenby constantly, as to the one man he knew in the room.  Tenby it was
who made the discovery of him somewhere in the City, where he earned his
livelihood either as a corn-merchant; or a stockbroker, or a chronometer-
maker, or a drysalter, and was always willing to gratify a customer with
the sight of his proofs of identity.  Mr. Tenby made it his business to
push his clamorous waggishness for the exhibition.  I could readily
believe that my father was more than his match in disposable sallies and
weight of humour, and that he shielded the old creature successfully, so
long as he had a tractable being to protect.  But the Dauphin was plied
with wine, and the marquis had his fun.  Proof upon proof in verification
of his claims was proffered by the now-tremulous son of St. Louis--so he
called himself.  With, Jorian admitted, a real courtly dignity, he stood
up and proposed to lead the way to any neighbouring cabinet to show the
spots on his person; living witnesses to the truth of his allegations,
he declared them to be.  The squire had authority for his broad farce,
except in so far as he mixed up my father in the swinery of it.

I grew more and more convinced that my father never could have lost his
presence of mind when he found himself in the net of a plot to cover him
with ridicule.  He was the only one who did not retire to the Dauphin's
'chamber of testification,' to return convulsed with vinous laughter
after gravely inspecting the evidence; for which abstention the Dauphin
reproached him violently, in round terms of abuse, challengeing him to go
through a similar process.  This was the signal for Edbury, Tenby, and
some of the rest.  They formed a circle, one-half for the Dauphin, one
for Roy.  How long the boorish fun lasted, and what exactly came of it,
I did not hear.  Jorian DeWitt said my father lost his temper, a point
contested by Wedderburn and Jennings, for it was unknown of him.  Anyhow,
he thundered to some effect, inasmuch as he detached those that had
gentlemanly feelings from the wanton roysterers, and next day the latter
pleaded wine.  But they told the story, not without embellishments.  The
world followed their example.

I dined and slept at Temple's house, not caring to meet my incarnate
humiliation.  I sent to hear that he was safe.  A quiet evening with a
scholarly man, and a man of strong practical ability and shrewdness, like
Mr. Temple, did me good.  I wished my father and I were on the same
footing as he and his son, and I may add his daughters.  They all talked
sensibly; they were at feud with nobody; they reflected their condition.
It was a simple orderly English household, of which the father was the
pillar, the girls the ornaments, the son the hope, growing to take his
father's place.  My envy of such a home was acute, and I thought of
Janet, and how well she was fashioned to build one resembling it, if only
the mate allotted to her should not be a fantastical dreamer.  Temple's
character seemed to me to demand a wife like Janet on its merits; an idea
that depressed me exceedingly.  I had introduced Temple to Anna Penrhys,
who was very kind to him; but these two were not framed to be other than
friends.  Janet, on the contrary, might some day perceive the sterling
fellow Temple was, notwithstanding his moderate height.  She might,
I thought.  I remembered that I had once wished that she would, and I was
amazed at myself.  But why?  She was a girl sure to marry.  I brushed
these meditations away.  They recurred all the time I was in Temple's
house.

Mr. Temple waited for my invitation to touch on my father's Case, when he
distinctly pronounced his opinion that it could end but in failure.
Though a strict Constitutionalist, he had words of disgust for princes,
acknowledging, however, that we were not practical in our use of them,
and kept them for political purposes often to the perversion of our
social laws and their natural dispositions.  He spoke of his son's freak
in joining the Navy.  'That was the princess's doing,' said Temple.
'She talked of our naval heroes, till she made me feel I had only to
wear the anchor buttons to be one myself.  Don't tell her I was invalided
from the service, Richie, for the truth is, I believe, I half-shammed.
And the time won't be lost.  You'll see I shall extract guineas from
"old ocean" like salt.  Precious few barristers understand maritime
cases.  The other day I was in Court, and prompted a great Q.C. in a
case of collision.  Didn't I, sir?'

'I think there was a hoarse whisper audible up to the Judge's seat at
intervals,' said Mr. Temple.

'The Bar cannot confess to obligations from those who don't wear the
robe,' Temple rejoined.

His father advised me to read for the Bar, as a piece of very good
training.

I appealed to Temple, whether he thought it possible to read law-books in
a cockboat in a gale of wind.

Temple grimaced and his father nodded.  Still it struck me that I might
one day have the felicity of quiet hours to sit down with Temple and read
Law--far behind him in the race.  And he envied me, in his friendly
manner, I knew.  My ambition had been blown to tatters.

A new day dawned.  The household rose and met at the breakfast-table,
devoid of any dread of the morning newspapers.  Their talk was like the
chirrup of birds.  Temple and his father walked away together to
chambers, bent upon actual business--upon doing something!  I reflected
emphatically, and compared them to ships with rudders, while I was at the
mercy of wind, tide, and wave.  I called at Dettermain and Newson's, and
heard there of a discovery of a witness essential to the case, either in
North Wales or in New South.  I did not, as I had intended, put a veto on
their proceedings.  The thing to do was to see my father, and cut the
case at the fountain head.  For this purpose, it was imperative that I
should go to him, and prepare myself for the interview by looking at the
newspapers first.  I bought one, hastily running my eyes down the columns
in the shop.  His name was printed, but merely in a fashionable
notification that carriages took up and set down for his costume Ball,
according to certain regulations.  The relief of comparative obscurity
helped me to breathe freely: not to be laughed at, was a gain.  I was
rather inclined to laud his courage in entering assembly-rooms, where he
must be aware that he would see the Dauphin on every face.  Perhaps he
was guilty of some new extravagance last night, too late for scandal to
reinforce the reporters!

Mrs. Waddy had a woeful visage when informing me that he was out, gone to
Courtenay Square.  She ventured a murmur of bills coming in.  Like
everybody else, she fancied he drew his supplies from my inexhaustible
purse; she hoped the bills would be paid off immediately: the servants'
wages were overdue.  'Never can I get him to attend to small accounts,'
she whimpered, and was so ready to cry outright, that I said, 'Tusk,' and
with the one word gave her comfort.  'Of course, you, Mr. Harry, can
settle them, I know that.'  We were drawing near to poor old Sewis's
legacy, even for the settling of the small accounts!

London is a narrow place to one not caring to be seen.  I could not
remain in this creditor-riddled house; I shunned the Parks, the Clubs,
and the broad, brighter streets of the West.  Musing on the refreshing
change it would be to me to find myself suddenly on board Captain Jasper
Welsh's barque Priscilla, borne away to strange climes and tongues, the
world before me, I put on the striding pace which does not invite
interruption, and no one but Edbury would have taken the liberty.  I
heard his shout.  'Halloa!  Richmond.'  He was driving his friend
Witlington in his cabriolet.  'Richmond, my hearty, where the deuce have
you been?  I wanted you to dine with me the other night.'

I replied, looking at him steadily, that I wished I had been there.

'Compendious larks!' cried he, in the slang of his dog's day.  'I say;
you're one at Duke Fitz's masquerade to-night?  Tell us your toggery.
Hang it, you might go for the Black Prince.  I'm Prince Hal.  Got a
headache?  Come to my Club and try my mixture.  Yoicks! it'd make
Methuselah and Melchisedec jump up and have a twirl and a fandango.  I
say, you're thick with that little French actress Chastedian jolly little
woman!  too much to say for herself to suit me.'

He described the style of woman that delighted him--an ideal English
shepherdess of the print-shops, it appeared, and of extremely remote
interest to me, I thought at the time.  Eventually I appointed to walk
round to his Club, and he touched his horse gently, and bobbed his
diminutive henchman behind his smart cabriolet, the admiration of the
street.

I found him waiting for me on the steps of his Club, puffing a cigar with
all his vigour, in the classic attitude of a trumpeter.  My first words
were: 'I think I have to accuse you of insulting me.'

'Insulting you, Richmond!' he cried, much surprised, holding his cigar in
transit.

'If you insult my father, I make you responsible to me.'

'Insult old Duke Fitz!  I give you my word of honour, Richmond--why,
I like him; I like the old boy.  Wouldn't hurt him for the world and all
Havannah.

What the deuce have you got into your head?  Come in and smoke.'

The mention of his dinner and the Dauphin crazed him with laughter.
He begged me as a man to imagine the scene: the old Bloated Bourbon of
London Wall and Camberwell!  an Illustrious Boy!--drank like a fish!--
ready to show himself to the waiters!  And then with 'Gee' and 'Gaw,' the
marquis spouted out reminiscences of scene, the best ever witnessed!
'Up starts the Dauphin.  "Damn you, sir!  and damn me, sir, if believe
you have a spot on your whole body!"  And snuffles and puffs--you should
have been there Richmond, I wrote to ask you: did, upon my life! wanted
you there.  Lord!  why, you won't get such fun in a century.  And old
Roy!  he behaved uncommonly finely: said capital things, by Jove!  Never
saw him shine so; old trump!  Says Dauphin, "My beautiful mother had a
longing for strawberries out of season.  I am marked with a strawberry,
here."  Says Roy: "It is an admirable and roomy site, but as I am not
your enemy, sir, I doubt if I shall often have the opportunity to behold
it."  Ha! ha!--gee!  Richmond, you've missed the deucedest good scene
ever acted.'

How could I, after having had an adversary like Prince Otto, call upon a
fellow such as Edbury to give me reason for his conduct?  He rollicked
and laughed until my ungovernable impatience brought him to his senses.

'Dash it, you're a fire-eater, I know, Richmond.  We can't fight in this
country; ain't allowed.  And fighting 's infernal folly.  By Jove!
If you're going to tumble down every man who enjoys old Roy, you've your
work cut out for you.  He's long chalks the best joke out.  'Twixt you
and me, he did return thanks.  What does it matter what old Duke Fitz
does?  I give him a lift on his ladder with all my heart.  He keeps a
capital table.  And I'll be hanged if he hasn't got the secret of the
women.  How he does it old Roy!  If the lords were ladies they'd vote him
premier peer, double quick.  And I'll tell you what, Richmond, I'm
thought a devil of a good-tempered fellow for not keeping watch over
Courtenay Square.  I don't call it my business to be house dog for a
pretty stepmother.  But there's talking and nodding, and oh!  leave all
that: come in and smoke, and let me set you up; and I'll shake your hand.
Halloa!  I'm hailed.'

A lady, grasping the veil across her face, beckoned her hand from a
closed carriage below.  Edbury ran down to her.  I caught sight of
ravishing golden locks, reminding me of Mabel Sweetwinter's hair, and
pricking me with a sensation of spite at the sex for their deplorable
madness in the choice of favourites.  Edbury called me to come to the
carriage window.  I moved slowly, but the carriage wheeled about and
rolled away.  I could just see the outline of a head muffled in furs and
lace.

'Queer fish, women!' he delivered himself of the philosophical
ejaculation cloudily.  I was not on terms with him to offer any remark
upon the one in question.  His imperturbable good humour foiled me, and
I left him, merely giving him a warning, to which his answer was:

'Oh! come in and have a bottle of claret.'

Claret or brandy had done its work on him by the time I encountered him
some hours later, in the Park.  Bramham DeWitt, whom I met in the same
neighbourhood, offered me a mount after lunch, advising me to keep near
my father as much as I conveniently could; and he being sure to appear in
the Park, I went, and heard his name to the right and left of me.  He was
now, as he said to me once that he should become, 'the tongue of London.'
I could hardly expect to escape from curious scrutiny myself; I was
looked at.  Here and there I had to lift my hat and bow.  The
stultification of one's feelings and ideas in circumstances which divide
and set them at variance is worse than positive pain.  The looks shed on
me were rather flattering, but I knew that in the background I was felt
to be the son of the notorious.  Edbury came trotting up to us like a
shaken sack, calling, 'Neigh!  any of you seen old Roy?'  Bramham DeWitt,
a stiff, fashionable man of fifty, proud of his blood and quick as his
cousin Jorian to resent an impertinence, replied:

'Are you the Marquis of Edbury, or a drunken groom, sir?'

"Gad, old gentleman, I've half a mind to ride you down,' said Edbury,
and, espying me, challenged me to a race to run down the fogies.

A cavalcade of six abreast came cantering along.  I saw my father listen
to a word from Lady Edbury, and push his horse to intercept the marquis.
They spoke.  'Presently, presently,' my father said; 'ride to the rear,
and keep at half a stone's throw-say, a groom's distance.'

'Groom be hanged!' Edbury retorted.  'I made a bet I'd drive you out of
the Park, old Roy!'

'Ride behind, then,' said my father, and to my astonishment Edbury obeyed
him, with laughter.  Lady Edbury smiled to herself; and I experienced the
esteem I perceived in her for a masterful manner.  A few minutes later my
father beckoned me to pay my respects to Graf Kesensky, an ambassador
with strong English predilections and some influence among us.  He asked
me if he was right in supposing I wished to enter Parliament.  I said he
was, wondering at the interest a foreigner could find in it.  The count
stopped a quiet-pacing gentleman.  Bramhaxri DeWitt joined them, and a
group of friends.  I was introduced to Mr. Beauchamp Hill, the Government
whip, who begged me to call on him with reference to the candidature of a
Sussex borough: 'that is,' said he, turning to Graf Kesensky, 'if you're
sure the place is open?  I've heard nothing of Falmouth's accident.'
The count replied that Falmouth was his intimate friend; he had received
a special report that Falmouth was dying, just as he was on the point of
mounting his horse.  'We shan't have lost time,' said Mr. Hill.  The
Government wanted votes.  I went down to the House of Commons at midnight
to see him.  He had then heard of Falmouth's hopeless condition, and
after extracting my political views, which were for the nonce those of a
happy subserviency, he expressed his belief that the new writ for the
borough of Chippenden might be out, and myself seated on the Government
benches, within a very short period.  Nor would it be necessary, he
thought, for the Government nominee to spend money: 'though that does not
affect you, Mr. Richmond!'  My supposed wealth gave me currency even in
political circles.




CHAPTER XLIII

I BECOME ONE OF THE CHOSEN OF THE NATION

An entire revulsion in my feelings and my way of thinking was caused by
this sudden change of prospect.  A member of our Parliament, I could then
write to Ottilia, and tell her that I had not wasted time.  And it was
due to my father, I confessed, when he returned from his ball at dawn, .
that I should thank him for speaking to Graf Kesensky.  'Oh!' said he,
'that was our luck, Richie.  I have been speaking about you to hundreds
for the last six months, and now we owe it to a foreigner!' I thanked him
again.  He looked eminently handsome in his Henry III. costume, and was
disposed to be as luxurious as his original.  He had brought Count Lika,
Secretary of Legation to the Austrian Embassy, dressed as an Albanian,
with him.  The two were stretched on couches, and discoursing of my
father's reintroduction of the sedan chair to society.  My father
explained that he had ordered a couple of dozen of these chairs to be
built on a pattern of his own.  And he added, 'By the way, Richie, there
will be sedaniers--porters to pay to-day.  Poor men should be paid
immediately.' I agreed with the monarch.  Contemplating him, I became
insensible to the sting of ridicule which had been shooting through me,
agonizing me for the last eight-and-forty hours.  Still I thought: can I
never escape from the fascination?--let me only get into Parliament!
The idea in me was that Parliament lifted me nearer to Ottilia, and would
prompt me to resolute action, out of his tangle of glittering cobwebs.
I told him of my interview with Beauchamp Hill.  'I have never known
Kesensky wrong yet,' said he; 'except in his backing of Falmouth's
horses.'  Count Lika murmured that he hoped his Chief would be wrong in
something else: he spoke significantly.  My father raised his eyebrows.
'In his opinion,' Lika accepted the invitation to pursue, 'Prince Ernest
will not let that announcement stand uncontradicted.'

My father's eyes dwelt on him.  'Are we accused of it?'

Lika slipped from the question.  'Who is accused of a newspaper's doings?
It is but the denial of a statement.'

'I dare them to deny it!--and, Lika, my dear fellow, light me a
cigarette,' said my father.

'Then,' said Lika, touching the flame delicately, 'you take the view that
Kesensky is wrong in another thing besides horses.'

I believe he struck on the subject casually: there was nothing for him to
gain or lose in it; and he had a liking for my father.

After puffing the cigarette twice or thrice my father threw it down,
resuming his conversation upon the sedan, the appropriate dresses of
certain of the great masquerading ladies, and an incident that appeared
to charge Jorian DeWitt with having misconducted himself.  The moment
Lika had gone upstairs for two or three hours' sleep, he said to me:
'Richie, you and I have no time for that.  We must have a man at
Falmouth's house by eight o'clock.  If the scrubbing-maid on all fours-
not an inelegant position, I have remarked--declares him dead, we are at
Bartlett's (money-lender) by ten: and in Chippenden borough before two
post meridian.  As I am a tactician, there is mischief! but I will turn
it to my uses, as I did our poor Jorian to-night; he smuggled in the
Chassediane: I led her out on my arm.  Of that by and by.  The point is,
that from your oath in Parliament you fly to Sarkeld.  I implore you now,
by your love for me and the princess, not to lose precious minutes.
Richie, we will press things so that you shall be in Sarkeld by the end
of the month.  My son! my dear boy! how you loved me once!--you do still!
then follow my directions.  I have a head.  Ay, you think it wild?
'Tis true, my mother was a poetess.  But I will convince my son as I am
convincing the world-tut, tut!  To avoid swelling talk, I tell you,
Richie, I have my hand on the world's wheel, and now is the time for you
to spring from it and gain your altitude.  If you fail, my success is
emptiness.'

'Will you avoid Edbury and his like, and protect yourself?' was my form
of stipulation, spoken to counteract his urgency.

He gave no answer beyond a wave of the hand suitable to his princely one-
coloured costume of ruffled lavender silk, and the magnificent leg he
turned to front me.  My senses even up to that period were so
impressionable as to be swayed by a rich dress and a grand manner when
circumstances were not too unfavourable.  Now they seemed very
favourable, for they offered me an upward path to tread.  His appearance
propitiated me less after he had passed through the hands of his man
Tollingby, but I had again surrendered the lead to him.  As to the risk
of proceedings being taken against him, he laughed scornfully at the
suggestion.  'They dare not.  The more I dare, the less dare they.'
Again I listened to his curious roundabout reasoning, which dragged
humour at its heels like a comical cur, proclaiming itself imposingly,
in spite of the mongrel's barking, to be prudence and common sense.
Could I deny that I owed him gratitude for the things I cherished most?
--for my acquaintance with Ottilia?--for his services in Germany?--for
the prospect of my elevation in England?  I could not; and I tried hard
to be recklessly grateful.  As to money, he reiterated that he could put
his hand on it to satisfy the squire on the day of accounts: for the
present, we must borrow.  His argument upon borrowing--which I knew well,
and wondered that I did not at the outset disperse with a breath of
contempt--gained on me singularly when reviewed under the light of my
immediate interests: it ran thus:--We have a rich or a barren future,
just as we conceive it.  The art of generalship in life consists in
gathering your scattered supplies to suit a momentous occasion; and it is
the future which is chiefly in debt to us, and adjures us for its sake to
fight the fight and conquer.  That man is vile and fit to be trampled on
who cannot count his future in gold and victory.  If, as we find, we are
always in debt to the past, we should determine that the future is in our
debt, and draw on it.  Why let our future lie idle while we need succour?
For instance, to-morrow I am to have what saves my reputation in the
battle to-day; shall I not take it at once?  The military commander who
acts on that principle overcomes his adversary to a certainty.

'You, Richie, the member for this borough of Chippenden, have won solid
ground.  I guarantee it to you.  And you go straight from the hustings,
or the first taste of parliamentary benches, to Sarkeld: you take your
grandad's proposition to Prince Ernest: you bring back the prince's
acceptance to the squire.  Can you hope to have a princess without a
battle for her?'  More and much more in this strain, until--for he could
read me and most human beings swiftly on the surface, notwithstanding the
pressure of his fancifulness--he perceived that talking influenced me far
less than activity, and so after a hurried breakfast and an innocuous
glance at the damp morning papers, we started to the money-lender's, with
Jennings to lend his name.  We were in Chippenden close upon the hour my
father had named, bringing to the startled electors the first news of
their member's death.

During the heat of the canvass for votes I received a kind letter from
the squire in reply to one of mine, wherein he congratulated me on my
prospects of success, and wound up: 'Glad to see it announced you are off
with that princess of yours.  Show them we are as proud as they are,
Harry, and a fig for the whole foreign lot!  Come to Riversley soon, and
be happy.'  What did that mean?  Heriot likewise said in a letter: 'So
it's over?  The proud prince kicks?  You will not thank me for telling
you now what you know I think about it.'  I appealed to my father.
'Canvass!  canvass!' cried he; and he persistently baffled me.  It was
from Temple I learnt that on the day of our starting for Chippenden, the
newspapers contained a paragraph in large print flatly denying upon
authority that there was any foundation for the report of an intended
marriage between the Princess of Eppenwelzen-Sarkeld and an English
gentleman.  Then I remembered how that morning my father had flung the
papers down, complaining of their dampness.

Would such denial have appeared without Ottilia's sanction?

My father proved that I was harnessed to him; there was no stopping, no
time for grieving.  Pace was his specific.  He dragged me the round of
the voters; he gave dinners at the inn of true Liberals, and ate of them
contentedly; he delivered speeches incessantly.  The whole force of his.
serio-comic genius was alive in its element at Chippenden.  From balls
and dinners, and a sharp contest to maintain his position in town, he was
down among us by the first morning train, bright as Apollo, and quite the
sun of the place, dazzling the independent electors and their wives, and
even me somewhat; amazing me, certainly.  Dettermain, his lawyer, who had
never seen him in action, and supposed he would treat an election as he
did his Case, with fits and starts of energy, was not less astonished,
and tried to curb him.

'Mr. Dettermain, my dear sir, I apprehend it is the electoral maxim to
woo the widowed borough with the tear in its eye, and I shall do so
hotly, in a right masculine manner,' my father said.  'We have the
start; and if we beat the enemy by nothing else we will beat him by
constitution.  We are the first in the field, and not to reap it is to
acknowledge oneself deficient in the very first instrument with which
grass was cut.'

Our difficulty all through the election was to contend with his humour.
The many triumphs it won for him, both in speech and in action, turned at
least the dialectics of the argument against us, and amusing, flattering,
or bewildering, contributed to silence and hold us passive.  Political
convictions of his own, I think I may say with truth, he had none.  He
would have been just as powerful, after his fashion, on the Tory side,
pleading for Mr. Normanton Hipperdon; more, perhaps: he would have been
more in earnest.  His store of political axioms was Tory; but he did
remarkably well, and with no great difficulty, in confuting them to the
wives of voters, to the voters themselves, and at public assemblies.  Our
adversary was redoubtable; a promising Opposition member, ousted from his
seat in the North--a handsome man, too, which my father admitted, and
wealthy, being junior partner in a City banking firm.  Anna Penrhys knew
him, and treacherously revealed some of the enemy's secrets, notably
concerning what he termed our incorrigible turn for bribery.

'And that means,' my father said, 'that Mr. Hipperdon does not possess
the art of talking to the ladies.  I shall try him in repartee on the
hustings.  I must contrive to have our Jorian at my elbow.'

The task of getting Jorian to descend upon such a place as Chippenden
worried my father more than electoral anxieties.  Jorian wrote, 'My best
wishes to you.  Be careful of your heads.  The habit of the Anglo-Saxon
is to conclude his burlesques with a play of cudgels.  It is his notion
of freedom, and at once the exordium and peroration of his eloquence.
Spare me the Sussex accent on your return.'

My father read out the sentences of this letter with admiring bursts of
indignation at the sarcasms, and an evident idea that I inclined to
jealousy of the force displayed.

'But we must have him,' he said; 'I do not feel myself complete without
Jorian.'

So he made dispositions for a concert to be given in Chippenden town.
Jenny Chassediane was invited down to sing, and Jorian came in her wake,
of course.  He came to suffer tortures.  She was obliging enough to
transform me into her weapon of chastisement upon the poor fellow for his
behaviour to her at the Ball-atrocious, I was bound to confess.  On this
point she hesitated just long enough to imply a doubt whether, under any
circumstances, the dues of men should be considered before those of her
sex, and then struck her hands together with enthusiasm for my father,
who was, she observed--critical in millinery in the height of her
ecstasy--the most majestic, charming, handsome Henri III.  imaginable,
the pride and glory of the assembly, only one degree too rosy at night
for the tone of the lavender, needing a touch of French hands, and the
merest trifle in want of compression about the waistband.  She related
that a certain Prince Henri d'Angleterre had buzzed at his ear
annoyingly.  'Et Gascoigne, ou est-il?' called the King, and the Judge
stepped forth to correct the obstreperous youth.  The Judge was Jennings,
clearly prepared by my father to foil the Prince--no other than Edbury.
It was incomprehensible to me that my father should tolerate the tatter's
pranks; unless, indeed, he borrowed his name to bonds of which I heard
nothing.

Mademoiselle Chassediane vowed that her own dress was ravishing.  She
went attired as a boudoir-shepherdess or demurely-coquettish Sevres-china
Ninette, such of whom Louis Quinze would chuck the chin down the deadly
introductory walks of Versailles.  The reason of her desiring to go was
the fatal sin of curiosity, and, therefore, her sex's burden, not hers.
Jorian was a Mousquetaire, with plumes and ruffles prodigious, and a
hen's heart beneath his cock's feathers.  'Pourtant j'y allai.  I saw
your great ladies, how they carry themselves when they would amuse
themselves, and, mon Dieu!  Paris has done its utmost to grace their
persons, and the length of their robes did the part of Providence in
bestowing height upon them, parceque, vous savez, Monsieur, c'est
extraordinaire comme ils ont les jambes courtes, ces Anglaises!'  Our
aristocracy, however, was not so bad in that respect as our bourgeoisie;
yet it was easy to perceive that our female aristocracy, though they
could ride, had never been drilled to walk: 'de belles femmes, oui;
seulement, tenez, je n'admire ni les yeux de vache, ni de souris, ni mime
ceux de verre comme ornement feminin.  Avec de l'embonpoint elles font de
l'effet, mais maigre il n'y a aucune illusion possible.'

This vindictive critic smarted, with cause, at the recollection of her
walk out of her rooms.  Jorian's audacity or infatuation quitted him
immediately after he had gratified her whim.  The stout Mousquetaire
placed her in a corner, and enveloped her there, declaring that her
petition had been that she might come to see, not to be seen,--as if, she
cried out tearfully, the two wishes must not necessarily exist together,
like the masculine and the feminine in this world!  Prince Hal, acting
the most profligate period of his career, espied her behind the
Mousquetaire's moustache, and did not fail to make much of his discovery.
In a perilous moment for the reputation of the Ball, my father handed him
over to Gascoigne, and conducted Jenny in a leisurely walk on his arm out
of the rooms.

'Il est comme les Romains,' she said: 'he never despairs of himself.
It is a Jupiter!  If he must punish you he confers a dignity in doing it.
Now I comprehend, that with such women as these grandes dames Anglaises
I should have done him harm but for his greatness of soul.'

Some harm, I fancied, must have been done, in spite of his boast to the
contrary.  He had to be in London every other night, and there were tales
current of intrigues against him which had their sources from very lofty
regions.  But in Chippenden he threw off London, just as lightly as in
London he discarded Chippenden.  No symptom of personal discouragement,
or of fatigue, was betrayed in his face.  I spoke once of that paragraph
purporting to emanate from Prince Ernest.

'It may,' he said.  'Business!  Richie.'

He set to counting the promises of votes, disdaining fears and
reflections.  Concerts, cricket-matches, Balls, dinner-parties, and the
round of the canvass, and speech-making at our gatherings, occupied every
minute of my time, except on Saturday evenings, when I rode over to
Riversley with Temple to spend the Sunday.  Temple, always willing to
play second to me, and a trifle melancholy under his partial eclipse-
which, perhaps, suggested the loss of Janet to him--would have it that
this election was one of the realizations of our boyish dreams of
greatness.  The ladies were working rosettes for me.  My aunt Dorothy
talked very anxiously about the day appointed by my father to repay the
large sum expended.  All hung upon that day, she said, speaking from her
knowledge of the squire.  She was moved to an extreme distress by the
subject.

'He is confident, Harry; but where can he obtain the money?  If your
grandfather sees it invested in your name in Government securities, he
will be satisfied, not otherwise: nothing less will satisfy him; and if
that is not done, he will join you and your father together in his mind;
and as he has hitherto treated one he will treat both.  I know him.  He
is just, to the extent of his vision; but he will not be able to separate
you.  He is aware that your father has not restricted his expenses since
they met; he will say you should have used your influence.'

She insisted on this, until the tears streamed from her eyes, telling me
that my grandfather was the most upright and unsuspicious of men, and
precisely on that account the severest when he thought he had been
deceived.  The fair chances of my election did not console her, as it did
me, by dazzling me.  She affirmed strongly that she was sure my father
expected success at the election to be equivalent to the promised
restitution of the money, and begged me to warn him that nothing short of
the sum squandered would be deemed sufficient at Riversley.  My dear
aunt, good woman though she was, seemed to me to be waxing miserly.
The squire had given her the name of Parsimony; she had vexed him, Janet
told me, by subscribing a miserable sum to a sailors' asylum that he
patronized--a sum he was ashamed to see standing as the gift of a
Beltham; and she had stopped the building of a wing of her village
school-house, designed upon his plan.  Altogether, she was fretful and
distressful; she appeared to think that I could have kept my father in
better order.  Riversley was hearing new and strange reports of him.  But
how could I at Chippenden thwart his proceedings in London?  Besides, he
was serving me indefatigably.

It can easily be imagined what description of banter he had to meet and
foil.

'This gentleman is obliging enough to ask me, "How about the Royal Arms?"
If in his extreme consideration he means to indicate my Arms, I will
inform him that they are open to him; he shall find entertainment for man
and beast; so he is doubly assured of a welcome.'

Questioned whether he did not think he was entitled to be rated at the
value of half-a-crown, he protested that whatever might be the sum of his
worth, he was pure coin, of which neither party in Chippenden could
accuse the silver of rubbing off; and he offered forthwith an impromptu
apologue of a copper penny that passed itself off for a crown-piece, and
deceived a portion of the country: that was why (with a wave of the arm
over the Hipperdon faction) it had a certain number of backers; for
everybody on whom the counterfeit had been foisted, praised it to keep it
in the currency.

'Now, gentlemen, I apprehend that Chippenden is not the pocket-borough
for Hipperdon coin.  Back with him to the Mint!  and, with your
permission, we will confiscate the first syllable of his name, while we
consign him to oblivion, with a hip, hip, hip, hurrah for Richmond!'

The cheers responded thunderingly, and were as loud when he answered a
'How 'bout the Dauphin?' by saying that it was the Tory hotel, of which
he knew nothing.

'A cheer for old Roy!' Edbury sang out.

My father checked the roar, and turned to him.

'Marquis of Edbury, come to the front!'

Edbury declined to budge, but the fellows round him edged aside to show
him a mark for my father's finger.

'Gentlemen, this is the young Marquis of Edbury, a member of the House of
Lords by right of his birth, born to legislate for you and me.  He,
gentlemen, makes our laws.  Examine him, hear him, meditate on him.'

He paused cruelly for Edbury to open his mouth.  The young lord looked
confounded, and from that moment behaved becomingly.

'He might have been doing mischief to-morrow,' my father said to me, and
by letting me conceive his adroitness a matter of design, comforted me
with proofs of intelligent power, and made me feel less the melancholy
conjunction of a piece of mechanism and a piece of criticism, which I was
fast growing to be in the contemplation of the agencies leading to honour
in our land.  Edbury whipped his four-in-hand to conduct our voters to
the poll.  We had to pull hard against Tory interest.  It was a sharp,
dubious, hot day--a day of outcries against undue influence and against
bribery--a day of beer and cheers and the insanest of tricks to cheat the
polling-booth.  Old John Thresher of Dipwell, and Farmer Eckerthy drove
over to Chippenden to afford me aid and countenance, disconcerting me by
the sight of them, for I associated them with Janet rather than with
Ottilia, and it was to Ottilia that I should have felt myself rising when
the figures increased their pace in my favour, and the yeasty mob
surrounding my father's superb four-horsed chariot responded to his
orations by proclaiming me victor.

'I congratulate you, Mr. Richmond,' Dettermain said.  'Up to this day I
have had my fears that we should haul more moonshine than fish in our
net.  Your father has accomplished prodigies.'

My father, with the bloom of success on his face, led me aside soon after
a safe majority of upwards of seventy had been officially announced.
'Now, Richie,' said he, 'you are a Member.  Now to the squire away!
Thank the multitude and off, and as quick to Sarkeld as you well can, and
tell the squire from me that I pardon his suspicions.  I have landed you
a Member--that will satisfy him.  I am willing, tell him .  .  .  you
know me competent to direct mines .  .  .  bailiff of his estates--
whatever he pleases, to effect a reconciliation.  I must be in London to-
night--I am in the thick of the fray there.  No matter: go, my son.'
He embraced me.  It was not a moment for me to catechize him, though I
could see that he was utterly deluded.

Between moonlight and morning, riding with Temple and Captain Bulsted on
either side of me, I drew rein under the red Grange windows, tired, and
in love with its air of sleepy grandeur.  Janet's window was open.  I
hailed her.  'Has he won?' she sang out in the dark of her room, as
though the cry of delight came upon the leap from bed.  She was dressed.
She had commissioned Farmer Eckerthy to bring her the news at any hour of
the night.  Seeing me, she clapped hands.  'Harry, I congratulate you a
thousand times.'  She had wit to guess that I should never have thought
of coming had I not been the winner.  I could just discern the curve and
roll of her famed thick brown hair in the happy shrug of her shoulder,
and imagined the full stream of it as she leaned out of window to talk to
us.

Janet herself, unfastened the hall-door bolts.  She caressed the horses,
feverishly exulting, with charming subdued laughter of victory and
welcome, and amused us by leading my horse round to stables, and
whistling for one of the lads, playing what may, now and then, be a
pretty feature in a young woman of character--the fair tom-boy girl.
She and her maid prepared coffee and toast for us, and entered the hall,
one after the other, laden with dishes of cold meat; and not until the
captain had eaten well did she tell him slyly that somebody, whom she had
brought to Riversley yesterday, was abed and asleep upstairs.  The
slyness and its sisterly innocence lit up our eyes, and our hearts
laughed.  Her cheeks were deliciously overcoloured.  We stole I know not
what from the night and the day, and conventional circumstances, and
rallied Captain Bulsted, and behaved as decorous people who treat the
night properly, and live by rule, do not quite do.  Never since Janet was
a girl had I seen her so spirited and responsive: the womanly armour of
half-reserve was put away.  We chatted with a fresh-hearted natural young
creature who forfeited not a particle of her ladyship while she made
herself our comrade in talk and frolic.

Janet and I walked part of the way to the station with Temple, who had to
catch an early train, and returning--the song of skylarks covering us--
joined hands, having our choice between nothing to say, and the excess;
perilous both.




CHAPTER XLIV

MY FATHER IS MIRACULOUSLY RELIEVED BY FORTUNE

My grandfather had a gratification in my success, mingled with a
transparent jealousy of the chief agent in procuring it.  He warned me
when I left him that he was not to be hoodwinked: he must see the money
standing in my name on the day appointed.  His doubts were evident, but
he affected to be expectant.  Not a word of Sarkeld could be spoken.  My
success appeared to be on a more visionary foundation the higher I
climbed.

Now Jorian DeWitt had affirmed that the wealthy widow Lady Sampleman was
to be had by my father for the asking.  Placed as we were, I regarded the
objections to his alliance with her in a mild light.  She might lend me
the money to appease the squire; that done, I would speedily repay it.
I admitted, in a letter to my aunt Dorothy, the existing objections: but
the lady had long been enamoured of him, I pleaded, and he was past the
age for passionate affection, and would infallibly be courteous and kind.
She was rich.  We might count on her to watch over him carefully.
Of course, with such a wife, he would sink to a secondary social sphere;
was it to be regretted if he did?  The letter was a plea for my own
interests, barely veiled.

At the moment of writing it, and moreover when I treated my father with
especial coldness, my heart was far less warm in the contemplation of its
pre-eminent aim than when I was suffering him to endanger it, almost
without a protest.  Janet and a peaceful Riversley, and a life of quiet
English distinction, beckoned to me visibly, and not hatefully.  The
image of Ottilia conjured up pictures of a sea of shipwrecks, a scene of
immeasurable hopelessness.  Still, I strove toward that.  My strivings
were against my leanings, and imagining the latter, which involved no
sacrifice of the finer sense of honour, to be in the direction of my
lower nature, I repelled them to preserve a lofty aim that led me through
questionable ways.

'Can it be you, Harry,' my aunt Dorothy's reply ran (I had anticipated
her line of reasoning, though not her warmth), 'who advise him to this
marriage from a motive so inexplicably unworthy?  That you will repay her
the money, I do not require your promise to assure me.  The money is
nothing.  It is the prospect of her life and fortune which you are
consenting, if not urging him, to imperil for your own purposes.  Are you
really prepared to imitate in him, with less excuse for doing it, the
things you most condemn?  Let it be checked at the outset.  It cannot be.
A marriage of inclination on both sides, prudent in a worldly sense, we
might wish for him, perhaps, if he could feel quite sure of himself.  His
wife might persuade him not to proceed in his law-case.  There I have
long seen his ruin.  He builds such expectations on it!  You speak of
something worse than a mercenary marriage.  I see this in your
handwriting!--your approval of it!  I have to check the whisper that
tells me it reads like a conspiracy.  Is she not a simpleton?  Can you
withhold your pity?  and pitying, can you possibly allow her to be
entrapped?  Forgive my seeming harshness.  I do not often speak to my
Harry so.  I do now because I must appeal to you, as the one chiefly
responsible, on whose head the whole weight of a dreadful error will
fall.  Oh!  my dearest, be guided by the purity of your feelings to shun
doubtful means.  I have hopes that after the first few weeks your
grandfather will--I know he does not 'expect to find the engagement
fulfilled--be the same to you that he was before he discovered the
extravagance.  You are in Parliament, and I am certain, that by keeping
as much as possible to yourself, and living soberly, your career there
will persuade him to meet your wishes.'

The letter was of great length.  In conclusion, she entreated me to
despatch an answer by one of the early morning trains; entreating me once
more to cause 'any actual deed' to be at least postponed.  The letter
revealed what I had often conceived might be.

My rejoinder to my aunt Dorothy laid stress on my father's pledge of his
word of honour as a gentleman to satisfy the squire on a stated day.
I shrank from the idea of the Riversley crow over him.  As to the lady,
I said we would see that her money was fastened to her securely before
she committed herself to the deeps.  The money to be advanced to me would
lie at my bankers, in my name,--untouched: it would be repaid in the bulk
after a season.  This I dwelt on particularly, both to satisfy her and to
appease my sense of the obligation.  An airy pleasantry in the tone of
this epistle amused me while writing it and vexed me when it had gone.
But a letter sent, upon special request, by railway, should not, I
thought, be couched in the ordinary strain.  Besides one could not write
seriously of a person like Lady Sampleman.

I consulted my aunt Dorothy's scruples by stopping my father on his way
to the lady.  His carriage was at the door: I suggested money-lenders: he
had tried them all.  He begged me to permit him to start: but it was too
ignominious to think of its being done under my very eyes, and I refused.
He had tried the money-lenders yesterday.  They required a mortgage
solider than expectations for the sum we wanted.  Dettermain and Newson
had declined to undertake the hypothecation of his annuity.  Providence
pointed to Sampleman.

'You change in a couple of nights, Richie,' said he.  'Now I am always
the identical man.  I shall give happiness to one sincerely good soul.
I have only to offer myself--let me say in becoming modesty, I believe
so.  Let me go to her and have it over, for with me a step taken is a
thing sanctified.  I have in fact held her in reserve.  Not that I think
Fortune has abandoned us: but a sagacious schemer will not leave
everything to the worthy Dame.  I should have driven to her yesterday,
if I had not heard from Dettermain and Newson that there was a hint of
a negotiation for a compromise.  Government is fairly frightened.'

He mused.  'However, I slept on it, and arrived at the conclusion this
morning that my old Richie stood in imminent jeopardy of losing the fruit
of all my toil.  The good woman will advance the money to her husband.
When I pledged my word to the squire I had reason to imagine the two
months a sufficient time.  We have still a couple of days.  I have heard
of men who lost heart at the eleventh hour, and if they had only hung on,
with gallant faith in themselves, they would have been justified by the
result.  Faith works miracles.  At least it allows time for them.'

His fertile ingenuity spared mine the task of persuading him to postpone
the drive to Lady Sampleman.  But that he would have been prompt to go,
at a word from me, and was actually about to go when I entered his house,
I could not question.

He drove in manifest relief of mind to Dettermain and Newson's.

I had an appointment with Mr. Temple at a great political Club, to meet
the gentlemen who were good enough to undertake the introduction of the
infant member to the House of Commons.  My incessantly twisting
circumstances foiled the pleasure and pride due to me.  From the Club I
bent my steps to Temple's district, and met in the street young Eckart
vom Hof, my champion and second on a memorable occasion, fresh upon
London, and looking very Germanic in this drab forest of our city people.
He could hardly speak of Deutschland for enthusiasm at the sight of the
moving masses.  His object in coming to England, he assured me honestly,
was to study certain editions of Tibullus in the British Museum.  When he
deigned to speak of Sarkeld, it was to say that Prince Hermann was
frequently there.  I gave him no chance to be sly, though he pushed for
it, at a question of the Princess Ottilia's health.

The funeral pace of the block of cabs and omnibuses engrossed his
attention.  Suddenly the Englishman afforded him an example of the
reserve of impetuosity we may contain.  I had seen my aunt Dorothy in a
middle line of cabs coming from the City, and was darting in a twinkling
among wheels and shafts and nodding cab-horse noses to take her hand and
know the meaning of her presence in London.  She had family business to
do: she said no more.  I mentioned that I had checked my father for a day
or two.  She appeared grateful.  Her anxiety was extreme that she might
not miss the return train, so I relinquished her hand, commanded the
cabman to hasten, and turned to rescue Eckart--too young and faithful a
collegian not to follow his friend, though it were into the lion's den-
from a terrific entanglement of horseflesh and vehicles brawled over by a
splendid collision of tongues.  Secure on the pavement again, Eckart
humbly acknowledged that the English tongue could come out upon
occasions.  I did my best to amuse him.

Whether it amused him to see me take my seat in the House of Commons, and
hear a debate in a foreign language, I cannot say; but the only pleasure
of which I was conscious at that period lay in the thought that he or his
father, Baron vom Hof, might some day relate the circumstance at Prince
Ernest's table, and fix in Ottilia's mind the recognition of my having
tried to perform my part of the contract.  Beggared myself, and knowing
Prince Hermann to be in Sarkeld, all I hoped for was to show her I had
followed the path she traced.  My state was lower: besides misfortune I
now found myself exalted only to feel my profound insignificance.

'The standard for the House is a man's ability to do things,' said
Charles Etherell, my friendly introductor, by whom I was passingly,
perhaps ironically, advised to preserve silence for two or three
sessions.

He counselled the study of Foreign Affairs for a present theme.  I talked
of our management of them, in the strain of Dr. Julius von Karsteg.

'That's journalism, or clippings from a bilious essay; it won't do for
the House,' he said.  'Revile the House to the country, if you like, but
not the country to the House.'

When I begged him to excuse my absurdity, he replied:

'It's full of promise, so long as you're silent.'

But to be silent was to be merely an obedient hound of the whip.  And if
the standard for the House was a man's ability to do things, I was in the
seat of a better man.  External sarcasms upon the House, flavoured with
justness, came to my mind, but if these were my masters surrounding me,
how indefinitely small must I be!

Leaving the House on that first night of my sitting, I received Temple's
congratulations outside, and, as though the sitting had exhausted every
personal sentiment, I became filled with his; under totally new
sensations, I enjoyed my distinction through the perception of my old
comrade's friendly jealousy.

'I'll be there, too, some day,' he said, moaning at the prospect of an
extreme age before such honours would befall him.

The society of Eckart prevented me from urging him to puff me up with his
talk as I should have wished, and after I had sent the German to be taken
care of by Mrs. Waddy, I had grown so accustomed to the worldly view of
my position that I was fearing for its stability.  Threats of a petition
against me were abroad.  Supposing the squire disinherited me, could I
stand?  An extraordinary appetite for wealth, a novel appreciation of it
--which was, in truth, a voluntary enlistment into the army of mankind,
and the adoption of its passions--pricked me with an intensity of hope
and dread concerning my dependence on my grandfather.  I lay sleepless
all night, tossing from Riversley to Sarkeld, condemned, it seemed, to
marry Janet and gain riches and power by renouncing my hope of the
princess and the glory belonging to her, unless I should within a few
hours obtain a show of figures at my bankers.

I had promised Etherell to breakfast with him.  A note--a faint scream--
despatched by Mrs. Waddy to Mr. Temple's house informed me that 'the men'
were upon them.  If so, they were the forerunners of a horde, and my
father was as good as extinguished.  He staked everything on success;
consequently, he forfeited pity.

Good-bye to ambition, I thought, and ate heartily, considering robustly
the while how far lower than the general level I might avoid falling.
The report of the debates in morning papers--doubtless, more flowing and,
perhaps, more grammatical than such as I gave ear to overnight--had the
odd effect on me of relieving me from the fit of subserviency into which
the speakers had sunk me.

A conceit of towering superiority took its place, and as Etherell was
kind enough to draw me out and compliment me, I was attacked by a tragic
sense of contrast between my capacities and my probable fortunes.  It was
open to me to marry Janet.  But this meant the loosening of myself with
my own hand for ever from her who was my mentor and my glory, to gain
whom I was in the very tideway.  I could not submit to it, though the
view was like that of a green field of the springs passed by a climber up
the crags.  I went to Anna Penrhys to hear a woman's voice, and partly
told her of my troubles.  She had heard Mr. Hipperdon express his
confident opinion that he should oust me from my seat.  Her indignation
was at my service as a loan: it sprang up fiercely and spontaneously in
allusions to something relating to my father, of which the Marquis of
Edbury had been guilty.  'How you can bear it!' she exclaimed, for I was
not wordy.  The exclamation, however, stung me to put pen to paper--the
woman was not so remote in me as not to be roused by the woman.  I wrote
to Edbury, and to Heriot, bidding him call on the young nobleman.  Late
at night I was at my father's door to perform the act of duty of seeing
him, and hearing how he had entertained Eckart, if he was still master of
his liberty.  I should have known him better: I expected silence and
gloom.  The windows were lighted brilliantly.  As the hall-door opened, a
band of stringed and wood instruments commenced an overture.  Mrs. Waddy
came to me in the hall; she was unintelligible.  One thing had happened
to him at one hour of the morning, and another at another hour.  He was
at one moment suffering the hands of the 'officers' on his shoulder:

'And behold you, Mr. Harry!  a knock, a letter from a messenger, and he
conquers Government!' It struck me that the epitome of his life had been
played in a day: I was quite incredulous of downright good fortune.  He
had been giving a dinner followed by a concert, and the deafening strains
of the music clashed with my acerb spirit, irritating me excessively.
'Where are those men you spoke of?' I asked her.  'Gone,' she
replied,'gone long ago!'

'Paid?' said I.

She was afraid to be precise, but repeated that they were long since
gone.

I singled Jorian DeWitt from among the crowd of loungers on the stairs
and landing between the drawing-rooms.  'Oh, yes, Government has struck
its flag to him,' Jorian said.  'Why weren't you here to dine?  Alphonse
will never beat his achievement of to-day.  Jenny and Carigny gave us a
quarter-of-an-hour before dinner--a capital idea!--"VEUVE ET BACHELIER."
As if by inspiration.  No preparation for it, no formal taking of seats.
It seized amazingly--floated small talk over the soup beautifully.'

I questioned him again.

'Oh, dear, yes; there can't be a doubt about it,' he answered, airily.
'Roy Richmond has won his game.'

Two or three urgent men round a great gentleman were extracting his
affable approbation of the admirable nature of the experiment of the
Chassediane before dinner.  I saw that Eckart was comfortably seated, and
telling Jorian to provide for him in the matter of tobacco, I went to my
room, confused beyond power of thought by the sensible command of fortune
my father, fortune's sport at times, seemed really to have.

His statement of the circumstances bewildered me even more.  He was in no
hurry to explain them; when we met next morning he waited for me to
question him, and said, 'Yes.  I think we have beaten them so far!'
His mind was pre-occupied, he informed me, concerning the defence of a
lady much intrigued against, and resuming the subject: 'Yes, we have
beaten them up to a point, Richie.  And that reminds me: would you have
me go down to Riversley and show the squire the transfer paper?  At any
rate you can now start for Sarkeld, and you do, do you not?  To-day: to-
morrow at latest.'

I insisted: 'But how, and in what manner has this money been paid?' The
idea struck me that he had succeeded in borrowing it.

'Transferred to me in the Bank, and intelligence of the fact sent to
Dettermain and Newson, my lawyers,' he replied.  'Beyond that, I know as
little as you, Richie, though indubitably I hoped to intimidate them.
If,' he added, with a countenance perfectly simple and frank, 'they
expect me to take money for a sop, I am not responsible, as I by no means
provoked it, for their mistake.

'I proceed.  The money is useful to you, so I rejoice at it.'

Five and twenty thousand pounds was the amount.

'No stipulation was attached to it?'

'None.  Of course a stipulation was implied: but of that I am not bound
to be cognizant.'

'Absurd!' I cried: 'it can't have come from the quarter you suspect.'

'Where else?' he asked.

I thought of the squire, Lady Edbury, my aunt, Lady Sampleman, Anna
Penrhys, some one or other of his frantic female admirers.  But the
largeness of the amount, and the channel selected for the payment,
precluded the notion that any single person had come to succour him in
his imminent need, and, as it chanced, mine.

Observing that my speculations wavered, he cited numerous instances in
his life of the special action of Providence in his favour, and was bold
enough to speak of a star, which his natural acuteness would have checked
his doing before me, if his imagination had not been seriously struck.

'You hand the money over to me, sir?' I said.

'Without a moment of hesitation, my dear boy,' he melted me by answering.

'You believe you have received a bribe?'

'That is my entire belief--the sole conclusion I can arrive at.  I will
tell you, Richie: the old Marquis of Edbury once placed five thousand
pounds to my account on a proviso that I should--neglect, is the better
word, my Case.  I inherited from him at his death; of course his demise
cancelled the engagement.  He had been the friend of personages
implicated.  He knew.  I suspect he apprehended the unpleasant position
of a witness.'

'But what was the stipulation you presume was implied?' said I.

'Something that passed between lawyers: I am not bound to be cognizant of
it.  Abandon my claims for a few thousands?  Not for ten, not for ten
hundred times the sum!'

To be free from his boisterous influence, which made my judgement as
unsteady as the weather-glass in a hurricane, I left my house and went
straight to Dettermain and Newson, who astonished me quite as much by
assuring me that the payment of the money was a fact.  There was no
mystery about it.  The intelligence and transfer papers, they said, had
not been communicated to them by the firm they were opposed to, but by a
solicitor largely connected with the aristocracy; and his letter had
briefly declared the unknown donator's request that legal proceedings
should forthwith be stopped.  They offered no opinion of their own.
Suggestions of any kind, they seemed to think, had weight, and all of
them an equal weight, to conclude from the value they assigned to every
idea of mine.  The name of the solicitor in question was Charles Adolphus
Bannerbridge.  It was, indeed, my old, one of my oldest friends; the same
by whom I had been led to a feast and an evening of fun when a little
fellow starting in the London streets.  Sure of learning the whole truth
from old Mr. Bannerbridge, I walked to his office and heard that he had
suddenly been taken ill.  I strode on to his house, and entered a house
of mourning.  The kind old man, remembered by me so vividly, had died
overnight.  Miss Bannerbridge perceived that I had come on an errand, and
with her gentle good breeding led me to speak of it.  She knew nothing
whatever of the sum of money.  She was, however, aware that an annuity
had been regularly paid through the intervention of her father.  I was
referred by her to a Mr. Richards, his recently-established partner.
This gentleman was ignorant of the whole transaction.

Throughout the day I strove to combat the pressure of evidence in favour
of the idea that an acknowledgement of special claims had been wrested
from the enemy.  Temple hardly helped me, though his solid sense was dead
against the notions entertained by my father and Jorian DeWitt, and
others besides, our elders.  The payment of the sum through the same
channel which supplied the annuity, pointed distinctly to an admission of
a claim, he inclined to think, and should be supposed to come from a
personage having cause either to fear him or to assist him.  He set my
speculations astray by hinting that the request for the stopping of the
case might be a blind.  A gift of money, he said shrewdly, was a
singularly weak method of inducing a man to stop the suit of a life-time.
I thought of Lady Edbury; but her income was limited, and her expenditure
was not of Lady Sampleman, but it was notorious that she loved her purse
as well as my aunt Dorothy, and was even more, in the squire's phrase,
'a petticoated parsimony.' Anna Penrhys appeared the likelier, except for
the fact that the commencement of the annuity was long before our
acquaintance with her.  I tried her on the subject.  Her amazement was
without a shadow of reserve.  'It 's Welsh, it's not English,' she
remarked.  I knew no Welshwoman save Anna.

'Do you know the whole of his history?' said she.  Possibly one of the
dozen unknown episodes in it might have furnished the clue, I agreed with
her.

The sight of twenty-one thousand pounds placed to my credit in the Funds
assuaged my restless spirit of investigation.  Letters from the squire
and my aunt Dorothy urged me to betake myself to Riversley, there finally
to decide upon what my course should be.

'Now that you have the money, pray,' St. Parsimony wrote,--'pray be
careful of it.  Do not let it be encroached on.  Remember it is to serve
one purpose.  It should be guarded strictly against every appeal for
aid,' etc., with much underlining.

My grandfather returned the papers.  His letter said 'I shall not break
my word.  Please to come and see me before you take steps right or left.'

So here was the dawn again.

I could in a day or two start for Sarkeld.  Meanwhile, to give my father
a lesson, I discharged a number of bills, and paid off the bond to which
Edbury's name was attached.  My grandfather, I knew, was too sincerely
and punctiliously a gentleman in practical conduct to demand a further
inspection of my accounts.  These things accomplished, I took the train
for Riversley, and proceeded from the station to Durstan, where I knew
Heriot to be staying.  Had I gone straight to my grandfather, there would
have been another story to tell.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Bandied the weariful shuttlecock of gallantry
Determine that the future is in our debt, and draw on it
Faith works miracles.  At least it allows time for them
He whipped himself up to one of his oratorical frenzies
I was discontented, and could not speak my discontent
No Act to compel a man to deny what appears in the papers
Puns are the smallpox of the language
Stultification of one's feelings and ideas
They dare not.  The more I dare, the less dare they
Too prompt, too full of personal relish of his point




End of this Project Gutenberg Etext of Adventures of Harry Richmond, v6
by George Meredith






THE ADVENTURES OF HARRY RICHMOND

By George Meredith



BOOK 7.

XLV.      WITHIN AN INCH OF MY LIFE .
XLVI.     AMONG GIPSY WOMEN
XLVII.    MY FATHER ACTS THE CHARMER AGAIN
XLVIII.   THE PRINCESS ENTRAPPED
XLIX.     WHICH FORESHADOWS A GENERAL GATHERING
L.        WE ARE ALL IN MY FATHER'S NET
LI.       AN ENCOUNTER SHOWING MY FATHER'S GENIUS IN A STRONG LIGHT



CHAPTER XLV

WITHIN AN INCH OF MY LIFE

A single tent stood in a gully running from one of the gravel-pits of the
heath, near an iron-red rillet, and a girl of Kiomi's tribe leaned over
the lazy water at half length, striking it with her handkerchief.  At a
distance of about twice a stone's-throw from the new carriage-road
between Durstan and Bulsted, I fancied from old recollections she might
be Kiomi herself.  This was not the time for her people to be camping on
Durstan.  Besides, I feared it improbable that one would find her in any
of the tracks of her people.  The noise of the wheels brought the girl's
face round to me.  She was one of those who were babies in the tents when
I was a boy.  We were too far apart for me to read her features.  I lay
back in the carriage, thinking that it would have been better for my poor
little wild friend if I had never crossed the shadow of her tents.  A
life caught out of its natural circle is as much in danger of being lost
as a limb given to a wheel in spinning machinery; so it occurred to me,
until I reflected that Prince Ernest might make the same remark, and
deplore the damage done to the superior machinery likewise.

My movements appeared to interest the girl.  She was up on a mound of the
fast-purpling heath, shading her eyes to watch me, when I called at
Bulsted lodge-gates to ask for a bed under Julia's roof that night.  Her
bare legs twinkled in a nimble pace on the way to Durstan Hall, as if she
was determined to keep me in sight.  I waved my hand to her.  She
stopped.  A gipsy's girl's figure is often as good an index to her mind
as her face, and I perceived that she had not taken my greeting
favourably; nor would she advance a step to my repeated beckonings; I
tried hat, handkerchief, purse, in vain.  My driver observed that she was
taken with a fit of the obstinacy of 'her lot.' He shouted, 'Silver,' and
then 'Fortune.'  She stood looking.  The fellow discoursed on the nature
of gipsies.  Foxes were kept for hunting, he said; there was reason in
that.  Why we kept gipsies none could tell.  He once backed a gipsy
prizefighter, who failed to keep his appointment.  'Heart sunk too low
below his belt, sir.  You can't reckon on them for performances.  And
that same man afterwards fought the gamest fight in the chronicles o' the
Ring!  I knew he had it in him.  But they're like nothing better than the
weather; you can't put money on 'em and feel safe.'  Consequently he saw
no good in them.

'She sticks to her post,' he said, as we turned into the Durstan grounds.
The girl was like a flag-staff on the upper line of heathland.

Heriot was strolling, cigar in mouth, down one of the diminutive alleys
of young fir in this upstart estate.  He affected to be prepossessed by
the case between me and Edbury, and would say nothing of his own affairs,
save that he meant to try for service in one of the Continental armies;
he whose susceptible love for his country was almost a malady.  But he
had given himself to women it was Cissy this, Trichy that, and the wiles
of a Florence, the spites of an Agatha, duperies, innocent-seemings,
witcheries, reptile-tricks of the fairest of women, all through his
conversation.  He had so saturated himself with the resources, evasions,
and desperate cruising of these light creatures of wind, tide, and
tempest, that, like one who has been gazing on the whirligoround, he saw
the whole of women running or only waiting for a suitable partner to run
the giddy ring to perdition and an atoning pathos.

I cut short one of Heriot's narratives by telling him that this picking
bones of the dish was not to my taste.  He twitted me with turning
parson.  I spoke of Kiomi.  Heriot flushed, muttering, 'The little
devil!'  with his usual contemplative relish of devilry.  We parted,
feeling that severe tension of the old links keeping us together which
indicates the lack of new ones: a point where simple affection must bear
the strain of friendship if it can.  Heriot had promised to walk half-way
with me to Bulsted, in spite of Lady Maria's childish fears of some
attack on him.  He was now satisfied with a good-bye at the hall-doors,
and he talked ostentatiously of a method that he had to bring Edbury up
to the mark.  I knew that same loud decreeing talk to be a method on his
own behalf of concealing his sensitive resentment at the tone I had
adopted: Lady Maria's carriage had gone to fetch her husband from a
political dinner.  My portmanteau advised me to wait for its return.
Durstan and Riversley were at feud, however, owing to some powerful rude
English used toward the proprietor of the former place by the squire; so
I thought it better to let one of the grooms shoulder my luggage, and
follow him.

The night was dark; he chose the roadway, and I crossed the heath,
meeting an exhilarating high wind that made my blood race: Egoism is not
peculiar to any period of life; it is only especially curious in a young
man beginning to match himself against his elders, for in him it suffuses
the imagination; he is not merely selfishly sentient, or selfishly
scheming: his very conceptions are selfish.  I remember walking at my
swiftest pace, blaming everybody I knew for insufficiency, for want of
subordination to my interests, for poverty of nature, grossness,
blindness to the fine lights shining in me; I blamed the Fates for
harassing me, circumstances for not surrounding me with friends worthy of
me.  The central 'I' resembled the sun of this universe, with the
difference that it shrieked for nourishment, instead of dispensing it.

My monstrous conceit of elevation will not suffer condensation into
sentences.  What I can testify to is, that for making you bless the legs
you stand on, a knockdown blow is a specific.  I had it before I knew
that a hand was up.  I should have fancied that I had run athwart a tree,
but for the recollection, as I was reeling to the ground, of a hulk of a
fellow suddenly fronting me, and he did not hesitate with his fist.  I
went over and over into a heathery hollow.  The wind sang shrill through
the furzes; nothing was visible but black clumps, black cloud.
Astonished though I was, and shaken, it flashed through me that this was
not the attack of a highwayman.  He calls upon you to stand and deliver:
it is a foe that hits without warning.  The blow took me on the forehead,
and might have been worse.  Not seeing the enemy, curiosity was almost as
strong in me as anger; but reflecting that I had injured no one I knew
of, my nerves were quickly at the right pitch.  Brushing some spikes of
furze off my hands, I prepared for it.  A cry rose.  My impression seemed
to be all backward, travelling up to me a moment or two behind time.  I
recognised a strange tongue in the cry, but too late that it was Romany
to answer it.  Instantly a voice was audible above the noisy wind: 'I
spot him.'  Then began some good and fair fighting.  I got my footing on
grass, and liked the work.  The fellow facing me was unmistakably gipsy-
build.  I, too, had length of arm, and a disposition to use it by hitting
straight out, with footing firm, instead of dodging and capering, which
told in my favour, and is decidedly the best display of the noble art on
a dark night.

My dancer went over as neatly as I had preceded him; and therewith I
considered enough was done for vengeance.  The thrill of a salmon on the
gut is known to give a savage satisfaction to our original nature; it is
but an extension and attenuation of the hearty contentment springing from
a thorough delivery of the fist upon the prominent features of an
assailant that yields to it perforce.  Even when you receive such perfect
blows you are half satisfied.  Feeling conqueror, my wrath was soothed; I
bent to have a look at my ruffian, and ask him what cause of complaint
gipsies camping on Durstan could find against Riversley.  A sharp stroke
on the side of my neck sent me across his body.  He bit viciously.  In
pain and desperation I flew at another of the tawny devils.  They
multiplied.  I took to my heels; but this was the vainest of stratagems,
they beat me in nimbleness.  Four of them were round me when I wheeled
breathless to take my chance at fighting the odds.  Fiery men have not
much notion of chivalry: gipsies the least of all.  They yelled disdain
of my summons to them to come on one by one: 'Now they had caught me, now
they would pay me, now they would pound me; and, standing at four
corners, they commended me to think of becoming a jelly.  Four though
they were, they kept their positions; they left it to me to rush in for a
close; the hinder ones held out of arms' reach so long as I was
disengaged.  I had perpetually to shift my front, thinking--Oh, for a
stick!  any stout bit of timber!  My fists ached, and a repetition of
nasty dull knocks on back and neck, slogging thumps dealt by men getting
to make sure of me, shattered my breathing.

I cried out for a pause, offered to take a couple of them at a time: I
challenged three-the fourth to bide.  I was now the dancer: left, right,
and roundabout I had to swing, half-stunned, half-strangled with gorge.
Those terrible blows in the back did the mischief.  Sickness threatened
to undermine me.  Boxers have breathing-time: I had none.  Stiff and
sick, I tried to run; I tottered, I stood to be knocked down, I dropped
like a log-careless of life.  But I smelt earth keenly, and the damp
grass and the devil's play of their feet on my chin, chest, and thighs,
revived a fit of wrath enough to set me staggering on my legs again.
They permitted it, for the purpose of battering me further.  I passed
from down to up mechanically, and enjoyed the chestful of air given me in
the interval of rising: thought of Germany and my father, and Janet at
her window, complacently; raised a child's voice in my throat for mercy,
quite inaudible, and accepted my punishment.  One idea I had was, that I
could not possibly fail as a speaker after this--I wanted but a minute's
grace to fetch breath for an oration, beginning, 'You fools!' for I
guessed that they had fallen upon the wrong man.  Not a second was
allowed.  Soon the shrewd physical bracing, acting momentarily on my
brain, relaxed; the fitful illumination ceased: all ideas faded out-clung
about my beaten body-fled.  The body might have been tossed into its
grave, for aught I knew.




CHAPTER XLVI

AMONG GIPSY WOMEN

I cannot say how long it was after my senses had gone when I began to
grope for them on the warmest of heaving soft pillows, and lost the
slight hold I had on them with the effort.  Then came a series of
climbings and fallings, risings to the surface and sinkings fathoms
below.  Any attempt to speculate pitched me back into darkness.  Gifted
with a pair of enormous eyes, which threw surrounding objects to a
distance of a mile away, I could not induce the diminutive things to
approach; and shutting eyes led to such a rolling of mountains in my
brain, that, terrified by the gigantic revolution, I lay determinedly
staring; clothed, it seemed positive, in a tight-fitting suit of sheet-
lead; but why?  I wondered why, and immediately received an extinguishing
blow.  My pillow was heavenly; I was constantly being cooled on it, and
grew used to hear a croon no more musical than the unstopped reed above
my head; a sound as of a breeze about a cavern's mouth, more soothing
than a melody.  Conjecture of my state, after hovering timidly in dread
of relapses, settled and assured me I was lying baked, half-buried in an
old river-bed; moss at my cheek, my body inextricable; water now and then
feebly striving to float me out, with horrid pain, with infinite
refreshingness.  A shady light, like the light through leafage, I could
see; the water I felt.  Why did it keep trying to move me?  I questioned
and sank to the depths again.

The excruciated patient was having his wet bandages folded across his
bruises, and could not bear a motion of the mind.

The mind's total apathy was the sign of recovering health.  Kind nature
put that district to sleep while she operated on the disquieted lower
functions.  I looked on my later self as one observes the mossy bearded
substances travelling blind along the undercurrent of the stream,
clinging to this and that, twirling absurdly.

Where was I?  Not in a house.  But for my condition of absolute calm,
owing to skilful treatment, open air, and physical robustness, the scene
would have been of a kind to scatter the busy little workmen setting up
the fabric of my wits.  A lighted oil-cup stood on a tripod in the middle
of a tent-roof, and over it the creased neck and chin of a tall old
woman, splendid in age, reddened vividly; her black eyes and grey brows,
and greyishblack hair fell away in a dusk of their own.  I thought her
marvellous.  Something she held in her hands that sent a thin steam
between her and the light.  Outside, in the A cutting of the tent's
threshold, a heavy-coloured sunset hung upon dark land.  My pillow
meantime lifted me gently at a regular measure, and it was with
untroubled wonder that I came to the knowledge of a human heart beating
within it.  So soft could only be feminine; so firm still young.  The
bosom was Kiomi's.  A girl sidled at the opening of the tent, peeping in,
and from a mufed rattle of subpectoral thunder discharged at her in quick
heated snaps, I knew Kiomi's voice.  After an altercation of their
monotonous gipsy undertones, the girl dropped and crouched outside.

It was morning when I woke next, stronger, and aching worse.  I was lying
in the air, and she who served for nurse, pillow, parasol, and bank of
herbage, had her arms round beneath mine cherishingly, all the fingers
outspread and flat on me, just as they had been when I went to sleep.

'Kiomi!'

'Now, you be quiet.'

'Can I stand up a minute or two?'

'No, and you won't talk.'

I submitted.  This was our duel all day: she slipped from me only twice,
and when she did the girl took her place.

I began to think of Bulsted and Riversley.

'Kiomi, how long have I been here?'

'You 'll be twice as long as you've been.'

'A couple of days?'

'More like a dozen.'

'Just tell me what happened.'

'Ghm-m-m,' she growled admonishingly.

Reflecting on it, I felt sure there must have been searching parties over
the heath.

'Kiomi, I say, how was it they missed me?'

She struck at once on my thought.

'They're fools.'

'How did you cheat them?'

'I didn't tie a handkercher across their eyes.'

'You half smothered me once, in the combe.'

'You go to sleep.'

'Have you been doctor?'

The growling tigerish 'Ghm-m-m' constrained me to take it for a lullaby.

'Kiomi, why the deuce did your people attack me?' She repeated the sound
resembling that which sometimes issues from the vent of a mine; but I
insisted upon her answering.

'I 'll put you down and be off,' she threatened.

'Brute of a girl!  I hate you!'

'Hate away.'

'Tell me who found me.'

'I shan't.  You shut your peepers.'

The other and younger girl sung out: 'I found you.'

Kiomi sent a volley at her.

'I did,' said the girl; 'yes, and I nursed you first, I did; and mother
doctored you.  Kiomi hasn't been here a day.'

The old mother came out of the tent.  She felt my pulse, and forthwith
squatted in front of me.  'You're hard to kill, and oily as a bean,' said
she.  'You've only to lie quiet in the sun like a handsome gentleman; I'm
sure you couldn't wish for more.  Air and water's the doctor for such as
you.  You've got the bound in you to jump the ditch: don't you fret at
it, or you'll lose your spring, my good gentleman.'

'Leave off talking to me as a stranger,' I bawled.  'Out with it; why
have you kept me here?  Why did your men pitch into me?'

'OUR men, my good gentleman!' the old woman ejaculated.  There was
innocence indeed!  sufficient to pass the whole tribe before a bench of
magistrates.  She wheedled: 'What have they against a handsome gentleman
like you?  They'd run for you fifty mile a day, and show you all their
tricks and secrets for nothing.'

My despot Kiomi fired invectives at her mother.  The old mother retorted;
the girl joined in.  All three were scowling, flashing, showing teeth,
driving the wordy javelin upon one another, indiscriminately, or two to
one, without a pause; all to a sound like the slack silver string of the
fiddle.

I sang out truce to them; they racked me with laughter; and such
laughter!--the shaking of husks in a half-empty sack.

Ultimately, on a sudden cessation of the storm of tongues, they agreed
that I must have my broth.

Sheer weariness, seasoned with some hope that the broth would give me
strength to mount on my legs and walk, persuaded me to drink it.  Still
the old mother declared that none of her men would ever have laid hands
on me.  Why should they?  she asked.  What had I done to them?  Was it
their way?

Kiomi's arms tightened over my breast.  The involuntary pressure was like
an illumination to me.

No longer asking for the grounds of the attack on a mistaken person,
and bowing to the fiction that none of the tribe had been among my
assailants, I obtained information.  The girl Eveleen had spied me
entering Durstan.  Quite by chance, she was concealed near Bulsted Park
gates when the groom arrived and told the lodge-keeper that Mr. Harry
Richmond was coming up over the heath, and might have lost his way.
'Richmond!' the girl threw a world of meaning into the unexpected name.
Kiomi clutched me to her bosom, but no one breathed the name we had in
our thoughts.

Eveleen and the old mother had searched for me upon the heath, and having
haled me head and foot to their tent, despatched a message to bring Kiomi
down from London to aid them in their desperate shift.  They knew Squire
Beltham's temper.  He would have scattered the tribe to the shores of the
kingdom at a rumour of foul play to his grandson.  Kiomi came in time to
smuggle me through an inspection of the tent and cross-examination of its
ostensible denizens by Captain Bulsted, who had no suspicions, though he
was in a state of wonderment.  Hearing all this, I was the first to say
it would be better I should get out of the neighbourhood as soon as my
legs should support me.  The grin that goes for a laugh among gipsies
followed my question of how Kiomi had managed to smuggle me.  Eveleen was
my informant when the dreaded Kiomi happened to be off duty for a minute.
By a hasty transformation, due to a nightcap on the bandages about the
head, and an old petticoat over my feet, Captain William's insensible
friend was introduced to him as the sore sick great-grandmother of the
tribe, mother of Kiomi's mother, aged ninety-one.  The captain paid like
a man for doctor and burial fees; he undertook also to send the old lady
a pound of snuff to assist her to a last sneeze or two on the right side
of the grave, and he kept his word; for, deeming it necessary to paint
her in a characteristic, these prodigious serpents told him gravely that
she delighted in snuff; it was almost the only thing that kept her alive,
barring a sip of broth.  Captain William's comment on the interesting
piece of longevity whose well-covered length and framework lay exposed to
his respectful contemplation, was, that she must have been a devilish
fine old lady in her day.  'Six foot' was given as her measurement.

One pound of snuff, a bottle of rum, and five sovereigns were the fruits
of the captain's sensibility.  I shattered my ribs with laughter over the
story.  Eveleen dwelt on the triumph, twinkling.  Kiomi despised laughter
or triumph resulting from the natural exercise of craft in an emergency.
'But my handsome gentleman he won't tell on us, will he, when we've
nursed him and doctored him, and made him one of us, and as good a stick
o' timber as grows in the forest?' whined the old mother.  I had to swear
I would not.

'He!' cried Kiomi.

'He may forget us when he's gone,' the mother said.  She would have liked
me to kiss a book to seal the oath.  Anxiety about the safety of their
'homes,' that is, the assurance of an untroubled reception upon their
customary camping-ground, is a peculiarity of the gipsies, distinguishing
them, equally with their cleanliness and thriftiness, from mumpers and
the common wanderers.

It is their tribute to civilization, which generally keeps them within
the laws.

Who that does not know them will believe that under their domestic system
I had the best broth and the best tea I have ever tasted!  They are very
cunning brewers and sagacious buyers too; their maxims show them to
direct all their acuteness upon obtaining quality for their money.  A
compliment not backed by silver is hardly intelligible to the pretty
ones: money is a really credible thing to them; and when they have it,
they know how to use it.  Apparently because they know so well, so
perfectly appreciating it, they have only vague ideas of a corresponding
sentiment on the opposite side to the bargain, and imagine that they fool
people much more often than they succeed in doing.  Once duped
themselves, they are the wariest of the dog-burnt; the place is notched
where it occurred, and for ever avoided.  On the other hand, they repose
implicit faith in a reputation vouched for by their experience.  I was
amused by the girl Eveleen's dotting of houses over the breadth of five
counties, where for this and that article of apparel she designed to
expend portions of a golden guinea, confident that she would get the very
best, and a shilling besides.  The unwonted coin gave her the joy of
supposing she cheated the Mint of that sum.  This guinea was a present to
the girl (to whom I owed my thrashing, by the way) that excused itself
under cover of being a bribe for sight of a mirror interdicted by the
implacable Kiomi.  I wanted to have a look at my face.  Now that the
familiar scenes were beginning to wear their original features to me, my
dread of personal hideousness was distressing, though Eveleen declared
the bad blood in my cheeks and eyes 'had been sucked by pounds of red
meat.' I wondered, whether if I stood up and walked to either one of the
three great halls lying in an obtuse triangle within view, I should
easily be recognized.  When I did see myself, I groaned verily.  With the
silence of profound resignation, I handed back to Eveleen the curious
fragment of her boudoir, which would have grimaced at Helen of Troy.

'You're feeling your nose--you've been looking at a glass!' Kiomi said,
with supernatural swiftness of deduction on her return.

She added for my comfort that nothing was broken, but confessed me to be
still 'a sight'; and thereupon drove knotty language at Eveleen.  The
girl retorted, and though these two would never acknowledge to me that
any of their men had been in this neighbourhood recently, the fact was
treated as a matter of course in their spiteful altercation, and each
saddled the other with the mistake they had committed.  Eveleen snatched
the last word.  What she said I did not comprehend, she must have hit
hard.  Kiomi's eyes lightened, and her lips twitched; she coloured like
the roofing smoke of the tent fire; twice she showed her teeth, as in a
spasm, struck to the heart, unable to speak, breathing in and out of a
bitterly disjoined mouth.  Eveleen ran.  I guessed at the ill-word
spoken.  Kiomi sat eyeing the wood-ashes, a devouring gaze that shot
straight and read but one thing.  They who have seen wild creatures die
will have her before them, saving the fiery eyes.  She became an ashen-
colour, I took her little hand.  Unconscious of me, her brown fingers
clutching at mine, she flung up her nostrils, craving air.

This was the picture of the woman who could not weep in her misery.

'Kiomi, old friend!' I called to her.  I could have cursed that other
friend, the son of mischief; for she, I could have sworn, had been
fiercely and wantonly hunted.  Chastity of nature, intense personal
pride, were as proper to her as the free winds are to the heaths: they
were as visible to dull divination as the milky blue about the iris of
her eyeballs.  She had actually no animal vileness, animal though she
might be termed, and would have appeared if compared with Heriot's
admirable Cissies and Gwennies, and other ladies of the Graces that run
to fall, and spend their pains more in kindling the scent of the huntsman
than in effectively flying.

There was no consolation for her.

The girl Eveleen came in sight, loitering and looking, kicking her idle
heels.

Kiomi turned sharp round to me.

'I'm going.  Your father's here, up at Bulsted.  I'll see him.  He won't
tell.  He'll come soon.  You'll be fit to walk in a day.  You're sound as
a nail.  Goodbye--I shan't say good-bye twice,' she answered my attempt
to keep her, and passed into the tent, out of which she brought a small
bundle tied in a yellow handkerchief, and walked away, without nodding or
speaking.

'What was that you said to Kiomi?' I questioned Eveleen, who was quickly
beside me.

She replied, accurately or not: 'I told her our men'd give her as good as
she gave me, let her wait and see.'

Therewith she pouted; or, to sketch her with precision, 'snouted' would
better convey the vivacity of her ugly flash of features.  It was an
error in me to think her heartless.  She talked of her aunt Kiomi
affectionately, for a gipsy girl, whose modulated tones are all addressed
to the soft public.  Eveleen spoke with the pride of bated breath of the
ferocious unforgivingness of their men.  Perhaps if she had known that I
traced the good repute of the tribes for purity to the sweeter instincts
of the women, she would have eulogized her sex to amuse me.  Gipsy girls,
like other people, are fond of showing off; but it would have been a
victory of education to have helped her to feel the distinction of the
feminine sense of shame half as awfully and warmly as she did the
inscrutable iron despotism of the males.  She hinted that the mistake of
which I had been the victim would be rectified.

'Tell your men I'll hunt them down like rats if I hear of it,' said I.

While we were conversing my father arrived.  Eveleen, not knowing him,
would have had me accept the friendly covering of a mat.

'Here 's a big one!  he's a clergyman,' she muttered to herself, and ran
to him and set up a gipsy whine, fronting me up to the last step while
she advanced; she only yielded ground to my outcry.

My father bent over me.  Kiomi had prepared him for what he saw.  I
quieted his alarm by talking currently and easily.  Julia Bulsted had
despatched a messenger to inform him of my mysterious disappearance; but
he, as his way was, revelling in large conjectures, had half imagined me
seized by a gust of passion, and bound for Germany.  'Without my
luggage?' I laughed.

'Ay, without your luggage, Richie,' he answered seriously.  His conceit
of a better knowledge of me than others possessed, had buoyed him up.
'For I knew,' he said, 'we two do nothing like the herd of men.
I thought you were off to her, my boy.  Now!' he looked at me, and this
look of dismay was a perfect mirror.  I was not a presentable object.

He stretched his limbs on the heather and kept hold of my hand, looking
and talking watchfully, doctor-like, doubting me to be as sound in body
as I assured him I was, despite aches and pains.  Eveleen hung near.

'These people have been kind to you?' he said.

'No, the biggest brutes on the earth,' said I.

'Oh!  you say that, when I spotted you out in the dark where you might
have lied to be eaten, and carried you and washed your bloody face, and
watched you, and never slept, I didn't, to mother you and wet your head!'
cried the girl.

My father beckoned to her and thanked her appreciably in the yellow
tongue.

'So these scoundrels of the high road fell upon you and robbed you,
Richie?'

I nodded.

'You let him think they robbed you, and you had your purse to give me a
gold guinea out of it!' Eveleen cried, and finding herself in the wrong
track, volubly resumed: 'That they didn't, for they hadn't time, whether
they meant to, and the night black as a coal, whoever they were.'

The mystery of my not having sent word to Bulsted or to Riversley
perplexed my father.

'Comfortable here!' he echoed me, disconsolately, and glanced at the
heath, the tent, the black circle of the broth-pot, and the wild girl.




CHAPTER XLVII

MY FATHER ACTS THE CHARMER AGAIN

Kiomi's mother was seen in a turn of the gravel-cutting, bearing
purchases from Durstan village.  She took the new circumstances in with a
single cast up of her wary eyelids; and her, and her skill in surgery and
art in medicine, I praised to lull her fears, which procured me the
denomination of old friend, as well as handsome gentleman: she went so
far as to add, in a fit of natural warmth, nice fellow; and it is the
truth, that this term effected wonders in flattering me: it seemed to
reveal to me how simple it was for Harry Richmond, one whom gipsies could
think a nice fellow, to be the lord of Janet's affections--to be her
husband.  My heart throbbed; yet she was within range of a mile and a
half, and I did not wish to be taken to her.  I did wish to smell the
piney air about the lake-palace; but the thought of Ottilia caused me no
quick pulsations.

My father remained an hour.  He could not perceive the drift of my
objection to go either to Bulsted or to Riversley, and desire that my
misadventure should be unknown at those places.  However, he obeyed me,
as I could always trust him to do scrupulously, and told a tale at
Bulsted.  In the afternoon he returned in a carriage to convey me to the
seaside.  When I was raised I fainted, and saw the last of the camp on
Durstan much as I had come to it first.  Sickness and swimming of the
head continued for several days.  I was persecuted with the sensation of
the carriage journey, and an iteration of my father's that ran: 'My son's
inanimate body in my arms,' or 'Clasping the lifeless body of my sole
son, Harry Richmond,' and other variations.  I said nothing about it.
He told me aghast that I had spat blood.  A battery of eight fists,
having it in the end all its own way, leaves a deeper indentation on its
target than a pistol-shot that passes free of the vital chords.  My
convalescence in Germany was a melody compared with this.  I ought to
have stopped in the tent, according to the wise old mother's advice,
given sincerely, for prudence counselled her to strike her canvas and be
gone.  There I should have lain, interested in the progress of a bee, the
course of a beetle or a cloud, a spider's business, and the shaking of
the gorse and the heather, until good health had grown out of
thoughtlessness.  The very sight of my father was as a hive of humming
troubles.

His intense anxiety about me reflected in my mind the endless worry I had
concerning him.  It was the intellect which condemned him when he wore a
joyful air, and the sensations when he waxed over-solicitous.  Whether or
not the sentences were just, the judges should have sometimes shifted
places.  I was unable to divine why he fevered me so much.  Must I say
it?--He had ceased to entertain me.  Instead of a comic I found him a
tragic spectacle; and his exuberant anticipations, his bursting hopes
that fed their forcing-bed with the blight and decay of their
predecessors, his transient fits of despair after a touch at my pulses,
and exclamation of 'Oh, Richie, Richie, if only I had my boy up and
well!'--assuming that nothing but my tardy recovery stood in the way of
our contentment--were examples of downright unreason such as
contemplation through the comic glass would have excused; the tragic
could not.  I knew, nevertheless, that to the rest of the world he was a
progressive comedy: and the knowledge made him seem more tragic still.
He clearly could not learn from misfortune; he was not to be contained.
Money I gave him freely, holding the money at my disposal his own; I
chafed at his unteachable spirit, surely one of the most tragical things
in life; and the proof of my love for him was that I thought it so,
though I should have been kinder had he amused me, as in the old days.

Conceive to yourself the keeping watch over a fountain choked in its
spouting, incessantly labouring to spin a jet into the air; now for a
moment glittering and towering in a column, and once more straining to
mount.  My father appeared to me in that and other images.  He would have
had me believe him shooting to his zenith, victorious at last.  I
likewise was to reap a victory of the highest kind from the attack of the
mysterious ruffians; so much; he said, he thought he could assure me of.
He chattered of an intimidated Government, and Dettermain and Newson;
duchesses, dukes, most friendly; innumerable invitations to country
castles; and among other things one which really showed him to be capable
of conceiving ideas and working from an initiative.  But this, too,
though it accomplished a temporary service, he rendered illusory to me by
his unhappy manner of regarding it as an instance of his now permanent
social authority.  He had instituted what he called his JURY OF HONOUR
COURT, composed of the select gentlemen of the realm, ostensibly to weigh
the causes of disputes between members of their class, and decree the
method of settlement: but actually, my father admitted, to put a stop to
the affair between Edbury and me.

'That was the origin of the notion, Richie.  I carried it on.  I dined
some of the best men of our day.  I seized the opportunity when our
choicest "emperor" was rolling on wheels to propound my system.  I
mention the names of Bramham DeWitt, Colonel Hibbert Segrave, Lord Alonzo
Carr, Admiral Loftus, the Earl of Luton, the Marquis of Hatchford, Jack
Hippony, Monterez Williams,--I think you know him?--and little Dick
Phillimore, son of a big-wig, a fellow of a capital wit and discretion;
I mention them as present to convince you we are not triflers, dear boy.
My argument ran, it is absurd to fight; also it is intolerable to be
compelled to submit to insult.  As the case stands, we are under a
summary edict of the citizens, to whom chivalry is unknown.  Well, well,
I delivered a short speech.  Fighting, I said, resembled butting,--
a performance proper to creatures that grow horns instead of brains .  .
not to allude to a multitude of telling remarks; and the question "Is man
a fighting animal?"  my answer being that he is not born with spurs on
his heels or horns to his head and that those who insisted on fighting
should be examined by competent anatomists, "ologists" of some sort, to
decide whether they have the excrescences, and proclaim them .  .  .
touching on these lighter parts of my theme with extreme delicacy.  But--
and here I dwelt on my point: Man, if not a fighting animal in his
glorious--I forgot what--is a sensitive one, and has the idea of honour.
"Hear," from Colonel Segrave, and Sir Weeton Slaterhe was one of the
party.  In fine, Richie, I found myself wafted into a breathing oration.
I cannot, I confess it humbly, hear your "hear, hear," without going up
and off, inflated like a balloon.  "Shall the arbitration of the
magistracy, indemnifications in money awarded by the Law-courts, succeed
in satisfying,"--but I declare to you, Richie, it was no platform speech.
I know your term--"the chaincable sentence."  Nothing of the kind,
I assure you.  Plain sense, as from gentlemen to gentlemen.  We require,
I said, a protection that the polite world of Great Britain does not now
afford us against the aggressions of the knave, the fool, and the brute.
We establish a Court.  We do hereby--no, no, not the "hereby"; quite
simply, Richie--pledge ourselves--I said some other word not "pledge" to
use our utmost authority and influence to exclude from our circles
persons refusing to make the reparation of an apology for wanton common
insults: we renounce intercourse with men declining, when guilty of
provoking the sentiment of hostility, to submit to the jurisdiction of
our Court.  All I want you to see is the notion.  We raise the shield
against the cowardly bully which the laws have raised against the bloody
one.  "And gentlemen,"' my father resumed his oration, forgetting my
sober eye for a minute--'"Gentlemen, we are the ultimate Court of Appeal
for men who cherish their honour, yet abstain from fastening it like a
millstone round the neck of their common-sense."  Credit me, Richie,
the proposition kindled.  We cited Lord Edbury to appear before us,
and I tell you we extracted an ample apology to you from that young
nobleman.  And let me add, one that I, that we, must impose it upon an
old son to accept.  He does!  Come, come.  And you shall see, Richie,
society shall never repose an inert mass under my leadership.  I cure it;
I shake it and cure it.'

He promenaded the room, repeating: 'I do not say I am possessed of a
panacea,' and bending to my chin as he passed; 'I maintain that I can and
do fulfil the duties of my station, which is my element, attained in the
teeth of considerable difficulties, as no other man could, be he prince
or Prime Minister.  Not one,' he flourished, stepping onward.  'And mind
you, Richie, this,' he swung round, conscious as ever of the critic in
me, though witless to correct his pomp of style, 'this is not self-
glorification.  I point you facts.  I have a thousand schemes--projects.
I recognize the value of early misfortune.  The particular misfortune of
princes born is that they know nothing of the world--babies!  I grant
you, babies.  Now, I do.  I have it on my thumbnail.  I know its wants.
And just as I succeeded in making you a member of our Parliament in
assembly, and the husband of an hereditary princess--hear me--so will I
make good my original determination to be in myself the fountain of our
social laws, and leader.  I have never, I believe--to speak
conscientiously--failed in a thing I have once determined on.'

The single wish that I might be a boy again, to find pleasure in his
talk, was all that remained to combat the distaste I had for such
oppressive deliveries of a mind apparently as little capable of being
seated as a bladder charged with gas.  I thanked him for getting rid of
Edbury, and a touch of remorse pricked me, it is true, on his turning
abruptly and saying: 'You see me in my nakedness, Richie.  To you and my
valet, the heart, the body!'  He was too sympathetic not to have a keen
apprehension of a state of hostility in one whom he loved.  If I had
inclined to melt, however, his next remark would have been enough to
harden me: 'I have fought as many battles, and gained as startling
victories as Napoleon Buonaparte; he was an upstart.'  The word gave
me a jerk.

Sometimes he would indulge me transparently in a political controversy,
confessing that my dialectical dexterity went far to make a Radical of
him.  I had no other amusement, or I should have held my peace.  I tried
every argument I could think of to prove to him that there was neither
honour, nor dignity, nor profit in aiming at titular distinctions not
forced upon us by the circumstances of our birth.  He kept his position
with much sly fencing, approaching shrewdness; and, whatever I might say,
I could not deny that a vile old knockknee'd world, tugging its forelock
to the look of rank and chink of wealth, backed him, if he chose to be
insensible to radical dignity.

'In my time,' said he, 'all young gentlemen were born Tories.  The doctor
no more expected to see a Radical come into the world from a good family
than a radish.  But I discern you, my dear boy.  Our reigning Families
must now be active; they require the discipline I have undergone; and I
also dine at aldermen's tables, and lay a foundation-stone--as Jorian
says--with the facility of a hen-mother: that should not suffice them.
'Tis not sufficient for me.  I lay my stone, eat my dinner, make my
complimentary speech--and that is all that is expected of us; but I am
fully aware we should do more.  We must lead, or we are lost.  Ay, and--
to quote you a Lord Mayor's barge is a pretty piece of gilt for the
festive and luxurious to run up the river Thames in and mark their swans.
I am convinced there is something deep in that.  But what am I to do?
Would you have me frown upon the people?  Richie, it is prudent--
I maintain it righteous, nay, it is, I affirm positively, sovereign
wisdom--to cultivate every flower in the British bosom.  Riposte me--have
you too many?  Say yes, and you pass my guard.  You cannot.  I fence you
there.  This British loyalty is, in my estimation, absolutely beautiful.
We grow to a head in our old England.  The people have an eye!  I need no
introduction to them.  We reciprocate a highly cordial feeling when they
line the streets and roads with respectful salutations, and I acknowledge
their demonstrative goodwill.  These things make us a nation.  By heaven,
Richie, you are, on this occasion, if your dad may tell you so, wrong.
I ask pardon for my bluntness; but I put it to you, could we, not
travelling as personages in our well-beloved country, count on civility
to greet us everywhere?  Assuredly not.  My position is, that by
consenting to their honest enthusiasm, we the identical effect you are
perpetually crying out for--we civilize them, we civilize them.
Goodness!--a Great Britain without Royalty!'

He launched on a series of desolate images.  In the end, he at least
persuaded himself that he had an idea in his anxiety to cultivate the
primary British sentiment.

We moved from town to town along the South coast; but it was vain to hope
we might be taken for simple people.  Nor was he altogether to blame,
except in allowing the national instinct for 'worship and reverence' to
air itself unrebuked.  I fled to the island.  Temple ran down to meet me
there, and I heard that Janet had written to him for news of me.  He
entered our hotel a private person; when he passed out, hats flew off
before him.  The modest little fellow went along a double line of
attentive observers on the pier, and came back, asking me in astonishment
who he was supposed to be.

'I petitioned for privacy here!' exclaimed my father.  It accounted for
the mystery.

Temple knew my feelings, and did but glance at me.

Close upon Temple's arrival we had a strange couple of visitors.
'Mistress Dolly Disher and her husband,' my father introduced them.  She
called him by one of his Christian names inadvertently at times.  The
husband was a confectioner, a satisfied shade of a man who reserved the
exercise of his will for his business, we learnt; she, a bustling, fresh-
faced woman of forty-five, with still expressive dark eyes, and, I
guessed, the ideal remainder of a passion in her bosom.  The guess was no
great hazard.  She was soon sitting beside me, telling me of the 'years'
she had known my father, and of the most affectionate friend and perfect
gentleman he was of the ladies who had been in love with him; 'no
wonder': and of his sorrows and struggles, and his beautiful voice, and
hearts that bled for him; and of one at least who prayed and trusted he
would be successful at last.

Temple and the pallid confectioner spent the day on board a yacht with my
father.  Mrs. Dolly stayed to nurse me and persuade me to swallow
medicine.  She talked of her youth, when, as a fashionable bootmaker's
daughter, she permitted no bills to be sent in to Mr. Richmond, alleging,
as a sufficient reason for it to her father, that their family came from
Richmond in Yorkshire.  Eventually, the bills were always paid.  She had
not been able to manage her husband so well; and the consequence was,
that (she breathed low) an execution was out; 'though I tell him,'
she said tremulously, 'he 's sure to be paid in the long run, if only
he'll wait.  But no; he is you cannot think how obstinate in his
business.  And my girl Augusta waiting for Mr. Roy Richmond, the wish of
our hearts!  to assist at her wedding; and can we ask it, and have an
execution hanging over him?  And for all my husband's a guest here, he's
as likely as not to set the officers at work, do what I will, to-morrow
or any day.  Your father invited us, Mr. Harry.  I forced my husband to
come, hoping against hope; for your papa gave the orders, relying on me,
as he believed he might, and my husband undertook them, all through me.
There it stops; he hears reports, and he takes fright: in goes the bill:
then it's law, and last Oh!  I'm ashamed.'

Mr. Disher's bill was for supplying suppers to the Balls.  He received my
cheque for the amount in full, observing that he had been confident his
wife was correct when she said it would be paid, but a tradesman's
business was to hasten the day of payment; and, for a penance, he himself
would pacify the lawyers.

On hearing of the settlement of Mr. Disher's claim, my father ahem'd,
speechless, which was a sign of his swallowing vexation.  He remarked
that I had, no doubt with the best intentions, encroached on his liberty.
'I do not like to have my debts disturbed.'  He put it to me, whether a
man, carrying out a life-long plan, would not be disconcerted by the
friendliest intervention.  This payment to Disher he pronounced fatal in
policy.  'You have struck a heavy blow to my credit, Richie.  Good little
Mistress Dolly brought the man down here--no select addition to our
society--and we were doing our utmost to endure him, as the ladies say,
for the very purpose .  .  .  but the error stands committed!  For the
future, friend Disher will infallibly expect payments within the year.
Credit for suppers is the guarantee of unlimited entertainments.  And I
was inspiring him with absolute confidence for next year's campaign.
Money, you are aware, is no longer a question to terrify me.  I hold
proofs that I have conclusively frightened Government, and you know it.
But this regards the manipulation of the man Disher.  He will now dictate
to me.  A refresher of a few hundreds would have been impolitic to this
kind of man; but the entire sum! and to a creditor in arms!  You reverse
the proper situations of gentleman and tradesman.  My supperman, in
particular, should be taught to understand that he is bound up in my
success.  Something frightened him; he proceeded at law; and now we have
shown him that he has frightened us.  An execution?  My dear boy, I have
danced an execution five years running, and ordered, consecutively, at
the same house.  Like other matters, an execution depends upon how you
treat it.  The odds are that we have mortally offended Mistress Dolly.'
He apologized for dwelling on the subject, with the plea that it was an
essential part of his machinery of action, and the usual comparison of
'the sagacious General' whose forethought omitted no minutiae.  I had to
listen.

The lady professed to be hurt.  The payment, however, put an end to the
visit of this couple.  Politic or not, it was a large sum to disburse,
and once more my attention became fixed on the probable display of
figures in my bankers' book.  Bonds and bills were falling due: the
current expenses were exhausting.  I tried to face the evil, and take a
line of conduct, staggering, as I did on my feet.  Had I been well
enough, I believe I should have gone to my grandfather, to throw myself
on his good-nature; such was the brain's wise counsel: but I was all
nerves and alarms, insomuch that I interdicted Temple's writing to Janet,
lest it should bring on me letters from my aunt Dorothy, full of advice
that could no longer be followed, well-meant cautions that might as well
be addressed to the mile-posts behind me.  Moreover, Janet would be
flying on the wind to me, and I had a craving for soft arms and the look
of her eyebrows, that warned me to keep her off if I intended to act as
became a man of good faith.

Fair weather, sunny green sea-water speckled with yachts shooting and
bounding, and sending me the sharp sense of life there is in dashed-up
fountains of silvery salt-spray, would have quickened my blood sooner but
for this hot-bed of fruitless adventure, tricksy precepts, and wisdom
turned imp, in which my father had again planted me.  To pity him seemed
a childish affectation.  His praise of my good looks pleased me, for on
that point he was fitted to be a judge, and I was still fancying I had
lost them on the heath.  Troops of the satellites of his grand parade
surrounded him.  I saw him walk down the pier like one breaking up a
levee.  At times he appeared to me a commanding phantasm in the midst of
phantasm figures of great ladies and their lords, whose names he told off
on his return like a drover counting his herd; but within range of his
eye and voice the reality of him grew overpowering.  It seduced me, and,
despite reason, I began to feel warm under his compliments.  He was like
wine.  Gaiety sprang under his feet.  Sitting at my window, I thirsted to
see him when he was out of sight, and had touches of the passion of my
boyhood.

I listened credulously, too, as in the old days, when he repeated, 'You
will find I am a magician, and very soon, Richie, mark me.'  His manner
hinted that there was a surprise in store.  'You have not been on the
brink of the grave for nothing.'  He resembled wine in the other
conditions attached to its rare qualities.  Oh for the choice of having
only a little of him, instead of having him on my heart!  The unfilial
wish attacked me frequently: he could be, and was, so ravishing to
strangers and light acquaintances.  Did by chance a likeness exist
between us?  My sick fancy rushed to the Belthams for a denial.  There
did, of some sort, I knew; and the thought partitioned my dreamy ideas,
of which the noblest, taking advantage of my physical weakness, compelled
me to confess that it was a vain delusion for one such as I to hope for
Ottilia.  This looking at the roots of yourself, if you are possessed of
a nobler half that will do it, is a sound corrective of an excessive
ambition.  Unfortunately it would seem that young men can do it only in
sickness.  With the use of my legs, and open-air breathing, I became
compact, and as hungry and zealous on behalf of my individuality, as
proud of it as I had ever been: prouder and hungrier.

My first day of outing, when, looking at every face, I could reflect on
the miraculous issue of mine almost clear from its pummelling, and above
all, that my nose was safe--not stamped with the pugilist's brand--
inspired a lyrical ebullition of gratitude.  Who so intoxicated as the
convalescent catching at health?

I met Charles Etherell on the pier, and heard that my Parliamentary seat
was considered in peril, together with a deal of gossip about my
disappearance.

My father, who was growing markedly restless, on the watch for letters
and new arrivals, started to pay Chippenden a flying visit.  He begged me
urgently to remain for another few days, while he gathered information,
saying my presence at his chief quarters did him infinite service, and I
always thought that possible.  I should find he was a magician, he
repeated, with a sort of hesitating fervour.

I had just waved my hand to him as the boat was bearing him away from the
pier-head, when a feminine voice murmured in my ear, 'Is not this our
third meeting, Mr. Harry Richmond?--Venice, Elbestadt, and the Isle of
Wight?'  She ran on, allowing me time to recognize Clara Goodwin.  'What
was your last adventure?  You have been ill.  Very ill?  Has it been
serious?'

I made light of it.  'No: a tumble.'

'You look pale,' she said quickly.

'That's from grieving at the loss of my beauty, Miss Goodwin.'

'Have you really not been seriously ill?' she asked with an astonishing
eagerness.

I told her mock-loftily that I did not believe in serious illnesses
coming to godlike youth, and plied her in turn with inquiries.

'You have not been laid up in bed?' she persisted.

'No, on my honour, not in bed.'

'Then,' said she, 'I would give much to be able to stop that boat.'

She amazed me.  'Why?'

'Because it's going on a bad errand,' she replied.

'Miss Goodwin, you perplex me.  My father has started in that boat.'

'Yes, I saw him.' She glanced hastily at the foam in a way to show
indifference.  'What I am saying concerns others .  .  .  who have heard
you were dangerously ill.  I have sent for them to hasten across.'

'My aunt and Miss Ilchester?'

'No.'

'Who are they?  Miss Goodwin, I'll answer any question.  I've been
queerish, that's true.  Now let me hear who they are, when you arrived,
when you expect them.  Where are they now?'

'As to me,' she responded with what stretched on my ears like an
insufferable drawl, 'I came over last night to hire a furnished house or
lodgings.  Papa has an appointment attached to the fortifications yonder.
We'll leave the pier, if you please.  You draw too much attention on
ladies who venture to claim acquaintance with so important a gentleman.'

We walked the whole length of the pier, chatting of our former meetings.

'Not here,' she said, as soon as I began to question.

I was led farther on, half expecting that the accessories of time and
place would have to do with the revelation.

The bitter creature drew me at her heels into a linendraper's shop.
There she took a seat, pitched her voice to the key of a lady's at a
dinner-table, when speaking to her cavalier of the history or attire of
some one present, and said, 'You are sure the illness was not at all
feigned?'

She had me as completely at her mercy in this detestable shop as if I had
been in a witness-box.

'Feigned!' I exclaimed.

'That is no answer.  And pray remember where you are.'

'No, the illness was not feigned.'

'And you have not made the most of it?'

'What an extraordinary thing to say!'

'That is no answer.  And please do not imagine yourself under the
necessity of acting every sentiment of your heart before these people.'

She favoured a shopman with half-a-dozen directions.

'My answer is, then, that I have not made the most of it,' I said.

'Not even by proxy?'

'Once more I'm adrift.'

'You are certainly energetic.  I must address you as a brother, or it
will be supposed we are quarrelling.  Harry, do you like that pattern?'

'Yes.  What's the meaning of proxy?'

'With the accent you give it, heaven only knows what it means.  I would
rather you did not talk here like a Frenchman relating his last love-
affair in company.

Must your voice escape control exactly at the indicatory words?  Do you
think your father made the most of it?'

'Of my illness?  Oh! yes; the utmost.  I should undoubtedly think so.
That's his way.'

'Why did you permit it?'

'I was what they call "wandering" half the time.  Besides, who could keep
him in check?  I rarely know what he is doing.'

'You don't know what he wrote?'

'Wrote?'

'That you were dying.'

'Of me?  To whom?'

She scrutinized me, and rose from her chair.  'I must try some other
shop.  How is it, that if these English people cannot make a "berthe" fit
to wear, they do not conceive the idea of importing such things from
Paris?  I will take your arm, Harry.'

'You have bought nothing,' I remarked.

'I have as much as I went for,' she replied, and gravely thanked the
assistant leaning on his thumbs across the counter; after which, dropping
the graceless play of an enigma, she inquired whether I had forgotten the
Frau von Dittmarsch.

I had, utterly; but not her maiden name of Sibley.

'Miss Goodwin, is she one of those who are coming to the island?'

'Frau von Dittmarsch?  Yes.  She takes an interest in you.  She and I
have been in correspondence ever since my visit to Sarkeld.  It reminds
me, you may vary my maiden name with the Christian, if you like.  Harry,
I believe you are truthful as ever, in spite--'

'Don't be unjust,' said I.

'I wish I could think I was!' she rejoined.  'Frau von Dittmarsch was at
Sarkeld, and received terrible news of you.  She called on me, at my
father's residence over the water yonder, yesterday afternoon, desiring
greatly to know--she is as cautious as one with a jewel in her custody--
how it fared with you, whether you were actually in a dying state.  I
came here to learn; I have friends here: you were not alone, or I should
have called on you.  The rumour was that you were very ill; so I hired a
furnished place for Frau von Dittmarsch at once.  But when I saw you and
him together, and the parting between you, I began to have fears;
I should have countermanded the despatch I sent by the boat, had it been
possible.'

'It has gone!  And tell me the name of the other.'

'Frau von Dittmarsch has a husband.'

'Not with her now.  Oh!  cruel!  speak: her name?'

'Her name, Harry?' Her title is Countess von Delzenburg.'

'Not princess?'

'Not in England.'

Then Ottilia was here!

My father was indeed a magician!




CHAPTER XLVIII

THE PRINCESS ENTRAPPED

'Not princess in England,' could betoken but one thing--an incredible act
of devotion, so great that it stunned my senses, and I thought of it, and
of all it involved, before the vision of Ottilia crossing seas took
possession of me.

'The Princess Ottilia, Miss Goodwin?'

'The Countess of Delzenburg, Harry.'

'To see me?  She has come!'

'Harry, you talk like the boy you were when we met before you knew her.
Yes and yes to everything you have to say, but I think you should spare
her name.'

'She comes thinking me ill?'

'Dying.'

'I'm as strong as ever I was.'

'I should imagine you are, only rather pale.'

'Have you, tell me, Clara, seen her yourself?  Is she well?'

'Pale: not unwell: anxious.'

'About me?'

'It may be about the political affairs of the Continent; they are
disturbed.'

'She spoke of me?'

'Yes.'

'She is coming by the next boat?'

'It's my fear that she is.'

'Why do you fear?'

'Shall I answer you, Harry?  It is useless now.  Well, because she has
been deceived.  That is why.  You will soon find it out.'

'Prince Ernest is at Sarkeld?'

'In Paris, I hear.'

'How will your despatch reach these ladies in time for them to come over
by the next boat?'

'I have sent my father's servant.  The General--he is promoted at last,
Harry--attends the ladies in person, and is now waiting for the boat's
arrival over there, to follow my directions.'

'You won't leave me?'

Miss Goodwin had promised to meet the foreign ladies on the pier.  We
quarrelled and made it up a dozen times like girl and boy, I calling her
aunt Clara, as in the old days, and she calling me occasionally son
Richie: an imitation of my father's manner of speech to me when we formed
acquaintance first in Venice.  But I was very little aware of what I was
saying or doing.  The forces of my life were yoked to the heart, and
tumbled as confusedly as the world under Phaethon charioteer.  We walked
on the heights above the town.  I looked over the water to the white line
of shore and batteries where this wonder stood, who was what poets dream
of, deep-hearted men hope for, none quite believe in.  Hardly could I;
and though my relenting spinster friend at my elbow kept assuring me it
was true that she was there, my sceptical sight fixed on the stale
prominences visible in the same features which they had worn day after
empty day of late.  This deed of hers was an act of devotion great as
death.  I knew it from experience consonant to Ottilia's character; but
could a princess, hereditary, and bound in the league of governing
princes, dare so to brave her condition?  Complex of mind, simplest in
character, the uncontrollable nobility of her spirit was no sooner
recognized by me than I was shocked throughout by a sudden light,
contrasting me appallingly with this supreme of women, who swept the
earth aside for truth.  I had never before received a distinct intimation
of my littleness of nature, and my first impulse was to fly from thought,
and then, as if to prove myself justly accused, I caught myself
regretting--no, not regretting, gazing, as it were, on a picture of
regrets--that Ottilia was not a romantic little lady of semi-celestial
rank, exquisitely rash, wilful, desperately enamoured, bearing as many
flying hues and peeps of fancy as a love-ballad, and not more roughly
brushing the root-emotions.

If she had but been such an one, what sprightly colours, delicious
sadness, magical transformations, tenderest intermixture of earth and
heaven; what tears and sunbeams, divinest pathos: what descents from
radiance to consolatory twilight, would have surrounded me for poetry and
pride to dwell on!  What captivating melody in the minor key would have
been mine, though I lost her--the legacy of it all for ever!  Say a
petulant princess, a star of beauty, mad for me, and the whisper of our
passion and sorrows traversing the flushed world!  Was she coming?  Not
she, but a touchstone, a relentless mirror, a piercing eye, a mind severe
as the Goddess of the God's head: a princess indeed, but essentially a
princess above women: a remorseless intellect, an actual soul visible in
the flesh.  She was truth.  Was I true?  Not so very false, yet how far
from truth!  The stains on me (a modern man writing his history is
fugitive and crepuscular in alluding to them, as a woman kneeling at the
ear-guichet) burnt like the blood-spots on the criminal compelled to
touch his victim by savage ordinance, which knew the savage and how to
search him.  And these were faults of weakness rather than the sins of
strength.  I might as fairly hope for absolution of them from Ottilia as
from offended laws of my natural being, gentle though she was, and
charitable.

Was I not guilty of letting her come on to me hoodwinked at this moment?
I had a faint memory of Miss Goodwin's saying that she had been deceived,
and I suggested a plan of holding aloof until she had warned the princess
of my perfect recovery, to leave it at her option to see me.

'Yes,' Miss Goodwin assented: 'if you like, Harry.'

Her compassion for me only tentatively encouraged the idea.  'It would,
perhaps, be right.  You are the judge.  If you can do it.  You are acting
bravely.' She must have laughed at me in her heart.

The hours wore on.  My curse of introspection left me, and descending
through the town to the pier, amid the breezy blue skirts and bonnet-
strings, we watched the packet-boat approaching.  There was in advance
one of the famous swift island wherries.  Something went wrong with it,
for it was overtaken, and the steamer came in first.  I jumped on board,
much bawled at.  Out of a crowd of unknown visages, Janet appeared: my
aunt Dorothy was near her.  The pair began chattering of my paleness, and
wickedness in keeping my illness unknown to them.  They had seen Temple
on an excursion to London; he had betrayed me, as he would have betrayed
an archangel to Janet.

'Will you not look at us, Harry?' they both said.

The passengers were quitting the boat, strangers every one.

'Harry, have we really offended you in coming?' said Janet.

My aunt Dorothy took the blame on herself.

I scarcely noticed them, beyond leading them on to the pier-steps and
leaving them under charge of Miss Goodwin, who had, in matters of luggage
and porterage, the practical mind and aplomb of an Englishwoman that has
passed much of her time on the Continent.  I fancied myself vilely duped
by this lady.  The boat was empty of its passengers; a grumbling pier-
man, wounded in his dignity, notified to me that there were fines for
disregard of the Company's rules and regulations.  His tone altered; he
touched his hat: 'Didn't know who you was, my lord.' Janet overheard him,
and her face was humorous.

'We may break the rules, you see,' I said to her.

'We saw him landing on the other side of the water,' she replied; so
spontaneously did the circumstance turn her thoughts on my father.

'Did you speak to him?'

'No.'

'You avoided him?'

'Aunty and I thought it best.  He landed .  .  .  there was a crowd.'

Miss Goodwin interposed: 'You go to Harry's hotel?'

'Grandada is coming down to-morrow or next day,' Janet prompted my aunt
Dorothy.

'If we could seek for a furnished house; Uberly would watch the luggage,'
Dorothy murmured in distress.

'Furnished houses, even rooms at hotels, are doubtful in the height of
the season,' Miss Goodwin remarked.  'Last night I engaged the only
decent set of rooms I could get, for friends of Harry's who are coming.'

'No wonder he was disappointed at seeing us--he was expecting them!' said
Janet, smiling a little.

'They are sure to come,' said Miss Goodwin.

Near us a couple of yachtsmen were conversing.

'Oh, he'll be back in a day or two,' one said.  'When you 've once tasted
that old boy, you can't do without him.  I remember when I was a
youngster--it was in Lady Betty Bolton's day; she married old Edbury, you
know, first wife--the Magnificent was then in his prime.  He spent his
money in a week: so he hired an eighty-ton schooner; he laid violent
hands on a Jew, bagged him, lugged him on board, and sailed away.'

'What the deuce did he want with a Jew?' cried the other.

'Oh, the Jew supplied cheques for a three months' cruise in the
Mediterranean, and came home, I heard, very good friends with his pirate.
That's only one of dozens.'

The unconscious slaughterers laughed.

'On another occasion'--I heard it said by the first speaker, as they
swung round to parade the pier, and passed on narrating.

'Not an hotel, if it is possible to avoid it,' my aunt Dorothy, with
heightened colour, urged Miss Goodwin.  They talked together.

'Grandada is coming to you, Harry,' Janet said.  'He has business in
London, or he would have been here now.  Our horses and carriages follow
us: everything you would like.  He does love you!  he is very anxious.
I'm afraid his health is worse than he thinks.  Temple did not say your
father was here, but grandada must have suspected it when he consented to
our coming, and said he would follow us.  So that looks well perhaps.
He has been much quieter since your money was paid back to you.  If they
should meet .  .  .  no, I hope they will not: grandada hates noise.
And, Harry, let me tell you: it may be nothing: if he questions you, do
not take fire; just answer plainly: I'm sure you understand.  One in a
temper at a time I'm sure 's enough: you have only to be patient with
him.  He has been going to London, to the City, seeing lawyers, bankers,
brokers, and coming back muttering.  Ah!  dear old man.  And when he
ought to have peace!  Harry, the poor will regret him in a thousand
places.  I write a great deal for him now, and I know how they will.
What are you looking at?'

I was looking at a man of huge stature, of the stiffest build, whose
shoulders showed me their full breadth while he stood displaying
frontwards the open of his hand in a salute.

'Schwartz!' I called.  Janet started, imagining some fierce interjection.
The giant did not stir.

But others had heard.  A lady stepped forward.  'Dear Mr. Harry Richmond!
Then you are better?  We had most alarming news of you.'

I bowed to the Frau von Dittmarsch, anciently Miss Sibley.

'The princess?'

'She is here.'

Frau von Dittmarsch clasped Miss Goodwin's hand.  I was touching
Ottilia's.  A veil partly swathed her face.  She trembled: the breeze
robbed me of her voice.

Our walk down the pier was almost in silence.  Miss Goodwin assumed the
guardianship of the foreign ladies.  I had to break from them and provide
for my aunt Dorothy and Janet.

'They went over in a little boat, they were so impatient.  Who is she?'
Dorothy Beltham asked.

'The Princess Ottilia,' said Janet.

'Are you certain?  Is it really, Harry?'

I confirmed it, and my aunt said, 'I should have guessed it could be no
other; she has a foreign grace.'

'General Goodwin was with them when the boat came in from the island,'
said Janet.  'He walked up to Harry's father, and you noticed, aunty,
that the ladies stood away, as if they wished to be unobserved, as we
did, and pulled down their veils.  They would not wait for our boat.  We
passed them crossing.  People joked about the big servant over-weighing
the wherry.'

Dorothy Beltham thought the water too rough for little boats.

'She knows what a sea is,' I said.

Janet gazed steadily after the retreating figures, and then commended me
to the search for rooms.  The end of it was that I abandoned my father's
suite to them.  An accommodating linen-draper possessed of a sea-view,
and rooms which hurled the tenant to the windows in desire for it, gave
me harbourage.

Till dusk I scoured the town to find Miss Goodwin, without whom there was
no clue to the habitation I was seeking, and I must have passed her
blindly again and again.  My aunt Dorothy and Janet thanked me for my
consideration in sitting down to dine with them; they excused my haste to
retire.  I heard no reproaches except on account of my not sending them
word of my illness.  Janet was not warm.  She changed in colour and voice
when I related what I had heard from Miss Goodwin, namely, that 'some
one' had informed the princess I was in a dying state.  I was obliged to
offer up my father as a shield for Ottilia, lest false ideas should
tarnish the image of her in their minds.  Janet did not speak of him.
The thought stood in her eyes; and there lies the evil of a sore subject
among persons of one household: they have not to speak to exhibit their
minds.

After a night of suspense I fell upon old Schwartz and Aennchen out in
the earliest dawn, according to their German habits, to have a gaze at
sea, and strange country and people.  Aennchen was all wonder at the
solitary place, Schwartz at the big ships.  But when they tried to direct
me to the habitation of their mistress, it was discovered by them that
they had lost their bearings.  Aennchen told me the margravine had been
summoned to Rippau just before they left Sarkeld.  Her mistress had
informed Baroness Turckems of her intention to visit England.  Prince
Ernest was travelling in France.

The hour which brought me to Ottilia was noon.  The arrangements of the
ladies could only grant me thirty minutes, for Janet was to drive the
princess out into the country to view the island.  She and my aunt
Dorothy had been already introduced.  Miss Goodwin, after presenting
them, insisted upon ceremoniously accompanying me to the house.  Quite
taking the vulgar view of a proceeding such as the princess had been
guilty of, and perhaps fearing summary audacity and interestedness in the
son of a father like mine, she ventured on lecturing me, as though it lay
with me to restrain the fair romantic head, forbear from calling up my
special advantages, advise, and stand to the wisdom of this world, and be
the man of honour.  The princess had said: 'Not see him when I have come
to him?'  I reassured my undiscerning friend partly, not wholly.

'Would it be commonly sensible or civil, to refuse to see me, having
come?'

Miss Goodwin doubted.

I could indicate forcibly, because I felt, the clear-judging brain and
tempered self-command whereby Ottilia had gained her decision.

Miss Goodwin nodded and gave me the still-born affirmative of politeness.
Her English mind expressed itself willing to have exonerated the rash
great lady for visiting a dying lover, but he was not the same person now
that he was on his feet, consequently her expedition wore a different
aspect:--my not dying condemned her.  She entreated me to keep the fact
of the princess's arrival unknown to my father, on which point we were
one.  Intensely enthusiastic for the men of her race, she would have me,
above all things, by a form of adjuration designed to be a masterpiece of
persuasive rhetoric, 'prove myself an Englishman.'  I was to show that
'the honour, interests, reputation and position of any lady (demented or
not,' she added) 'were as precious to me as to the owner': that 'no woman
was ever in peril of a shadow of loss in the hands of an English
gentleman,' and so forth, rather surprisingly to me, remembering her off-
hand manner of the foregoing day.  But the sense of responsibility thrown
upon her ideas of our superior national dignity had awakened her fervider
naturalness--made her a different person, as we say when accounting, in
our fashion, for what a little added heat may do.

The half hour allotted to me fled.  I went from the room and the house,
feeling that I had seen and heard her who was barely of the world of
humankind for me, so strongly did imagination fly with her.  I kissed her
fingers, I gazed in her eyes, I heard the beloved voice.  All passed too
swift for happiness.  Recollections set me throbbing, but recollection
brought longing.  She said, 'Now I have come I must see you, Harry.'
Did it signify that to see me was a piece of kindness at war with her
judgement?  She rejoiced at my perfect recovery, though it robbed her of
the plea in extenuation of this step she had taken.  She praised me for
abstaining to write to her, when I was stammering a set of hastily-
impressed reasons to excuse myself for the omission.  She praised my step
into Parliament.  It did not seem to involve a nearer approach to her.
She said, 'You have not wasted your time in England.'  It was for my
solitary interests that she cared, then.

I brooded desperately.  I could conceive an overlooking height that made
her utterance simple and consecutive: I could not reach it.  Topics which
to me were palpitating, had no terror for her.  She said, 'I have
offended my father; I have written to him; he will take me away.'
In speaking of the letter which had caused her to offend, she did not
blame the writer.  I was suffered to run my eyes over it, and was
ashamed.  It read to me too palpably as an outcry to delude and draw her
hither:--pathos and pathos: the father holding his dying son in his arms,
his sole son, Harry Richmond; the son set upon by enemies in the night:
the lover never daring to beg for a sight of his beloved ere he passed
away:--not an ill-worded letter; read uncritically, it may have been
touching: it must have been, though it was the reverse for me.
I frowned, broke down in regrets, under sharp humiliation.

She said, 'You knew nothing of it.  A little transgression is the real
offender.  When we are once out of the way traced for us, we are in
danger of offending at every step; we are as lawless as the outcasts.'
That meant, 'My turning aside to you originally was the blameable thing.'
It might mean, 'My love of you sets my ideas of duty at variance with my
father's.'

She smiled; nothing was uttered in a tone of despondency.  Her high
courage and breeding gave her even in this pitfall the smoothness which
most women keep for society.  Why she had not sent me any message or
tidings of herself to Riversley was not a matter that she could imagine
to perplex me: she could not imagine my losing faith in her.  The least
we could do, I construed it, the religious bond between us was a faith in
one another that should sanctify to our souls the external injuries it
caused us to commit.  But she talked in no such strain.  Her delight in
treading English ground was her happy theme.  She said, 'It is as young
as when we met in the forest'; namely, the feeling revived for England.
How far off we were from the green Devonshire coast, was one of her
questions, suggestive of our old yacht-voyage lying among her dreams.
Excepting an extreme and terrorizing paleness, there was little to fever
me with the thought that she suffered mortally.  Of reproach, not a word;
nor of regret.  At the first touch of hands, when we stood together,
alone, she said, 'Would hearing of your recovery have given me peace?'
My privileges were the touch of hands, the touch of her fingers to my
lips, a painless hearing and seeing, and passionate recollection.  She
said, 'Impatience is not for us, Harry': I was not to see her again
before the evening.  These were the last words she said, and seemed the
lightest until my hot brain made a harvest of them transcending thrice-
told vows of love.  Did they not mean, 'We two wait': therefore, 'The
years are bondmen to our stedfastness.' Could sweeter have been said?
They might mean nothing!

She was veiled when Janet drove her out; Janet sitting upright in
her masterly way, smoothing her pet ponies with the curl of her whip,
chatting and smiling; the princess slightly leaning back.  I strode up
to the country roads, proud of our land's beauty under a complacent sky.
By happy chance, which in a generous mood I ascribed to Janet's good
nature, I came across them at a seven miles' distance.  They were talking
spiritedly: what was wonderful, they gave not much heed to me: they
seemed on edge for one another's conversation: each face was turned to
the other's, and after nodding an adieu, they resumed the animated
discourse.  I had been rather in alarm lest Ottilia should think little
of Janet.  They passed out of sight without recurring to a thought of me
behind them.

In the evening I was one among a group of ladies.  I had the opportunity
of hearing the running interchange between Ottilia and Janet, which
appeared to be upon equal terms; indeed, Janet led.  The subjects were
not very deep.  Plain wits, candour, and an unpretending tongue, it
seemed, could make common subjects attractive, as fair weather does our
English woods and fields.  The princess was attracted by something in
Janet.  I myself felt the sway of something, while observing Ottilia's
rapt pleasure in her talk and her laughter, with those funny familiar
frowns and current dimples twisting and melting away like a play of
shadows on the eddies of the brook.

'I 'm glad to be with her,' Janet said of Ottilia.

It was just in that manner she spoke in Ottilia's presence.  Why it
should sound elsewhere unsatisfactorily blunt, and there possess a
finished charm, I could not understand.

I mentioned to Janet that I feared my father would be returning.

She contained herself with a bridled 'Oh!'

We were of one mind as to the necessity for keeping him absent, if
possible.

'Harry, you'll pardon me; I can't talk of him,' said she.

I proposed half-earnestly to foil his return by going to London at once.

'That's manly; that's nice of you,' Janet said.

This was on our walk from the house at night.  My aunt Dorothy listened,
pressing my arm.  The next morning Janet urged me to go at once.  'Keep
him away, bring down grandada, Harry.  She cannot quit the island,
because she has given Prince Ernest immediate rendezvous here.  You must
not delay to go.  Yes, the Countess of Delzenburg shall have your
excuses.  And no, I promise you I will run nobody down.  Besides, if I
do, aunty will be at hand to plead for the defence, and she can!  She has
a way that binds one to accept everything she says, and Temple ought to
study with her for a year or two before he wears his gown.  Bring him
back with you and grandada.  He is esteemed here at his true worth.  I
love him for making her in love with English boys.  I leave the men for
those who know them, but English boys are unrivalled, I declare.
Honesty, bravery, modesty, and nice looks!  They are so nice in their
style and their way of talking.  I tell her, our men may be shy and
sneering,--awkward, I daresay; but our boys beat the world.  Do bring
down Temple.  I should so like her to see a cricket-match between two
good elevens of our boys, Harry, while she is in England!  We could have
arranged for one at Riversley.'

I went, and I repressed the idea, on my way, that Janet had manoeuvred by
sending me off to get rid of me, but I felt myself a living testimony to
her heartlessness: for no girl of any heart, acting the part of friend,
would have allowed me to go without a leave-taking of her I loved few
would have been so cruel as to declare it a duty to go at all, especially
when the chances were that I might return to find the princess wafted
away.  Ottilia's condescension had done her no good.  'Turn to the right,
that's your path; on.'  She seemed to speak in this style, much as she
made her touch of the reins understood by her ponies.  'I 'll take every
care of the princess,' she said.  Her conceit was unbounded.  I revelled
in contemptuous laughter at her assumption of the post of leader with
Ottilia.  However, it was as well that I should go: there was no trusting
my father.




CHAPTER XLIX

WHICH FORESHADOWS A GENERAL GATHERING

At our Riversley station I observed the squire, in company with Captain
Bulsted, jump into a neighbouring carriage.  I joined them, and was
called upon to answer various inquiries.  The squire gave me one of his
short tight grasps of the hand, in which there was warmth and shyness,
our English mixture.  The captain whispered in my ear: 'He oughtn't to be
alone.'

'How's the great-grandmother of the tribe?' said I.

Captain Bulsted nodded, as if he understood, but was at sea until I
mentioned the bottle of rum and the remarkable length of that old lady's
measurement.

'Ay, to be sure!  a grand old soul,' he said.  'You know that scum of
old, Harry.'

I laughed, and so did he, at which I laughed the louder.

'He laughs, I suppose, because his party's got a majority in the House,'
said the squire.

'We gave you a handsome surplus this year, sir.'

'Sweated out of the country's skin and bone, ay!'

'You were complimented by the Chancellor of the Exchequer.!

'Yes, that fellow's compliments are like a cabman's, and cry fool:--he
never thanks you but when he's overpaid.'

Captain Bulsted applauded the sarcasm.

'Why did you keep out of knowledge all this time, Hal?' my grandfather
asked.

I referred him to the captain.

'Hang it,' cried Captain Bulsted, 'do you think I'd have been doing duty
for you if I'd known where to lay hold of you.'

'Well, if you didn't shake hands with me, you touched my toes,' said I,
and thanked him with all my heart for his kindness to an old woman on the
point of the grave.  I had some fun to flavour melancholy with.

My grandfather resumed his complaint: 'You might have gone clean off, and
we none the wiser.'

'Are we quite sure that his head's clean on?' said the mystified captain.

'Of course we should run to him, wherever he was, if he was down on his
back,' the squire muttered.

'Ay, ay, sir; of course,' quoth Captain William, frowning to me to
reciprocate this relenting mood.  'But, Harry, where did you turn off
that night?  We sat up expecting you.  My poor Julia was in a terrible
fright, my lad.  Eh?  speak up.'

I raised the little finger.

'Oh, oh,' went he, happily reassured; but, reflecting, added: 'A bout of
it?'

I dropped him a penitent nod.

'That's bad, though,' said he.

'Then why did you tip me a bottle of rum, Captain William?'

'By George, Harry, you've had a crack o' the sconce,' he exclaimed, more
sagaciously than he was aware of.

My grandfather wanted to keep me by his side in London until we two
should start for the island next day; but his business was in the city,
mine toward the West.  We appointed to meet two hours after reaching the
terminus.

He turned to me while giving directions to his man.

'You 've got him down there, I suppose?'

'My father's in town, sir.  He shall keep away,' I said.

'Humph!  I mayn't object to see him.'

This set me thinking.

Captain Bulsted--previously asking me in a very earnest manner whether I
was really all right and sound--favoured me with a hint:

'The squire has plunged into speculations of his own, or else he is
peeping at somebody else's.  No danger of the dad being mixed up with
Companies?  Let's hope not.  Julia pledged her word to Janet that I would
look after the old squire.  I suppose I can go home this evening?  My
girl hates to be alone.'

'By all means,' said I; and the captain proposed to leave the squire at
his hotel, in the event of my failing to join him in the city.

'But don't fail, if you can help it,' he urged me; 'for things somehow,
my dear Harry, appear to me to look like the compass when the needle
gives signs of atmospheric disturbance.  My only reason for saying so is
common observation.  You can judge for yourself that he is glad to have
you with him.'

I told the captain I was equally glad; for, in fact, my grandfather's
quietness and apparently friendly disposition tempted me to petition for
a dower for the princess at once, so that I might be in the position to
offer Prince Ernest on his arrival a distinct alternative; supposing--
it was still but a supposition--Ottilia should empower me.  Incessant
dialogues of perpetually shifting tendencies passed between Ottilia and
me in my brain--now dark, now mildly fair, now very wild, on one side at
least.  Never, except by downright force of will, could I draw from the
phantom of her one purely irrational outcry, so deeply-rooted was the
knowledge of her nature and mind; and when I did force it, I was no
gainer: a puppet stood in her place--the vision of Ottilia melted out in
threads of vapour.

'And yet she has come to me; she has braved everything to come.'  I might
say that, to liken her to the women who break rules and read duties by
their own light, but I could not cheat my knowledge of her.  Mrs. Waddy
met me in the hall of my father's house, as usual, pressing, I regretted
to see, one hand to her side.  'Her heart,' she said, 'was easily set
pitty-pat now.' She had been, by her master's orders, examined by two of
the chief physicians of the kingdom, 'baronets both.' They advised total
rest.  As far as I could apprehend, their baronetcies and doings in high
regions had been of more comfort than their prescriptions.

'What I am I must be,' she said, meekly; 'and I cannot quit his service
till he's abroad again, or I drop.  He has promised me a monument.  I
don't want it; but it shows his kindness.'

A letter from Heriot informed me that the affair between Edbury and me
was settled: he could not comprehend how.

'What is this new Jury of Honour?  Who are the jurymen?' he asked, and
affected wit.

I thanked him for a thrashing in a curt reply.

My father had left the house early in the morning.  Mrs. Waddy believed
that he meant to dine that evening at the season's farewell dinner of the
Trump-Trick Club: 'Leastways, Tollingby has orders to lay out his
gentlemen's-dinners' evening-suit.  Yesterday afternoon he flew down to
Chippenden, and was home late.  To-day he's in the City, or one of the
squares.  Lady Edbury's--ah! detained in town with the jaundice or
toothache.  He said he was sending to France for a dentist: or was it
Germany, for some lady's eyes?  I am sure I don't know.  Well or ill, so
long as you're anything to him, he will abound.  Pocket and purse!  You
know him by this time, Mr. Harry.  Oh, my heart!'

A loud knock at the door had brought on the poor creature's palpitations.

This visitor was no other than Prince Ernest.  The name on his card was
Graf von Delzenburg, and it set my heart leaping to as swift a measure as
Mrs. Waddy's.

Hearing that I was in the house, he desired to see me.

We met, with a formal bow.

'I congratulate you right heartily upon being out of the list of the
nekron,' he said, civilly.  'I am on my way to one of your watering-
places, whither my family should have preceded me.  Do you publish the
names and addresses of visitors daily, as it is the custom with us?'

I relieved his apprehensions on that head: 'Here and there, rarely; and
only at the hotels, I believe.'  The excuse was furnished for offering
the princess's address.

'Possibly, in a year or two, we may have the pleasure of welcoming you at
Sarkeld,' said the prince, extending his hand.  'Then, you have seen the
Countess of Delzenburg?'

'On the day of her arrival, your Highness.  Ladies of my family are
staying on the island.'

'Ah?'

He paused, and invited me to bow to him.  We bowed thus in the room, in
the hall, and at the street-door.

For what purpose could he have called on my father?  To hear the worst at
once?  That seemed likely, supposing him to have lost his peculiar
confidence in the princess, of which the courtly paces he had put me
through precluded me from judging.

But I guessed acutely that it was not his intention to permit of my
meeting Ottilia a second time.  The blow was hard: I felt it as if it had
been struck already, and thought I had gained resignation, until, like a
man reprieved on his road to execution, the narrowed circle of my heart
opened out to the breadth of the world in a minute.  Returning from the
city, I hurried to my father's house, late in the afternoon, and heard
that he had started to overtake the prince, leaving word that the prince
was to be found at his address in the island.  No doubt could exist
regarding the course I was bound to take.  I drove to my grandfather,
stated my case to him, and by sheer vehemence took the wind out of his
sails; so that when I said, 'I am the only one alive who can control my
father,' he answered mildly, 'Seems t' other way,' and chose a small
snort for the indulgence of his private opinion.

'What! this princess came over alone, and is down driving out with my
girl under an alias?' he said, showing sour aversion at the prospect of a
collision with the foreign species, as expressive as the ridge of a cat's
back.

Temple came to dine with us, so I did not leave him quite to himself, and
Temple promised to accompany him down to the island.

'Oh, go, if you like,' the fretted old man dismissed me:

'I've got enough to think over.  Hold him fast to stand up to me within
forty-eight hours, present time; you know who I mean; I've got a question
or two for him.  How he treats his foreign princes and princesses don't
concern me.  I'd say, like the Prevention-Cruelty-Animal's man to the
keeper of the menagerie, "Lecture 'em, wound their dignity, hurt their
feelings, only don't wop 'em."  I don't wish any harm to them, but what
the deuce they do here nosing after my grandson! .  .  . There, go; we
shall be having it out ha' done with to-morrow or next day.  I've run the
badger to earth, else I'm not fit to follow a scent.'

He grumbled at having to consume other than his Riversley bread, butter,
beef, and ale for probably another fortnight.  One of the boasts of
Riversley was, that while the rest of the world ate and drank poison,
the Grange lived on its own solid substance, defying malefactory Radical
tricksters.

Temple was left to hear the rest.  He had the sweetest of modest wishes
for a re-introduction to Ottilia.




CHAPTER L

WE ARE ALL IN MY FATHER'S NET

Journeying down by the mail-train in the face of a great sunken sunset
broken with cloud, I chanced to ask myself what it was that I seriously
desired to have.  My purpose to curb my father was sincere and good; but
concerning my heart's desires, whitherward did they point?  I thought of
Janet--she made me gasp for air; of Ottilia, and she made me long for
earth.  Sharp, as I write it, the distinction smote me.  I might have
been divided by an electrical shot into two halves, with such an equal
force was I drawn this way and that, pointing nowhither.  To strangle the
thought of either one of them was like the pang of death; yet it did not
strike me that I loved the two: they were apart in my mind, actually as
if I had been divided.  I passed the Riversley station under sombre
sunset fires, saddened by the fancy that my old home and vivacious Janet
were ashes, past hope.  I came on the smell of salt air, and had that
other spirit of woman around me, of whom the controlled seadeeps were an
image, who spoke to my soul like starlight.  Much wise counsel, and
impatience of the wisdom, went on within me.  I walked like a man with a
yawning wound, and had to whip the sense of passion for a drug.  Toward
which one it strove I know not; it was blind and stormy as the night.

Not a boatman would take me across.  The lights of the island lay like a
crown on the water.  I paced the ramparts, eyeing them, breathing the
keen salt of thundering waves, until they were robbed of their magic by
the coloured Fast.

It is, I have learnt, out of the conflict of sensations such as I then
underwent that a young man's brain and morality, supposing him not to
lean overmuch to sickly sentiment, becomes gradually enriched and
strengthened, and himself shaped for capable manhood.  I was partly
conscious of a better condition in the morning; and a sober morning it
was to me after my long sentinel's step to and fro.  I found myself
possessed of one key--whether the right one or not--wherewith to read the
princess, which was never possible to me when I was under stress of
passion, or of hope or despair; my perplexities over what she said, how
she looked, ceased to trouble me.  I read her by this strange light: that
she was a woman who could only love intelligently--love, that is, in the
sense of giving herself.  She had the power of passion, and it could be
stirred; but he who kindled it wrecked his chance if he could not stand
clear in her intellect's unsparing gaze.  Twice already she must have
felt herself disillusioned by me.  This third time, possibly, she blamed
her own fatally credulous tenderness, not me; but it was her third
awakening, and could affection and warmth of heart combat it?  Her
child's enthusiasm for my country had prepared her for the impression
which the waxen mind of the dreamy invalid received deeply; and so, aided
by the emotional blood of youth, she gave me place in her imagination,
probing me still curiously, as I remembered, at a season when her sedate
mind was attaining to joint deliberations with the impulsive overgenerous
heart.

Then ensued for her the successive shocks of discernment.  She knew the
to have some of the vices, many follies, all the intemperateness of men
who carve a way for themselves in the common roads, if barely they do
that.  And resembling common men (men, in a judgement elective as hers,
common, however able), I was not assuredly to be separated by her from my
associations; from the thought of my father, for example.  Her look at
him in the lake-palace library, and her manner in unfolding and folding
his recent letter to her, and in one or two necessitated allusions,
embraced a kind of grave, pitiful humour, beyond smiles or any outward
expression, as if the acknowledgement that it was so quite obliterated
the wonder that it should be so--that one such as he could exercise
influence upon her destiny.  Or she may have made her reckoning
generally, not personally, upon our human destinies: it is the more
likely, if, as I divine, the calm oval of her lifted eyelids contemplated
him in the fulness of the recognition that this world, of which we hope
unuttered things, can be shifted and swayed by an ignis-fatuus.  The
father of one now seen through, could hardly fail of being transfixed
himself.  It was horrible to think of.  I would rather have added a vice
to my faults than that she should have penetrated him.

Nearing the island, I was reminded of the early morning when I landed on
the Flemish flats.  I did not expect a similar surprise, but before my
rowers had pulled in, the tall beaconhead of old Schwartz notified that
his mistress might be abroad.  Janet walked with her.  I ran up the steps
to salute them, and had Ottilia's hand in mine.

'Prince Ernest has arrived?'

'My father came yesterday evening.'

'Do you leave to-day?'

'I cannot tell; he will decide.'

It seemed a good omen, until I scanned Janet's sombre face.

'You will not see us out for the rest of the day, Harry,' said she.

'That is your arrangement?'

'It is.'

'Your own?'

'Mine, if you like.'

There was something hard in her way of speaking, as though she blamed me,
and the princess were under her protection against me.  She vouchsafed no
friendly significance of look and tone.

In spite of my readiness to criticize her (which in our language means
condemn) for always assuming leadership with whomsoever she might be, I
was impressed by the air of high-bred friendliness existing between her
and the princess.  Their interchange was pleasant to hear.  Ottilia had
caught the spirit of her frank manner of speech; and she, though in a
less degree, the princess's fine ease and sweetness.  They conversed,
apparently, like equal minds.  On material points, Janet unhesitatingly
led.  It was she who brought the walk to a close.

'Now, Harry, you had better go and have a little sleep.  I should like to
speak to you early.'

Ottilia immediately put her hand out to me.

I begged permission to see her to her door.

Janet replied for her, indicating old Schwartz: 'We have a protector, you
see, six feet and a half.'

An hour later, Schwartz was following her to the steps of her hotel.  She
saw me, and waited.  For a wonder, she displayed reluctance in
disburdening herself of what she had to say.  'Harry, you know that he
has come?  He and Prince Ernest came together.  Get him to leave the
island at once: he can return to-morrow.  Grandada writes of wishing to
see him.  Get him away to-day.'

'Is the prince going to stay here?' I asked.

'No.  I daresay I am only guessing; I hope so.  He has threatened the
prince.'

'What with?'

'Oh!  Harry, can't you understand?  I'm no reader of etiquette, but even
I can see that the story of a young princess travelling over to England
alone to visit .  .  .  and you .  .  ., and her father fetching her
away!  The prince is almost at his mercy, unless you make the man behave
like a gentleman.  This is exactly the thing Miss Goodwin feared!'

'But who's to hear of the story?' said I.

Janet gave an impatient sigh.

'Do you mean that my father has threatened to publish it, Janet?'

'I won't say he has.  He has made the prince afraid to move: that I think
is true.'

'Did the princess herself mention it to you?'

'She understands her situation, I am sure.'

'Did she speak of "the man," as you call him?'

'Yes: not as I do.  You must try by-and-by to forgive me.  Whether he set
a trap or not, he has decoyed her--don't frown at words--and it remains
for you to act as I don't doubt you will; but lose no time.  Determine.
Oh!  if I were a man!'

'You would muzzle us?'

'Muzzle, or anything you please; I would make any one related to me
behave honourably.  I would give him the alternative .  .  .'

'You foolish girl!  suppose he took it?'

'I would make him feel my will.  He should not take it.  Keep to the
circumstances, Harry.  If you have no control over him--I should think I
was not fit to live, in such a position!  No control over him at a moment
like this?  and the princess in danger of having her reputation hurt!
Surely, Harry!  But why should I speak to you as if you were undecided!'

'Where is he?'

'At the house where you sleep.  He surrendered his rooms here very
kindly.'

'Aunty has seen him?'

Janet blushed: I thought I knew why.  It was for subtler reasons than I
should have credited her with conceiving.

'She sent for him, at my request, late last night.  She believed her
influence would be decisive.  So do I.  She could not even make the man
perceive that he was acting--to use her poor dear old-fashioned word--
reprehensibly in frightening the prince to further your interests.  From
what I gathered he went off in a song about them.  She said he talked so
well!  And aunty Dorothy, too!  I should nearly as soon have expected
grandada to come in for his turn of the delusion.  How I wish he was
here!  Uberly goes by the first boat to bring him down.  I feel with Miss
Goodwin that it will be a disgrace for all of us--the country's disgrace.
As for our family!  .  .  .  Harry, and your name!  Good-bye.  Do your
best.'

I was in the mood to ask, 'On behalf of the country?'  She had, however,
a glow and a ringing articulation in her excitement that forbade
trifling; a minute's reflection set me weighing my power of will against
my father's.  I nodded to her.

'Come to us when you are at liberty,' she called.

I have said that I weighed my power of will against my father's.
Contemplation of the state of the scales did not send me striding to meet
him.  Let it be remembered--I had it strongly in memory that he
habitually deluded himself under the supposition that the turn of all
events having an aspect of good fortune had been planned by him of old,
and were offered to him as the legitimately-won fruits of a politic life.
While others deemed him mad, or merely reckless, wild, a creature living
for the day, he enjoyed the conceit of being a profound schemer, in which
he was fortified by a really extraordinary adroitness to take advantage
of occurrences: and because he was prompt in an emergency, and quick to
profit of a crisis, he was deluded to imagine that he had created it.
Such a man would be with difficulty brought to surrender his prize.

Again, there was his love for me.  'Pater est, Pamphile;--difficile est.'
How was this vast conceit of a not unreal paternal love to be
encountered?  The sense of honour and of decency might appeal to him
personally; would either of them get a hearing if he fancied them to be
standing in opposition to my dearest interests?  I, unhappily, as the
case would be sure to present itself to him, appeared the living example
of his eminently politic career.  After establishing me the heir of one
of the wealthiest of English commoners, would he be likely to forego any
desperate chance of ennobling me by the brilliant marriage?  His dreadful
devotion to me extinguished the hope that he would, unless I should
happen to be particularly masterful in dealing with him.  I heard his
nimble and overwhelming volubility like a flood advancing.  That could be
withstood, and his arguments and persuasions.  But by what steps could I
restrain the man himself?  I said 'the man,' as Janet did.  He figured in
my apprehensive imagination as an engine more than as an individual.
Lassitude oppressed me.  I felt that I required every access of strength
possible, physical besides moral, in anticipation of our encounter, and
took a swim in sea-water, which displaced my drowsy fit, and some
alarming intimations of cowardice menacing a paralysis of the will: I had
not altogether recovered from my gipsy drubbing.  And now I wanted to
have the contest over instantly.  It seemed presumable that my father had
slept at my lodgings.  There, however, the report of him was, that he had
inspected the rooms, highly complimented the owner of them, and vanished.

Returning to the pier, I learnt that he had set sail in his hired yacht
for the sister town on the Solent, at an early hour:--for what purpose?
I knew of it too late to intercept it.  One of the squire's horses
trotted me over; I came upon Colonel Hibbert Segrave near the Club-house,
and heard that my father was off again:

'But your German prince and papa-in-law shall be free of the Club for the
next fortnight,' said he, and cordially asked to have the date of the
marriage.  My face astonished him.  He excused himself for speaking of
this happy event so abruptly.  A sting of downright anger drove me back
at a rapid canter.  It flashed on me that this Prince Ernest, whose suave
fashion of depressing me, and philosophical skill in managing his
daughter, had induced me to regard him as a pattern of astuteness, was
really both credulous and feeble, or else supremely unsuspecting: and I
was confirmed in the latter idea on hearing that he had sailed to visit
the opposite harbour and docks on board my father's yacht.  Janet shared
my secret opinion.

'The prince is a gentleman,' she said.

Her wrath and disgust were unspeakable.  My aunt Dorothy blamed her for
overdue severity.  'The prince, I suppose, goes of his own free will
where he pleases.'

Janet burst out, 'Oh! can't you see through it, aunty?  The prince goes
about without at all knowing that the person who takes him--Harry sees
it--is making him compromise himself: and by-and-by the prince will
discover that he has no will of his own, whatever he may wish to resolve
upon doing.'

'Is he quite against Harry?' asked my aunt Dorothy.

'Dear aunty, he 's a prince, and a proud man.  He will never in his
lifetime consent to .  .  .  to what you mean, without being hounded
into it.  I haven't the slightest idea whether anything will force him.
I know that the princess would have too much pride to submit, even to
save her name.  But it 's her name that 's in danger.  Think of the
scandal to a sovereign princess!  I know the signification of that now; I
used to laugh at Harry's "sovereign princess."  She is one, and thorough!
there is no one like her.  Don't you understand, aunty, that the
intrigue, plot--I don't choose to be nice upon terms--may be perfectly
successful, and do good to nobody.  The prince may be tricked; the
princess, I am sure, will not.'

Janet's affectation of an intimate and peculiar knowledge of the princess
was a show of her character that I was accustomed to: still, it was
evident they had conversed much, and perhaps intimately.  I led her to
tell me that the princess had expressed no views upon my father.  'He
does not come within her scope, Harry.' 'Scope' was one of Janet's new
words, wherewith she would now and then fall to seasoning a serviceable
but savourless outworn vocabulary of the common table.  In spite of that
and other offences, rendered prominent to me by the lifting of her lip
and her frown when she had to speak of my father, I was on her side, not
on his.  Her estimation of the princess was soundly based.  She discerned
exactly the nature of Ottilia's entanglement, and her peril.

She and my aunt Dorothy passed the afternoon with Ottilia, while I
crossed the head of the street, looking down at the one house, where the
princess was virtually imprisoned, either by her father's express
injunction or her own discretion.  And it was as well that she should not
be out.  The yachting season had brought many London men to the island.
I met several who had not forgotten the newspaper-paragraph assertions
and contradictions.  Lord Alton, Admiral Loftus, and others were on the
pier and in the outfitters' shops, eager for gossip, as the languid
stretch of indolence inclines men to be.  The Admiral asked me for the
whereabout of Prince Ernest's territory.  He too said that the prince
would be free of the Club during his residence, adding:

'Where is he?'--not a question demanding an answer.  The men might have
let the princess go by, but there would have been questions urgently
demanding answers had she been seen by their women.

Late in the evening my father's yacht was sighted from the pier.  Just as
he reached his moorings, and his boat was hauled round, the last steamer
came in.  Sharp-eyed Janet saw the squire on board among a crowd, and
Temple next to him, supporting his arm.

'Has grandada been ill?' she exclaimed.

My chief concern was to see my father's head rising in the midst of the
crowd, uncovering repeatedly.  Prince Ernest and General Goodwin were
behind him, stepping off the lower pier-platform.  The General did not
look pleased.  My grandfather, with Janet holding his arm, in the place
of Temple, stood waiting to see that his man had done his duty by the
luggage.

My father, advancing, perceived me, and almost taking the squire into his
affectionate salutation, said:

'Nothing could be more opportune than your arrival, Mr. Beltham.'

The squire rejoined: 'I wanted to see you, Mr. Richmond; and not in
public.'

'I grant the private interview, sir, at your convenience.'

Janet went up to General Goodwin.  My father talked to me, and lost a
moment in shaking Temple's hand and saying kind things.

'Name any hour you please, Mr. Beltham,' he resumed; 'meantime, I shall
be glad to effect the introduction between Harry's grandfather and his
Highness Prince Ernest of Eppenwelzen-Sarkeld.'

He turned.  General Goodwin was hurrying the prince up the steps, the
squire at the same time retreating hastily.  I witnessed the spectacle of
both parties to the projected introduction swinging round to make their
escape.  My father glanced to right and left.  He covered in the airiest
fashion what would have been confusion to another by carrying on a jocose
remark that he had left half spoken to Temple, and involved Janet in it,
and soon--through sheer amiable volubility and his taking manner--the
squire himself for a minute or so.

'Harry, I have to tell you she is not unhappy,' Janet whispered rapidly.
'She is reading of one of our great men alive now.  She is glad to be on
our ground.' Janet named a famous admiral, kindling as a fiery beacon to
our blood.  She would have said more: she looked the remainder; but she
could have said nothing better fitted to spur me to the work she wanted
done.  Mournfulness dropped on me like a cloud in thinking of the bright
little princess of my boyhood, and the Ottilia of to-day, faithful to her
early passion for our sea-heroes and my country, though it had grievously
entrapped her.  And into what hands!  Not into hands which could cast one
ray of honour on a devoted head.  The contrast between the sane service--
giving men she admired, and the hopping skipping social meteor, weaver of
webs, thrower of nets, who offered her his history for a nuptial
acquisition, was ghastly, most discomforting.  He seemed to have
entangled us all.

He said that he had.  He treated me now confessedly as a cipher.  The
prince, the princess, my grandfather, and me--he had gathered us
together, he said.  I heard from him that the prince, assisted by him in
the part of an adviser, saw no way of cutting the knot but by a marriage.
All were at hand for a settlement of the terms:--Providence and destiny
were dragged in.

'Let's have no theatrical talk,' I interposed.

'Certainly, Richie; the plainest English,' he assented.

This was on the pier, while he bowed and greeted passing figures.  I
dared not unlink my arm, for fear of further mischief.  I got him to my
rooms, and insisted on his dining there.

'Dry bread will do,' he said.

My anticipations of the nature of our wrestle were correct.  But I had
not expected him to venture on the assertion that the prince was for the
marriage.  He met me at every turn with this downright iteration.  'The
prince consents: he knows his only chance is to yield.  I have him fast.'

'How?' I inquired.

'How, Richie?  Where is your perspicuity?  I have him here.  I loosen a
thousand tongues on him.  I--'

'No, not on him; on the princess, you mean.'

'On him.  The princess is the willing party; she and you are one.  On
him, I say.  'Tis but a threat: I hold it in terrorem.  And by heaven,
son Richie, it assures me I have not lived and fought for nothing.  "Now
is the day and now is the hour."  On your first birthday, my boy, I swore
to marry you to one of the highest ladies upon earth: she was, as it
turns out, then unborn.  No matter: I keep my oath.  Abandon it?  pooh!
you are--forgive me--silly.  Pardon me for remarking it, you have not
that dashing courage--never mind.  The point is, I have my prince in his
trap.  We are perfectly polite, but I have him, and he acknowledges it;
he shrugs: love has beaten him.  Very well.  And observe: I permit no
squire-of-low-degree insinuations; none of that.  The lady--all earthly
blessings on her!--does not stoop to Harry Richmond.  I have the
announcement in the newspapers.  I maintain it the fruit of a life of
long and earnest endeavour, legitimately won, by heaven it is!  and with
the constituted authorities of my native land against me.  Your grandad
proposes formally for the princess to-morrow morning.'

He maddened me.  Merely to keep him silent I burst out in a flux of
reproaches as torrent-like as his own could be; and all the time I was
wondering whether it was true that a man who talked as he did, in his
strain of florid flimsy, had actually done a practical thing.

The effect of my vehemence was to brace him and make him sedately
emphatic.  He declared himself to have gained entire possession of the
prince's mind.  He repeated his positive intention to employ his power
for my benefit.  Never did power of earth or of hell seem darker to me
than he at that moment, when solemnly declaiming that he was prepared to
forfeit my respect and love, die sooner than 'yield his prince.'  He wore
a new aspect, spoke briefly and pointedly, using the phrases of a
determined man, and in voice and gesture signified that he had us all in
a grasp of iron.  The charge of his having plotted to bring it about he
accepted with exultation.

'I admit,' he said, 'I did not arrange to have Germany present for a
witness besides England, but since he is here, I take advantage of the
fact, and to-morrow you will see young Eckart down.'

I cried out, as much enraged at my feebleness to resist him, as in
disgust of his unscrupulous tricks.

'Ay, you have not known me, Richie,' said he.  'I pilot you into harbour,
and all you can do is just the creaking of the vessel to me.  You are in
my hands.  I pilot you.  I have you the husband of the princess within
the month.  No other course is open to her.  And I have the assurance
that she loses nothing by it.  She is yours, my son.'

'She will not be.  You have wrecked my last chance.  You cover me with
dishonour.'

'You are a youngster, Richie.  'Tis the wish of her heart.  Probably
while you and I are talking it over, the prince is confessing that he has
no escape.  He has not a loophole!  She came to you; you take her.  I am
far from withholding my admiration of her behaviour; but there it is--she
came.  Not consent?  She is a ruined woman if she refuses!'

'Through you, through you!--through my father!'

'Have you both gone mad?'

'Try to see this,' I implored him.  'She will not be subjected by any
threats.  The very whisper of one will make her turn from me .  .  .'

He interrupted.  'Totally the contrary.  The prince acknowledges that you
are master of her affections.'

'Consistently with her sense of honour and respect for us.'

'Tell me of her reputation, Richie.'

'You pretend that you can damage it!'

'Pretend?  I pretend in the teeth of all concerned to establish her
happiness and yours, and nothing human shall stop me.  I have you
grateful to me before your old dad lays his head on his last pillow.
And that reminds me: I surrender my town house and furniture to you.
Waddy has received the word.  By the way, should you hear of a good
doctor for heart-disease, tell me: I have my fears for the poor soul.'

He stood up, saying, 'Richie, I am not like Jorian, to whom a lodging-
house dinner is no dinner, and an irreparable loss, but I must have air.
I go forth on a stroll.'

It was impossible for me to allow it.  I stopped him.

We were in the midst of a debate as to his right of personal freedom,
upon the singularity of which he commented with sundry ejaculations, when
Temple arrived and General Goodwin sent up his card.  Temple and I left
the general closeted with my father, and stood at the street-door.  He
had seen the princess, having at her request been taken to present his
respects to her by Janet.  How she looked, what she said, he was dull in
describing; he thought her lively, though she was pale.  She had
mentioned my name, 'kindly,' he observed.  And he knew, or suspected, the
General to be an emissary from the prince.  But he could not understand
the exact nature of the complication, and plagued me with a mixture of
blunt inquiries and the delicate reserve proper to him so much that I had
to look elsewhere for counsel and sympathy.  Janet had told him
everything; still he was plunged in wonder, tempting me to think the
lawyer's mind of necessity bourgeois, for the value of a sentiment seemed
to have no weight in his estimation of the case.  Nor did he appear
disinclined to excuse my father.  Some of his remarks partly swayed me,
in spite of my seeing that they were based on the supposition of an 'all
for love' adventure of a mad princess.  They whispered a little hope,
when I was adoring her passionately for being the reverse of whatever
might have given hope a breath.

General Goodwin, followed by my father, came down and led me aside after
I had warned Temple not to let my father elude him.  The General was
greatly ruffled.  'Clara tells me she can rely on you,' he said.  'I am
at the end of my arguments with that man, short of sending him to the
lock-up.  You will pardon me, Mr. Harry; I foresaw the scrapes in store
for you, and advised you.'

'You did, General,' I confessed.  'Will you tell me what it is Prince
Ernest is in dread of?'

'A pitiable scandal, sir; and if he took my recommendation, he would find
instant means of punishing the man who dares to threaten him.  You know
it.'

I explained that I was aware of the threat, not of the degree of the
prince's susceptibility; and asked him if he had seen the princess.

'I have had the honour,' he replied, stiffly.  'You gain nothing with her
by this infamous proceeding.'

I swallowed my anger, and said, 'Do you accuse me, General?'

'I do not accuse you,' he returned, unbendingly.  'You chose your path
some ten or twelve years ago, and you must take the consequences.
I foresaw it; but this I will say, I did not credit the man with his
infernal cleverness.  If I speak to you at all, I must speak my mind.
I thought him a mere buffoon and spendthrift, flying his bar-sinister
story for the sake of distinction.  He has schemed up to this point
successfully: he has the prince in his toils.  I would cut through them,
as I have informed Prince Ernest.  I daresay different positions lead to
different reasonings; the fellow appears to have a fascination over him.
Your father, Mr. Harry, is guilty now--he is guilty, I reiterate, now of
a piece of iniquity that makes me ashamed to own him for a countryman.'

The General shook himself erect.  'Are you unable to keep him in?' he
asked.

My nerves were pricking and stinging with the insults I had to listen to,
and conscience's justification of them.

He repeated the question.

'I will do what I can,' I said, unsatisfactorily to myself and to him,
for he transposed our situations, telling me the things he would say and
do in my place; things not dissimilar to those I had already said and
done, only more toweringly enunciated; and for that reason they struck me
as all the more hopelessly ineffectual, and made me despair.

My dumbness excited his ire.  'Come,' said he; 'the lady is a spoilt
child.  She behaved foolishly; but from your point of view you should
feel bound to protect her on that very account.  Do your duty, young
gentleman.  He is, I believe, fond of you, and if so, you have him by a
chain.  I tell you frankly, I hold you responsible.'

His way of speaking of the princess opened an idea of the world's, in the
event of her name falling into its clutches.

I said again, 'I will do what I can,' and sang out for Temple.

He was alone.  My father had slipped from him to leave a card at the
squire's hotel.  General Goodwin touched Temple on the shoulder kindly,
in marked contrast to his treatment of me, and wished us good-night.
Nothing had been heard of my father by Janet, but while I was sitting
with her, at a late hour, his card was brought up, and a pencilled
entreaty for an interview the next morning.

'That will suit grandada,' Janet said.  'He commissioned me before going
to bed to write the same for him.'

She related that the prince was in a state of undisguised distraction.
From what I could comprehend--it appeared incredible--he regarded his
daughter's marriage as the solution of the difficulty, the sole way out
of the meshes.

'Is not that her wish?' said Temple; perhaps with a wish of his own.

'Oh, if you think a lady like the Princess Ottilia is led by her wishes,'
said Janet.  Her radiant perception of an ideal in her sex (the first she
ever had) made her utterly contemptuous toward the less enlightened.

We appointed the next morning at half-past eleven for my father's visit.

'Not a minute later,' Janet said in my ear, urgently.  'Don't--don't let
him move out of your sight, Harry!  The princess is convinced you are
not to blame.'

I asked her whether she had any knowledge of the squire's designs.

'I have not, on my honour,' she answered.  'But I hope .  .  .  It is so
miserable to think of this disgraceful thing!  She is too firm to give
way.  She does not blame you.  I am sure I do not; only, Harry, one
always feels that if one were in another's place, in a case like this,
I could and would command him.  I would have him obey me.  One is not
born to accept disgrace even from a father.  I should say, "You shall not
stir, if you mean to act dishonourably."  One is justified, I am sure, in
breaking a tie of relationship that involves you in dishonour.  Grandada
has not spoken a word to me on the subject.  I catch at straws.  This
thing burns me!  Oh, good-night, Harry.  I can't sleep.'

'Good-night,' she called softly to Temple on the stairs below.  I heard
the poor fellow murmuring good-night to himself in the street, and
thought him happier than I.  He slept at a room close to the hotel.

A note from Clara Goodwin adjured me, by her memory of the sweet, brave,
gracious fellow she loved in other days, to be worthy of what I had been.
The General had unnerved her reliance on me.

I sat up for my father until long past midnight.  When he came his
appearance reminded me of the time of his altercation with Baroness
Turckems under the light of the blazing curtains: he had supped and drunk
deeply, and he very soon proclaimed that I should find him invincible,
which, as far as insensibility to the strongest appeals to him went, he
was.

'Deny you love her, deny she loves you, deny you are one--I knot you
fast!'

He had again seen Prince Ernest; so he said, declaring that the Prince
positively desired the marriage; would have it.  'And I,' he dramatized
their relative situations, 'consented.'

After my experience of that night, I forgive men who are unmoved by
displays of humour.  Commonly we think it should be irresistible.  His
description of the thin-skinned sensitive prince striving to run and
dodge for shelter from him, like a fever-patient pursued by a North-
easter, accompanied by dozens of quaint similes full of his mental
laughter, made my loathing all the more acute.  But I had not been an
equal match for him previous to his taking wine; it was waste of breath
and heart to contend with him.  I folded my arms tight, sitting rigidly
silent, and he dropped on the sofa luxuriously.

'Bed, Richie!' he waved to me.  'You drink no wine, you cannot stand
dissipation as I do.  Bed, my dear boy!  I am a God, sir, inaccessible to
mortal ailments!  Seriously, dear boy, I have never known an illness in
my life.  I have killed my hundreds of poor devils who were for imitating
me.  This I boast--I boast constitution.  And I fear, Richie, you have
none of my superhuman strength.  Added to that, I know I am watched over.
I ask--I have: I scheme the tricks are in my hand!  It may be the doing
of my mother in heaven; there is the fact for you to reflect on.  "Stand
not in my way, nor follow me too far," would serve me for a motto
admirably, and you can put it in Latin, Richie.  Bed!  You shall turn
your scholarship to account as I do my genius in your interest.  On my
soul, that motto in Latin will requite me.  Now to bed.'

'No,' said I.  'You have got away from me once.  I shall keep you in
sight and hearing, if I have to lie at your door for it.  You will go
with me to London to-morrow.  I shall treat you as a man I have to guard,
and I shall not let you loose before I am quite sure of you.'

'Loose!' he exclaimed, throwing up an arm and a leg.

'I mean, sir, that you shall be in my presence wherever you are, and I
will take care you don't go far and wide.  It's useless to pretend
astonishment.  I don't argue and I don't beseech any further: I just sit
on guard, as I would over a powder-cask.'

My father raised himself on an elbow.  'The explosion,' he said,
examining his watch, 'occurred at about five minutes to eleven--we are
advancing into the morning--last night.  I received on your behalf the
congratulations of friends Loftus, Alton, Segrave, and the rest, at that
hour.  So, my dear Richie, you are sitting on guard over the empty
magazine.'

I listened with a throbbing forehead, and controlled the choking in my
throat, to ask him whether he had touched the newspapers.

'Ay, dear lad, I have sprung my mine in them,' he replied.

'You have sent word--?'

'I have despatched a paragraph to the effect, that the prince and
princess have arrived to ratify the nuptial preliminaries.'

'You expect it to appear this day?'

'Or else my name and influence are curiously at variance with the
confidence I repose in them, Richie.'

'Then I leave you to yourself,' I said.  'Prince Ernest knows he has to
expect this statement in the papers?'

'We trumped him with that identical court-card, Richie.'

'Very well.  To-morrow, after we have been to my grandfather, you and I
part company for good, sir.  It costs me too much.'

'Dear old Richie,' he laughed, gently.  'And now to bye-bye!  My blessing
on you now and always.'

He shut his eyes.




CHAPTER LI

AN ENCOUNTER SHOWING MY FATHER'S GENIUS IN A STRONG LIGHT

The morning was sultry with the first rising of the sun. I knew that
Ottilia and Janet would be out.  For myself, I dared not leave the house.
I sat in my room, harried by the most penetrating snore which can ever
have afflicted wakeful ears.  It proclaimed so deep-seated a peacefulness
in the bosom of the disturber, and was so arrogant, so ludicrous, and
inaccessible to remonstrance, that it sounded like a renewal of our
midnight altercation on the sleeper's part.  Prolonged now and then
beyond all bounds, it ended in the crashing blare whereof utter
wakefulness cannot imagine honest sleep to be capable, but a playful
melody twirled back to the regular note. He was fast asleep on the
sitting-room sofa, while I walked fretting and panting.  To this twinship
I seemed condemned.  In my heart nevertheless there was a reserve of
wonderment at his apparent astuteness and resolution, and my old love for
him whispered disbelief in his having disgraced me.  Perhaps it was
wilful self-deception.  It helped me to meet him with a better face.

We both avoided the subject of our difference for some time: he would
evidently have done so altogether, and used his best and sweetest manner
to divert me: but when I struck on it, asking him if he had indeed told
me the truth last night, his features clouded as though with an effort of
patience.  To my consternation, he suddenly broke away, with his arms up,
puffing and stammering, stamping his feet.  He would have a truce--he
insisted on a truce, I understood him to exclaim, and that I was like a
woman, who would and would not, and wanted a master.  He raved of the
gallant down-rightedness of the young bloods of his day, and how
splendidly this one and that had compassed their ends by winning great
ladies, lawfully, or otherwise.  For several minutes he was in a state of
frenzy, appealing to his pattern youths of a bygone generation, as to
moral principles--stuttering, and of a dark red hue from the neck to the
temples.  I refrained from a scuffle of tongues.  Nor did he excuse
himself after he had cooled.  His hand touched instinctively for his
pulse, and, with a glance at the ceiling, he exclaimed, 'Good Lord!' and
brought me to his side.  'These wigwam houses check my circulation,' said
he.  'Let us go out-let us breakfast on board.'

The open air restored him, and he told me that he had been merely
oppressed by the architect of the inferior classes, whose ceiling sat on
his head.  My nerves, he remarked to me, were very exciteable.  'You
should take your wine, Richie,--you require it.  Your dear mother had a
low-toned nervous system.'  I was silent, and followed him, at once a
captive and a keeper.

This day of slackened sails and a bright sleeping water kept the
yachtsmen on land; there was a crowd to meet the morning boat.  Foremost
among those who stepped out of it was the yellow-haired Eckart, little
suspecting what the sight of him signalled to me.  I could scarcely greet
him at all, for in him I perceived that my father had fully committed
himself to his plot, and left me nothing to hope.  Eckart said something
of Prince Hermann.  As we were walking off the pier, I saw Janet
conversing with Prince Ernest, and the next minute Hermann himself was
one of the group.  I turned to Eckart for an explanation.

'Didn't I tell you he called at your house in London and travelled down
with me this morning!' said Eckart.

My father looked in the direction of the princes, but his face was for
the moment no index.  They bowed to Janet, and began talking hurriedly in
the triangle of road between her hotel, the pier, and the way to the
villas: passing on, and coming to a full halt, like men who are not
reserving their minds.  My father stept out toward them.  He was met by
Prince Ernest.  Hermann turned his back.

It being the hour of the appointment, I delivered Eckart over to Temple's
safe-keeping, and went up to Janet.  'Don't be late, Harry,' she said.

I asked her if she knew the object of the meeting appointed by my
grandfather.

She answered impatiently, 'Do get him away from the prince.'  And then:
'I ought to tell you the princess is well, and so on--pardon me just now:
Grandada is kept waiting, and I don't like it.'

Her actual dislike was to see Prince Ernest in dialogue with my father,
it seemed to me; and the manner of both, which was, one would have said,
intimate, anything but the manner of adversaries.  Prince Ernest appeared
to affect a pleasant humour; he twice, after shaking my father's hand,
stepped back to him, as if to renew some impression.  Their attitude
declared them to be on the best of terms.  Janet withdrew her attentive
eyes from observing them, and threw a world of meaning into her
abstracted gaze at me.  My father's advance put her to flight.

Yet she gave him the welcome of a high-bred young woman when he entered
the drawing-room of my grandfather's hotel-suite.  She was alone, and she
obliged herself to accept conversation graciously.  He recommended her to
try the German Baths for the squire's gout, and evidently amused her with
his specific probations for English persons designing to travel in
company, that they should previously live together in a house with a
collection of undisciplined chambermaids, a musical footman, and a mad
cook: to learn to accommodate their tempers.  'I would add a touch of
earthquake, Miss Ilchester, just to make sure that all the party know one
another's edges before starting.'  This was too far a shot of nonsense
for Janet, whose native disposition was to refer to lunacy or stupidity,
or trickery, whatsoever was novel to her understanding.  'I, for my
part,' said he, 'stipulate to have for comrade no man who fancies himself
a born and stamped chieftain, no inveterate student of maps, and no dog
with a turn for feeling himself pulled by the collar.  And that reminds
me you are amateur of dogs.  Have you a Pomeranian boar-hound?'

'No,' said Janet; 'I have never even seen one'

'That high.' My father raised his hand flat.

'Bigger than our Newfoundlands!'

'Without exaggeration, big as a pony.  You will permit me to send you
one, warranted to have passed his distemper, which can rarely be done for
our human species, though here and there I venture to guarantee my man as
well as my dog.'

Janet interposed her thanks, declining to take the dog, but he dwelt on
the dog's charms, his youth, stature, appearance, fitness, and grandeur,
earnestly.  I had to relieve her apprehensions by questioning where the
dog was.

'In Germany,' he said.

It was not improbable, nor less so that the dog was in Pomerania
likewise.

The entry of my aunt Dorothy, followed by my grandfather, was silent.

'Be seated,' the old man addressed us in a body, to cut short particular
salutations.

My father overshadowed him with drooping shoulders.

Janet wished to know whether she was to remain.

'I like you by me always,' he answered, bluff and sharp.

'We have some shopping to do,' my aunt Dorothy murmured, showing she was
there against her will.

'Do you shop out of London?' said my father; and for some time he
succeeded in making us sit for the delusive picture of a comfortable
family meeting.

My grandfather sat quite still, Janet next to him.  'When you've
finished, Mr. Richmond,' he remarked.

'Mr. Beltham, I was telling Miss Beltham that I join in the abuse of
London exactly because I love it.  A paradox!  she says.  But we seem to
be effecting a kind of insurance on the life of the things we love best
by crying them down violently.  You have observed it?  Denounce them--
they endure for ever!  So I join any soul on earth in decrying our dear
London.  The naughty old City can bear it.'

There was a clearing of throats.  My aunt Dorothy's foot tapped the
floor.

'But I presume you have done me the honour to invite me to this
conference on a point of business, Mr. Beltham?' said my father,
admonished by the hint.

'I have, sir,' the squire replied.

'And I also have a point.  And, in fact, it is urgent, and with your
permission, Mr. Beltham, I will lead the way.'

'No, sir, if you please.

I'm a short speaker, and go to it at once, and I won't detain you a
second after you've answered me.'

My father nodded to this, with the conciliatory comment that it was
business-like.

The old man drew out his pocket-book.

'You paid a debt,' he said deliberately, 'amounting to twenty-one
thousand pounds to my grandson's account.'

'Oh!  a debt!  I did, sir.  Between father and boy, dad and lad; debts!
.  .  .  but use your own terms, I pray you.'

' I don't ask you where that money is now.  I ask you to tell me where
you got it from.'

'You speak bluntly, my dear sir.'

'You won't answer, then?'

'You ask the question as a family matter?  I reply with alacrity, to the
best of my ability: and with my hand on my heart, Mr. Beltham, let me
assure you, I very heartily desire the information to be furnished to me.
Or rather--why should I conceal it?  The sources are irregular, but a
child could toddle its way to them--you take my indication.  Say that I
obtained it from my friends.  My friends, Mr. Beltham, are of the kind
requiring squeezing.  Government, as my chum and good comrade, Jorian
DeWitt, is fond of saying, is a sponge--a thing that when you dive deep
enough to catch it gives liberal supplies, but will assuredly otherwise
reverse the process by acting the part of an absorbent.  I get what I get
by force of arms, or I might have perished long since.'

'Then you don't know where you got it from, sir?'

'Technically, you are correct, sir.'

'A bird didn't bring it, and you didn't find it in the belly of a fish.'

'Neither of these prodigies.  They have occurred in books I am bound to
believe; they did not happen to me.'

'You swear to me you don't know the man, woman, or committee, who gave
you that sum?'

'I do not know, Mr. Beltham.  In an extraordinary history, extraordinary
circumstances!  I have experienced so many that I am surprised at
nothing.'

'You suppose you got it from some fool?'

'Oh!  if you choose to indict Government collectively?'

'You pretend you got it from Government?'

'I am termed a Pretender by some, Mr. Beltham.  The facts are these: I
promised to refund the money, and I fulfilled the promise.  There you
have the only answer I can make to you.  Now to my own affair.  I come to
request you to demand the hand of the Princess of Eppenwelzen-Sarkeld on
behalf of my son Harry, your grandson; and I possess the assurance of the
prince, her father, that it will be granted.  Doubtless you, sir, are of
as old a blood as the prince himself.  You will acknowledge that the
honour brought to the family by an hereditary princess is considerable:
it is something.  I am prepared to accompany you to his Highness, or not,
as you please.  It is but a question of dotation, and a selection from
one or two monosyllables.'

Janet shook her dress.

The squire replied: 'We 'll take that up presently.  I haven't quite
done.  Will you tell me what agent paid you the sum of money?'

'The usual agent--a solicitor, Mr. Beltham; a gentleman whose business
lay amongst the aristocracy; he is defunct; and a very worthy old
gentleman he was, with a remarkable store of anecdotes of his patrons,
very discreetly told: for you never heard a name from him.'

'You took him for an agent of Government, did you?  why?'

'To condense a long story, sir, the kernel of the matter is, that almost
from the hour I began to stir for the purpose of claiming my rights--
which are transparent enough this old gentleman--certainly from no
sinister motive, I may presume--commenced the payment of an annuity; not
sufficient for my necessities, possibly, but warrant of an agreeable sort
for encouraging my expectations; although oddly, this excellent old Mr.
Bannerbridge invariably served up the dish in a sauce that did not agree
with it, by advising me of the wish of the donator that I should abandon
my Case.  I consequently, in common with my friends, performed a little
early lesson in arithmetic, and we came to the one conclusion open to
reflective minds--namely, that I was feared.'

My aunt Dorothy looked up for the first time.

'Janet and I have some purchases to make,' she said.

The squire signified sharply that she must remain where she was.

'I think aunty wants fresh air; she had a headache last night,' said
Janet.

I suggested that, as my presence did not seem to be required, I could
take her on my arm for a walk to the pier-head.

Her face was burning; she would gladly have gone out, but the squire
refused to permit it, and she nodded over her crossed hands, saying that
she was in no hurry.

'Ha! I am,' quoth he.

'Dear Miss Beltham !' my father ejaculated solicitously.  'Here, sir,
oblige me by attending to me,' cried the squire, fuming and blinking.
'I sent for you on a piece of business.  You got this money through a
gentleman, a solicitor, named Bannerbridge, did you?'

'His name was Bannerbridge, Mr. Beltham.'

'Dorothy, you knew a Mr. Bannerbridge?'

She faltered: 'I knew him ....  Harry was lost in the streets of London
when he was a little fellow, and the Mr. Bannerbridge I knew found him
and took him to his house, and was very kind to him.'

'What was his Christian name?'

I gave them: 'Charles Adolphus.'

'The identical person!' exclaimed my father.

'Oh!  you admit it,' said the squire.  'Ever seen him since the time
Harry was lost, Dorothy?'

'Yes,' she answered.  'I have heard he is dead:

'Did you see him shortly before his death?'

'I happened to see him a short time before.!

'He was your man of business, was he?'

'For such little business as I had to do.'

'You were sure you could trust him, eh?'

'Yes.'

My aunt Dorothy breathed deeply.

'By God, ma'am, you're a truthful woman!'

The old man gave her a glare of admiration.

It was now my turn to undergo examination, and summoned by his apostrophe
to meet his eyes, I could appreciate the hardness of the head I had to
deal with.

'Harry, I beg your pardon beforehand; I want to get at facts; I must ask
you what you know about where the money came from?'

I spoke of my attempts to discover the whence and wherefore of it.

'Government?  eh?' he sneered.

'I really can't judge whether it came from that quarter,' said I.

'What do you think?--think it likely?'

I thought it unlikely, and yet likelier than that it should have come
from an individual.

'Then you don't suspect any particular person of having sent it in the
nick of time, Harry Richmond?'

I replied: 'No, sir; unless you force me to suspect you.'

He jumped in his chair, astounded and wrathful, confounded me for
insinuating that he was a Bedlamite, and demanded the impudent reason of
my suspecting him to have been guilty of the infernal folly.

I had but the reason to instance that he was rich and kind at heart.

'Rich!  kind!' he bellowed.  'Just excuse me--I must ask for the purpose
of my inquiry;--there, tell me, how much do you believe you 've got of
that money remaining?  None o' that Peterborough style of counting in the
back of your pate.  Say!'

There was a dreadful silence.

My father leaned persuasively forward.

'Mr. Beltham, I crave permission to take up the word.  Allow me to remind
you of the prize Harry has won.  The prince awaits you to bestow on him
the hand of his daughter--'

'Out with it, Harry,' shouted the squire.

'Not to mention Harry's seat in Parliament,' my father resumed, 'he has a
princess to wife, indubitably one of the most enviable positions in the
country!  It is unnecessary to count on future honours; they may be
alluded to.  In truth, sir, we make him the first man in the country.
Not necessarily Premier: you take my meaning: he possesses the
combination of social influence and standing with political achievements,
and rank and riches in addition--'

'I 'm speaking to my grandson, sir,' the squire rejoined, shaking himself
like a man rained on.  'I 'm waiting for a plain answer, and no lie.
You've already confessed as much as that the money you told me on your
honour you put out to interest; psh!--for my grandson was smoke.  Now
let's hear him.'

My father called out: 'I claim a hearing!  The money you speak of was put
out to the very highest interest.  You have your grandson in Parliament,
largely acquainted with the principal members of society, husband of an
hereditary princess!  You have only at this moment to propose for her
hand.  I guarantee it to you.  With that money I have won him everything.
Not that I would intimate to you that princesses are purchaseable.  The
point is, I knew how to employ it.'

'In two months' time, the money in the Funds in the boy's name--you told
me that.'

'You had it in the Funds in Harry Richmond's name, sir.'

'Well, sir, I'm asking him whether it's in the Funds now.'

'Oh!  Mr. Beltham.'

'What answer's that?'

The squire was really confused by my father's interruption, and lost
sight of me.

'I ask where it came from: I ask whether it's squandered?' he continued.

'Mr. Beltham, I reply that you have only to ask for it to have it; do so
immediately.'

'What 's he saying?' cried the baffled old man.

'I give you a thousand times the equivalent of the money, Mr. Beltham.'

'Is the money there?'

'The lady is here.'

'I said money, sir.'

'A priceless honour and treasure, I say emphatically.'  My grandfather's
brows and mouth were gathering for storm.  Janet touched his knee.

'Where the devil your understanding truckles, if you have any, I don't
know,' he muttered.  'What the deuce--lady got to do with money!'

'Oh!' my father laughed lightly, 'customarily the alliance is, they say,
as close as matrimony.  Pardon me.  To speak with becoming seriousness,
Mr. Beltham, it was duly imperative that our son should be known in
society, should be, you will apprehend me, advanced in station, which I
had to do through the ordinary political channel.  There could not but be
a considerable expenditure for such a purpose.'

'In Balls, and dinners!'

'In everything that builds a young gentleman's repute.'

'You swear to me you gave your Balls and dinners, and the lot, for Harry
Richmond's sake?'

'On my veracity, I did, sir!'

'Please don't talk like a mountebank.  I don't want any of your
roundabout words for truth; we're not writing a Bible essay.  I try my
best to be civil.'

My father beamed on him.

'I guarantee you succeed, sir.  Nothing on earth can a man be so
absolutely sure of as to succeed in civility, if he honestly tries at it.
Jorian DeWitt,--by the way, you may not know him--an esteemed old friend
of mine, says--that is, he said once--to a tolerably impudent fellow whom
he had disconcerted with a capital retort, "You may try to be a
gentleman, and blunder at it, but if you will only try to be his humble
servant, we are certain to establish a common footing."  Jorian, let me
tell you, is a wit worthy of our glorious old days.'

My grandfather eased his heart with a plunging breath.

'Well, sir, I didn't ask you here for your opinion or your friend's, and
I don't care for modern wit.'

'Nor I, Mr. Beltham, nor I!  It has the reek of stable straw.  We are of
one mind on that subject.  The thing slouches, it sprawls.  It--to quote
Jorian once more--is like a dirty, idle, little stupid boy who cannot
learn his lesson and plays the fool with the alphabet.  You smile, Miss
Ilchester: you would appreciate Jorian.  Modern wit is emphatically
degenerate.  It has no scintillation, neither thrust nor parry.  I
compare it to boxing, as opposed to the more beautiful science of
fencing.'

'Well, sir, I don't want to hear your comparisons,' growled the squire,
much oppressed.  'Stop a minute .  .  .'

'Half a minute to me, sir,' said my father, with a glowing reminiscence
of Jorian DeWitt, which was almost too much for the combustible old man,
even under Janet's admonition.

My aunt Dorothy moved her head slightly toward my father, looking on the
floor, and he at once drew in.

'Mr. Beltham, I attend to you submissively.'

'You do?  Then tell me what brought this princess to England?'

'The conviction that Harry had accomplished his oath to mount to an
eminence in his country, and had made the step she is about to take less,
I will say, precipitous: though I personally decline to admit a pointed
inferiority.'

'You wrote her a letter.'

'That, containing the news of the attack on him and his desperate
illness, was the finishing touch to the noble lady's passion.'

'Attack?  I know nothing about an attack.  You wrote her a letter and
wrote her a lie.  You said he was dying.'

'I had the boy inanimate on my breast when I despatched the epistle.'

'You said he had only a few days to live.'

'So in my affliction I feared.'

'Will you swear you didn't write that letter with the intention of
drawing her over here to have her in your power, so that you might
threaten you'd blow on her reputation if she or her father held out
against you and all didn't go as you fished for it?'

My father raised his head proudly.

'I divide your query into two parts.  I wrote, sir, to bring her to his
side.  I did not write with any intention to threaten.'

'You've done it, though.'

'I have done this,' said my father, toweringly: 'I have used the power
placed in my hands by Providence to overcome the hesitations of a
gentleman whose illustrious rank predisposes him to sacrifice his
daughter's happiness to his pride of birth and station.  Can any one
confute me when I assert that the princess loves Harry Richmond?'

I walked abruptly to one of the windows, hearing a pitiable wrangling on
the theme.  My grandfather vowed she had grown wiser, my father protested
that she was willing and anxious; Janet was appealed to.  In a strangely-
sounding underbreath, she said, 'The princess does not wish it.'

'You hear that, Mr. Richmond?' cried the squire.

He returned: 'Can Miss Ilchester say that the Princess Ottilia does not
passionately love my son Harry Richmond?  The circumstances warrant me in
beseeching a direct answer.'

She uttered: 'No.'

I looked at her; she at me.

'You can conduct a case, Richmond,' the squire remarked.

My father rose to his feet.  'I can conduct my son to happiness and
greatness, my dear sir; but to some extent I require your grandfatherly
assistance; and I urge you now to present your respects to the prince and
princess, and judge yourself of his Highness's disposition for the match.
I assure you in advance that he welcomes the proposal.'

'I do not believe it,' said Janet, rising.

My aunt Dorothy followed her example, saying: 'In justice to Harry the
proposal should be made.  At least it will settle this dispute.'

Janet stared at her, and the squire threw his head back with an amazed
interjection.

'What!  You're for it now?  Why, at breakfast you were all t' other way!
You didn't want this meeting because you pooh-poohed the match.'

'I do think you should go,' she answered.  'You have given Harry your
promise, and if he empowers you, it is right to make the proposal, and
immediately, I think.'

She spoke feverishly, with an unsweet expression of face, that seemed to
me to indicate vexedness at the squire's treatment of my father.

'Harry,' she asked me in a very earnest fashion, 'is it your desire?
Tell your grandfather that it is, and that you want to know your fate.
Why should there be any dispute on a fact that can be ascertained by
crossing a street?  Surely it is trifling.'

Janet stooped to whisper in the squire's ear.

He caught the shock of unexpected intelligence apparently; faced about,
gazed up, and cried: 'You too!  But I haven't done here.  I 've got to
cross-examine .  .  .  Pretend, do you mean?  Pretend I'm ready to go?
I can release this prince just as well here as there.'

Janet laughed faintly.

'I should advise your going, grandada.'

'You a weathercock woman!' he reproached her, quite mystified, and fell
to rubbing his head.  'Suppose I go to be snubbed?'

'The prince is a gentleman, grandada.  Come with me.  We will go alone.
You can relieve the prince, and protect him.'

My father nodded: 'I approve.'

'And grandada--but it will not so much matter if we are alone, though,'
Janet said.

'Speak out.'

'See the princess as well; she must be present.'

'I leave it to you,' he said, crestfallen.

Janet pressed my aunt Dorothy's hand.

'Aunty, you were right, you are always right.  This state of suspense is
bad all round, and it is infinitely worse for the prince and princess.'

My aunt Dorothy accepted the eulogy with a singular trembling wrinkle of
the forehead.

She evidently understood that Janet had seen her wish to get released.

For my part, I shared my grandfather's stupefaction at their
unaccountable changes.  It appeared almost as if my father had won them
over to baffle him.  The old man tried to insist on their sitting down
again, but Janet perseveringly smiled and smiled until he stood up.  She
spoke to him softly.  He was one black frown; displeased with her;
obedient, however.

Too soon after, I had the key to the enigmatical scene.  At the moment I
was contemptuous of riddles, and heard with idle ears Janet's promptings
to him and his replies.  'It would be so much better to settle it here,'
he said.  She urged that it could not be settled here without the whole
burden and responsibility falling upon him.

'Exactly,' interposed my father, triumphing.

Dorothy Beltham came to my side, and said, as if speaking to herself,
while she gazed out of window, 'If a refusal, it should come from the
prince.' She dropped her voice: 'The money has not been spent?  Has it?
Has any part of it been spent?  Are you sure you have more than three
parts of it?'

Now, that she should be possessed by the spirit of parsimony on my behalf
at such a time as this, was to my conception insanely comical, and her
manner of expressing it was too much for me.  I kept my laughter under to
hear her continue: 'What numbers are flocking on the pier!  and there is
no music yet.  Tell me, Harry, that the money is all safe; nearly all; it
is important to know; you promised economy.'

'Music did you speak of, Miss Beltham?' My father bowed to her gallantly.
'I chanced to overhear you.  My private band performs to the public at
midday.'

She was obliged to smile to excuse his interruption.

'What's that?  whose band?' said the squire, bursting out of Janet's
hand.  'A private band?'

Janet had a difficulty in resuming her command of him.  The mention of
the private band made him very restive.

'I 'm not acting on my own judgement at all in going to these foreign
people,' he said to Janet.  'Why go?  I can have it out here and an end
to it, without bothering them and their interpreters.'

He sang out to me: 'Harry, do you want me to go through this form for
you?--mn'd unpleasant!'

My aunt Dorothy whispered in my ear: 'Yes! yes!'

'I feel tricked!' he muttered, and did not wait for me to reply before he
was again questioning my aunt Dorothy concerning Mr. Bannerbridge, and my
father as to 'that sum of money.' But his method of interrogation was
confused and pointless.  The drift of it was totally obscure.

'I'm off my head to-day,' he said to Janet, with a sideshot of his eye at
my father.

'You waste time and trouble, grandada,' said she.

He vowed that he was being bewildered, bothered by us all; and I thought
I had never seen him so far below his level of energy; but I had not seen
him condescend to put himself upon a moderately fair footing with my
father.  The truth was, that Janet had rigorously schooled him to bridle
his temper, and he was no match for the voluble easy man without the
freest play of his tongue.

'This prince!' he kept ejaculating.

'Won't you understand, grandada, that you relieve him, and make things
clear by going?' Janet said.

He begged her fretfully not to be impatient, and hinted that she and he
might be acting the part of dupes, and was for pursuing his inauspicious
cross-examination in spite of his blundering, and the 'Where am I now?'
which pulled him up.  My father, either talking to my aunt Dorothy, to
Janet, or to me, on ephemeral topics, scarcely noticed him, except when
he was questioned, and looked secure of success in the highest degree
consistent with perfect calmness.

'So you say you tell me to go, do you?' the squire called to me.  'Be
good enough to stay here and wait.  I don't see that anything's gained by
my going: it's damned hard on me, having to go to a man whose language I
don't know, and he don't know mine, on a business we're all of us in a
muddle about.  I'll do it if it's right.  You're sure?'

He glanced at Janet.  She nodded.

I was looking for this quaint and, to me, incomprehensible interlude to
commence with the departure of the squire and Janet, when a card was
handed in by one of the hotel-waiters.

'Another prince!' cried the squire.  'These Germans seem to grow princes
like potatoes--dozens to a root!  Who's the card for?  Ask him to walk
up.  Show him into a quiet room.  Does he speak English?'

'Does Prince Hermann of--I can't pronounce the name of the place--speak
English, Harry?' Janet asked me.

'As well as you or I,' said I, losing my inattention all at once with a
mad leap of the heart.

Hermann's presence gave light, fire, and colour to the scene in which my
destiny had been wavering from hand to hand without much more than
amusedly interesting me, for I was sure that I had lost Ottilia; I knew
that too well, and worse could not happen.  I had besides lost other
things that used to sustain me, and being reckless, I was contemptuous,
and listened to the talk about money with sublime indifference to the
subject: with an attitude, too, I daresay.  But Hermann's name revived my
torment.  Why had he come? to persuade the squire to control my father?
Nothing but that would suffer itself to be suggested, though conjectures
lying in shadow underneath pressed ominously on my mind.

My father had no doubts.

'A word to you, Mr. Beltham, before you go to Prince Hermann.  He is an
emissary, we treat him with courtesy, and if he comes to diplomatize we,
of course, give a patient hearing.  I have only to observe in the most
emphatic manner possible that I do not retract one step.  I will have
this marriage: I have spoken!  It rests with Prince Ernest.'

The squire threw a hasty glare of his eyes back as he was hobbling on
Janet's arm.  She stopped short, and replied for him.

'Mr. Beltham will speak for himself, in his own name.  We are not
concerned in any unworthy treatment of Prince Ernest.  We protest against
it.'

'Dear young lady!' said my father, graciously.  'I meet you frankly.
Now tell me.  I know you a gallant horsewoman: if you had lassoed the
noble horse of the desert would you let him run loose because of his
remonstrating?  Side with me, I entreat you!  My son is my first thought.
The pride of princes and wild horses you will find wonderfully similar,
especially in the way they take their taming when once they feel they are
positively caught.  We show him we have him fast--he falls into our paces
on the spot!  For Harry's sake--for the princess's, I beg you exert your
universally--deservedly acknowledged influence.  Even now--and you frown
on me!--I cannot find it in my heart to wish you the sweet and admirable
woman of the world you are destined to be, though you would comprehend me
and applaud me, for I could not--no, not to win your favourable opinion!
--consent that you should be robbed of a single ray of your fresh
maidenly youth.  If you must misjudge me, I submit.  It is the price I
pay for seeing you young and lovely.  Prince Ernest is, credit me, not
unworthily treated by me, if life is a battle, and the prize of it to the
General's head.  I implore you'--he lured her with the dimple of a
lurking smile--'do not seriously blame your afflicted senior, if we are
to differ.  I am vastly your elder: you instil the doubt whether I am by
as much the wiser of the two; but the father of Harry Richmond claims to
know best what will ensure his boy's felicity.  Is he rash?  Pronounce me
guilty of an excessive anxiety for my son's welfare; say that I am too
old to read the world with the accuracy of a youthful intelligence: call
me indiscreet: stigmatize me unlucky; the severest sentence a judge'--he
bowed to her deferentially--'can utter; only do not cast a gaze of rebuke
on me because my labour is for my son--my utmost devotion.  And we know,
Miss Ilchester, that the princess honours him with her love.  I protest
in all candour, I treat love as love; not as a weight in the scale; it is
the heavenly power which dispenses with weighing!  its ascendancy . . .'

The squire could endure no more, and happily so, for my father was losing
his remarkably moderated tone, and threatening polysyllables.  He had
followed Janet, step for step, at a measured distance, drooping toward
her with his winningest air, while the old man pulled at her arm to get
her out of hearing of the obnoxious flatterer.  She kept her long head
in profile, trying creditably not to appear discourteous to one who
addressed her by showing an open ear, until the final bolt made by the
frenzied old man dragged her through the doorway.  His neck was shortened
behind his collar as though he shrugged from the blast of a bad wind.
I believe that, on the whole, Janet was pleased.  I will wager that, left
to herself, she would have been drawn into an answer, if not an argument.
Nothing would have made her resolution swerve, I admit.

They had not been out of the room three seconds when my aunt Dorothy was
called to join them.  She had found time to say that she hoped the money
was intact.



