LETTER LXXXIV

LONDON, October 2, O. S.  1749.

DEAR BOY: I received by the last post your letter of the 22d September,
N. S., but I have not received that from Mr. Harte to which you refer,
and which you say contained your reasons for leaving Verona, and
returning to Venice; so that I am entirely ignorant of them.  Indeed the
irregularity and negligence of the post provoke me, as they break the
thread of the accounts I want to receive from you, and of the
instructions and orders which I send you, almost every post.  Of these
last twenty posts.

I am sure that I have wrote eighteen, either to you or to Mr. Harte, and
it does not appear by your letter, that all or even any of my letters
have been received.  I desire for the future, that both you and Mr. Harte
will constantly, in your letters, mention the dates of mine.  Had it not
been for their miscarriage, you would not have, been in the uncertainty
you seem to be in at present, with regard to your future motions.  Had
you received my letters, you would have been by this time at Naples: but
we must now take things where they are.

Upon the receipt, then, of this letter, you will as soon as conveniently
you can, set out for Rome; where you will not arrive too long before the
jubilee, considering the difficulties of getting lodgings, and other
accommodations there at this time.  I leave the choice of the route to
you; but I do by no means intend that you should leave Rome after the
jubilee, as you seem to hint in your letter: on the contrary, I will have
Rome your headquarters for six months at least; till you shall have, in a
manner, acquired the 'Jus Civitatis' there.  More things are to be seen
and learned there, than in any other town in Europe; there are the best
masters to instruct, and the best companies to polish you.  In the spring
you may make (if you please) frequent excursions to Naples; but Rome must
still be your headquarters, till the heats of June drive you from thence
to some other place in Italy, which we shall think of by that time.  As
to the expense which you mention, I do not regard it in the least; from
your infancy to this day, I never grudged any expense in your education,
and still less do it now, that it is become more important and decisive:
I attend to the objects of your expenses, but not to the sums.  I will
certainly not pay one shilling for your losing your nose, your money, or
your reason; that is, I will not contribute to women, gaming, and
drinking.  But I will most cheerfully supply, not only every necessary,
but every decent expense you can make.  I do not care what the best
masters cost.  I would have you as well dressed, lodged, and attended, as
any reasonable man of fashion is in his travels.  I would have you have
that pocket-money that should enable you to make the proper expense 'd'un
honnete homme'.  In short, I bar no expense, that has neither vice nor
folly for its object; and under those two reasonable restrictions, draw,
and welcome.

As for Turin, you may go there hereafter, as a traveler, for a month or
two; but you cannot conveniently reside there as an academician, for
reasons which I have formerly communicated to Mr. Harte, and which Mr.
Villettes, since his return here, has shown me in a still stronger light
than he had done by his letters from Turin, of which I sent copies to Mr.
Harte, though probably he never received them.

After you have left Rome, Florence is one of the places with which you
should be thoroughly acquainted.  I know that there is a great deal of
gaming there; but, at the same time, there are in every place some people
whose fortunes are either too small, or whose understandings are too good
to allow them to play for anything above trifles; and with those people
you will associate yourself, if you have not (as I am assured you have
not, in the least) the spirit of gaming in you.  Moreover, at suspected
places, such as Florence, Turin, and Paris, I shall be more attentive to
your draughts, and such as exceed a proper and handsome expense will not
be answered; for I can easily know whether you game or not without being
told.

Mr. Harte will determine your route to Rome as he shall think best;
whether along the coast of the Adriatic, or that of the Mediterranean,
it is equal to me; but you will observe to come back a different way from
that you went.

Since your health is so well restored, I am not sorry that you have
returned to Venice, for I love capitals.  Everything is best at capitals;
the best masters, the best companions, and the best manners.  Many other
places are worth seeing, but capitals only are worth residing at.  I am
very glad that Madame Capello received you so well.  Monsieur I was sure
would: pray assure them both of my respects, and of my sensibility of
their kindness to you.  Their house will be a very good one for you at
Rome; and I would advise you to be domestic in it if you can.  But
Madame, I can tell you, requires great attentions.  Madame Micheli has
written a very favorable account of you to my friend the Abbe Grossa
Testa, in a letter which he showed me, and in which there are so many
civil things to myself, that I would wish to tell her how much I think
myself obliged to her.  I approve very much of the allotment of your time
at Venice; pray go on so for a twelvemonth at least, wherever you are.
You will find your own account in it.

I like your last letter, which gives me an account of yourself, and your
own transactions; for though I do not recommend the EGOTISM to you, with
regard to anybody else, I desire that you will use it with me, and with
me only.  I interest myself in all that you do; and as yet (excepting Mr.
Harte) nobody else does.  He must of course know all, and I desire to
know a great deal.

I am glad you have received, and that you like the diamond buckles.  I am
very willing that you should make, but very unwilling that you should CUT
a figure with them at the jubilee; the CUTTING A FIGURE being the very
lowest vulgarism in the English language; and equal in elegancy to Yes,
my Lady, and No, my Lady.  The word VAST and VASTLY, you will have found
by my former letter that I had proscribed out of the diction of a
gentleman, unless in their proper signification of sizes and BULK.  Not
only in language, but in everything else, take great care that the first
impressions you give of yourself may be not only favorable, but pleasing,
engaging, nay, seducing.  They are often decisive; I confess they are a
good deal so with me: and I cannot wish for further acquaintance with a
man whose first 'abord' and address displease me.

So many of my letters have miscarried, and I know so little which, that I
am forced to repeat the same thing over and over again eventually.  This
is one.  I have wrote twice to Mr. Harte, to have your picture drawn in
miniature, while you were at Venice; and send it me in a letter: it is
all one to me whether in enamel or in watercolors, provided it is but
very like you.  I would have you drawn exactly as you are, and in no
whimsical dress: and I lay more stress upon the likeness of the picture,
than upon the taste and skill of the painter.  If this be not already
done, I desire that you will have it done forthwith before you leave
Venice; and inclose it in a letter to me, which letter, for greater
security, I would have you desire Sir James Gray to inclose in his packet
to the office; as I, for the same, reason, send this under his cover.
If the picture be done upon vellum, it will be the most portable.  Send
me, at the same time, a thread of silk of your own length exactly.  I am
solicitous about your figure; convinced, by a thousand instances, that a
good one is a real advantage.  'Mens sana in corpore sano', is the first
and greatest blessing.  I would add 'et pulchro', to complete it.  May
you have that and every other!  Adieu.

Have you received my letters of recommendation to Cardinal Albani and the
Duke de Nivernois, at Rome?




LETTER LXXXV

LONDON, October 9, O. S.  1749.

DEAR BOY: If this letter finds you at all, of which I am very doubtful,
it will find you at Venice, preparing for your journey to Rome; which, by
my last letter to Mr. Harte, I advised you to make along the coast of the
Adriatic, through Rimini, Loretto, Ancona, etc., places that are all
worth seeing; but not worth staying at.  And such I reckon all places
where the eyes only are employed.  Remains of antiquity, public
buildings, paintings, sculptures, etc., ought to be seen, and that with a
proper degree of attention; but this is soon done, for they are only
outsides.  It is not so with more important objects; the insides of which
must be seen; and they require and deserve much more attention.  The
characters, the heads, and the, hearts of men, are the useful science of
which I would have you perfect master.  That science is best taught and
best learned in capitals, where every human passion has its object, and
exerts all its force or all its art in the pursuit.  I believe there is
no place in the world, where every passion is busier, appears in more
shapes, and is conducted with more art, than at ,Rome.  Therefore, when
you are there, do not imagine that the Capitol, the Vatican, and the
Pantheon, are the principal objects of your curiosity.  But for one
minute that you bestow upon those, employ ten days in informing yourself
of the nature of that government, the rise and decay of the papal power,
the politics of that court, the 'Brigues' of the cardinals, the tricks of
the Conclaves; and, in general, everything that relates to the interior
of that extraordinary government, founded originally upon the ignorance
and superstition of mankind, extended by the weakness of some princes,
and the ambition of others; declining of late in proportion as knowledge
has increased; and owing its present precarious security, not to the
religion, the affection, or the fear of the temporal powers, but to the
jealousy of each other.  The Pope's excommunications are no longer
dreaded; his indulgences little solicited, and sell very cheap; and his
territories formidable to no power, are coveted by many, and will, most
undoubtedly, within a century, be scantled out among the great powers,
who have now a footing in Italy, whenever they can agree upon the
division of the bear's skin.  Pray inform yourself thoroughly of the
history of the popes and the popedom; which, for many centuries, is
interwoven with the history of all Europe.  Read the best authors who
treat of these matters, and especially Fra Paolo, 'De Beneficiis', a
short, but very material book.  You will find at Rome some of all the
religious orders in the Christian world.  Inform yourself carefully of
their origin, their founders, their rules, their reforms, and even their
dresses: get acquainted with some of all of them, but particularly with
the Jesuits; whose society I look upon to be the most able and best
governed society in the world.  Get acquainted, if you can, with their
General, who always resides at Rome; and who, though he has no seeming
power out of his own society, has (it may be) more real influence over
the whole world, than any temporal prince in it.  They have almost
engrossed the education of youth; they are, in general, confessors to
most of the princes of Europe; and they are the principal missionaries
out of it; which three articles give them a most extensive influence and
solid advantages; witness their settlement in Paraguay.  The Catholics in
general declaim against that society; and yet are all governed by
individuals of it.  They have, by turns, been banished, and with infamy,
almost every country in Europe; and have always found means to be
restored, even with triumph.  In short, I know no government in the world
that is carried on upon such deep principles of policy, I will not add
morality.  Converse with them, frequent them, court them; but know them.

Inform yourself, too, of that infernal court, the Inquisition; which,
though not so considerable at Rome as in Spain and Portugal, will,
however, be a good sample to you of what the villainy of some men can
contrive, the folly of others receive, and both together establish, in
spite of the first natural principles of reason, justice, and equity.

These are the proper and useful objects of the attention of a man of
sense, when he travels; and these are the objects for which I have sent
you abroad; and I hope you will return thoroughly informed of them.

I receive this very moment Mr. Harte's letter of the 1st October, N. S.,
but I never received his former, to which he refers in this, and you
refer in your last; in which he gave me the reasons for your leaving
Verona so soon; nor have I ever received that letter in which your case
was stated by your physicians.  Letters to and from me have worse luck
than other people's; for you have written to me, and I to you, for these
last three months, by way of Germany, with as little success as before.

I am edified with your morning applications, and your evening gallantries
at Venice, of which Mr. Harte gives me an account.  Pray go on with both
there, and afterward at Rome; where, provided you arrive in the beginning
of December, you may stay at Venice as much longer as you please.

Make my compliments to Sir James Gray and Mr. Smith, with my
acknowledgments for the great civilities they show you.

I wrote to Mr. Harte by the last post, October the 6th, O. S., and will
write to him in a post or two upon the contents of his last.  Adieu!
'Point de distractions'; and remember the GRACES.




LETTER LXXXVI

LONDON, October 17, O. S.  1749.

DEAR BOY: I have at last received Mr. Harte's letter of the 19th
September, N. S., from Verona.  Your reasons for leaving that place were
very good ones; and as you stayed there long enough to see what was to be
seen, Venice (as a capital) is, in my opinion, a much better place for
your residence.  Capitals are always the seats of arts and sciences, and
the best companies.  I have stuck to them all my lifetime, and I advise
you to do so too.

You will have received in my three or four last letters my directions for
your further motions to another capital, where I propose that your stay
shall be pretty considerable.  The expense, I am well aware, will be so
too; but that, as I told you before, will have no weight when your
improvement and advantage are in the other scale.  I do not care a groat
what it is, if neither vice nor folly are the objects of it, and if Mr.
Harte gives his sanction.

I am very well pleased with your account of Carniola; those are the kind
of objects worthy of your inquiries and knowledge.  The produce, the
taxes, the trade, the manufactures, the strength, the weakness, the
government of the several countries which a man of sense travels through,
are the material points to which he attends; and leaves the steeples, the
market-places, and the signs, to the laborious and curious researches of
Dutch and German travelers.

Mr. Harte tells me, that he intends to give you, by means of Signor
Vicentini, a general notion of civil and military architecture; with
which I am very well pleased.  They are frequent subjects of
conversation; and it is very right that you should have some idea of the
latter, and a good taste of the former; and you may very soon learn as
much as you need know of either.  If you read about one-third of
Palladio's book of architecture with some skillful person, and then, with
that person, examine the best buildings by those rules, you will know the
different proportions of the different orders; the several diameters of
their columns; their intercolumniations, their several uses, etc.  The
Corinthian Order is chiefly used in magnificent buildings, where ornament
and decoration are the principal objects; the Doric is calculated for
strength, and the Ionic partakes of the Doric strength, and of the
Corinthian ornaments.  The Composite and the Tuscan orders are more
modern, and were unknown to the Greeks; the one is too light, the other
too clumsy.  You may soon be acquainted with the considerable parts of
civil architecture; and for the minute and mechanical parts of it, leave
them to masons, bricklayers, and Lord Burlington, who has, to a certain
extent, lessened himself by knowing them too well.  Observe the same
method as to military architecture; understand the terms, know the
general rules, and then see them in execution with some skillful person.
Go with some engineer or old officer, and view with care the real
fortifications of some strong place; and you will get a clearer idea of
bastions, half-moons, horn-works, ravelins, glacis, etc., than all the
masters in the world could give you upon paper.  And thus much I would,
by all means, have you know of both civil and military architecture.

I would also have you acquire a liberal taste of the two liberal arts of
painting and sculpture; but without descending into those minutia, which
our modern virtuosi most affectedly dwell upon.  Observe the great parts
attentively; see if nature be truly represented; if the passions are
strongly expressed; if the characters are preserved; and leave the
trifling parts, with their little jargon, to affected puppies.  I would
advise you also, to read the history of the painters and sculptors, and I
know none better than Felibien's.  There are many in Italian; you will
inform yourself which are the best.  It is a part of history very
entertaining, curious enough, and not quite useless.  All these sort of
things I would have you know, to a certain degree; but remember, that
they must only be the amusements, and not the business of a man of parts.

Since writing to me in German would take up so much of your time, of
which I would not now have one moment wasted, I will accept of your
composition, and content myself with a moderate German letter once a
fortnight, to Lady Chesterfield or Mr. Gravenkop.  My meaning was only
that you should not forget what you had already learned of the German
language and character; but, on the contrary, that by frequent use it
should grow more easy and familiar.  Provided you take care of that, I do
not care by what means: but I do desire that you will every day of your
life speak German to somebody or other (for you will meet with Germans
enough), and write a line or two of it every day to keep your hand in.
Why should you not (for instance) write your little memorandums and
accounts in that language and character?  by which, too, you would have
this advantage into the bargain, that, if mislaid, few but yourself could
read them.

I am extremely glad to hear that you like the assemblies at Venice well
enough to sacrifice some suppers to them; for I hear that you do not
dislike your suppers neither.  It is therefore plain, that there is
somebody or something at those assemblies, which you like better than
your meat.  And as I know that there is none but good company at those
assemblies, I am very glad to find that you like good company so well.
I already imagine that you are a little, smoothed by it; and that you
have either reasoned yourself, or that they have laughed you out of your
absences and DISTRACTIONS; for I cannot suppose that you go there to
insult them.  I likewise imagine, that you wish to be welcome where you
wish to go; and consequently, that you both present and behave yourself
there 'en galant homme, et pas in bourgeois'.

If you have vowed to anybody there one of those eternal passions which I
have sometimes known, by great accident, last three months, I can tell
you that without great attention, infinite politeness, and engaging air
and manners, the omens will be sinister, and the goddess unpropitious.
Pray tell me what are the amusements of those assemblies?  Are they
little commercial play, are they music, are they 'la belle conversation',
or are they all three?  'Y file-t-on le parfait amour?  Y debite-t-on les
beaux sentimens?  Ou est-ce yu'on y parle Epigramme?  And pray which is
your department?  'Tutis depone in auribus'.  Whichever it is, endeavor
to shine and excel in it.  Aim at least at the perfection of everything
that is worth doing at all; and you will come nearer it than you would
imagine; but those always crawl infinitely short of it whose aim is only
mediocrity.  Adieu.

P. S.  By an uncommon diligence of the post, I have this moment received
yours of the 9th, N. S.




LETTER LXXXVII

LONDON, October 24, O. S.  1749.

DEAR BOY: By my last I only acknowledged, by this I answer, your letter
of the 9th October, N. S.

I am very glad that you approved of my letter of September the 12th,
O. S., because it is upon that footing that I always propose living with
you.  I will advise you seriously, as a friend of some experience, and I
will converse with you cheerfully as a companion; the authority of a
parent shall forever be laid aside; for, wherever it is exerted, it is
useless; since, if you have neither sense nor sentiments enough to follow
my advice as a friend, your unwilling obedience to my orders as a father
will be a very awkward and unavailing one both to yourself and me.
Tacitus, speaking of an army that awkwardly and unwillingly obeyed its
generals only from the fear of punishment, says, they obeyed indeed, 'Sed
ut qua mallent jussa Imperatorum interpretari, quam exequi'.  For my own
part, I disclaim such obedience.

You think, I find, that you do not understand Italian; but I can tell
you, that, like the 'Bourgeois Gentilhomme', who spoke prose without
knowing it, you understand a great deal, though you do not know that you
do; for whoever understands French and Latin so well as you do,
understands at least half the Italian language, and has very little
occasion for a dictionary.  And for the idioms, the phrases, and the
delicacies of it, conversation and a little attention will teach them
you, and that soon; therefore, pray speak it in company, right or wrong,
'a tort ou a travers', as soon as ever you have got words enough to ask a
common question, or give a common answer.  If you can only say 'buon
giorno', say it, instead of saying 'bon jour', I mean to every Italian;
the answer to it will teach you more words, and insensibly you will be
very soon master of that easy language.  You are quite right in not
neglecting your German for it, and in thinking that it will be of more
use to you; it certainly will, in the course of your business; but
Italian has its use too, and is an ornament into the bargain; there being
many very polite and good authors in that language.  The reason you
assign for having hitherto met with none of my swarms of Germans in
Italy, is a very solid one; and I can easily conceive, that the expense
necessary for a traveler must amount to a number of thalers, groschen,
and kreutzers, tremendous to a German fortune.  However, you will find
several at Rome, either ecclesiastics, or in the suite of the Imperial
Minister; and more, when you come into the Milanese, among the Queen of
Hungary's officers.  Besides, you have a Saxon servant, to whom I hope
you speak nothing but German.

I have had the most obliging letter in the world from Monsieur Capello,
in which he speaks very advantageously of you, and promises you his
protection at Rome.  I have wrote him an answer by which I hope I have
domesticated you at his hotel there; which I advise you to frequent as
much as you can.  'Il est vrai qui'il ne paie pas beaucaup de sa figure';
but he has sense and knowledge at bottom, with a great experience of
business, having been already Ambassador at Madrid, Vienna, and London.
And I am very sure that he will be willing to give you any informations,
in that way, that he can.

Madame was a capricious, whimsical, fine lady, till the smallpox, which
she got here, by lessening her beauty, lessened her humors too; but, as I
presume it did not change her sex, I trust to that for her having such a
share of them left, as may contribute to smooth and polish you.  She,
doubtless, still thinks that she has beauty enough remaining to entitle
her to the attentions always paid to beauty; and she has certainly rank
enough to require respect.  Those are the sort of women who polish a
young man the most, and who give him that habit of complaisance, and that
flexibility and versatility of manners which prove of great use to him
with men, and in the course of business.

You must always expect to hear, more or less, from me, upon that
important subject of manners, graces, address, and that undefinable
'je ne sais quoi' that ever pleases.  I have reason to believe that you
want nothing else; but I have reason to fear too, that you want those:
and that want will keep you poor in the midst of all the plenty of
knowledge which you may have treasured up.  Adieu.




LETTER LXXXVIII

LONDON, November 3, O. S. 1749.

DEAR BOY: From the time that you have had life, it has been the principle
and favorite object of mine, to make you as perfect as the imperfections
of human nature will allow: in this view, I have grudged no pains nor
expense in your education; convinced that education, more than nature,
is the cause of that great difference which you see in the characters of
men.  While you were a child, I endeavored to form your heart habitually
to virtue and honor, before your understanding was capable of showing you
their beauty and utility.  Those principles, which you then got, like
your grammar rules, only by rote, are now, I am persuaded, fixed and
confirmed by reason.  And indeed they are so plain and clear, that they
require but a very moderate degree of understanding, either to comprehend
or practice them.  Lord Shaftesbury says, very prettily, that he would be
virtuous for his own sake, though nobody were to know it; as he would be
clean for his own sake, though nobody were to see him.  I have therefore,
since you have had the use of your reason, never written to you upon
those subjects: they speak best for themselves; and I should now just as
soon think of warning you gravely not to fall into the dirt or the fire,
as into dishonor or vice.  This view of mine, I consider as fully
attained.  My next object was sound and useful learning.  My own care
first, Mr. Harte's afterward, and OF LATE (I will own it to your praise)
your own application, have more than answered my expectations in that
particular; and, I have reason to believe, will answer even my wishes.
All that remains for me then to wish, to recommend, to inculcate, to
order, and to insist upon, is good-breeding; without which, all your
other qualifications will be lame, unadorned, and to a certain degree
unavailing.  And here I fear, and have too much reason to believe, that
you are greatly deficient.  The remainder of this letter, therefore,
shall be (and it will not be the last by a great many) upon that subject.

A friend of yours and mine has very justly defined good-breeding to be,
THE RESULT OF MUCH GOOD SENSE, SOME GOOD NATURE, AND A LITTLE SELF-DENIAL
FOR THE SAKE OF OTHERS, AND WITH A VIEW TO OBTAIN THE SAME INDULGENCE
FROM THEM.  Taking this for granted (as I think it cannot be disputed),
it is astonishing to me that anybody who has good sense and good nature
(and I believe you have both), can essentially fail in good-breeding.
As to the modes of it, indeed, they vary according to persons, and
places, and circumstances; and are only to be acquired by observation and
experience: but the substance of it is everywhere and eternally the same.
Good manners are, to particular societies, what good morals are to
society in general; their cement and their security.  And, as laws are
enacted to enforce good morals, or at least to prevent the ill effects of
bad ones; so there are certain rules of civility, universally implied and
received, to enforce good manners and punish bad ones.  And, indeed,
there seems to me to be less difference, both between the crimes and
between the punishments than at first one would imagine.  The immoral
man, who invades another man's property, is justly hanged for it; and the
ill-bred man, who, by his ill-manners, invades and disturbs the quiet and
comforts of private life, is by common consent as justly banished
society.  Mutual complaisances, attentions, and sacrifices of little
conveniences, are as natural an implied compact between civilized people,
as protection and obedience are between kings and subjects; whoever, in
either case, violates that compact, justly forfeits all advantages
arising from it.  For my own part, I really think, that next to the
consciousness of doing a good action, that of doing a civil one is the
most pleasing; and the epithet which I should covet the most, next to
that of Aristides, would be that of well-bred.  Thus much for good-
breeding in general; I will now consider some of the various modes and
degrees of it.

Very few, scarcely any, are wanting in the respect which they should show
to those whom they acknowledge to be infinitely their superiors; such as
crowned heads, princes, and public persons of distinguished and eminent
posts.  It is the manner of showing that respect which is different.  The
man of fashion and of the world, expresses it in its fullest extent; but
naturally, easily, and without concern: whereas a man, who is not used to
keep good company, expresses it awkwardly; one sees that he is not used
to it, and that it costs him a great deal: but I never saw the worst-bred
man living guilty of lolling, whistling, scratching his head, and such-
like indecencies, in company that he respected.  In such companies,
therefore, the only point to be attended to is to show that respect,
which everybody means to show, in an easy, unembarrassed, and graceful
manner.  This is what observation and experience must teach you.

In mixed companies, whoever is admitted to make part of them, is, for the
time at least, supposed to be upon a footing of equality with the rest:
and consequently, as there is no one principal object of awe and respect,
people are apt to take a greater latitude in their behavior, and to be
less upon their guard; and so they may, provided it be within certain
bounds, which are upon no occasion to be transgressed.  But, upon these
occasions, though no one is entitled to distinguished marks of respect,
everyone claims, and very justly, every mark of civility and good-
breeding.  Ease is allowed, but carelessness and negligence are strictly
forbidden.  If a man accosts you, and talks to you ever so dully or
frivolously, it is worse than rudeness, it is brutality, to show him, by
a manifest inattention to what he says, that you think him a fool or a
blockhead, and not worth hearing.  It is much more so with regard to
women; who, of whatever rank they are, are entitled, in consideration of
their sex, not only to an attentive, but an officious good-breeding from
men.  Their little wants, likings, dislikes, preferences, antipathies,
fancies, whims, and even impertinencies, must be officiously attended to,
flattered, and, if possible, guessed at and anticipated by a well-bred
man.  You must never usurp to yourself those conveniences and 'agremens'
which are of common right; such as the best places, the best dishes,
etc., but on the contrary, always decline them yourself, and offer them
to others; who, in their turns, will offer them to you; so that, upon the
whole, you will in your turn enjoy your share of the common right.  It
would be endless for me to enumerate all the particular instances in
which a well-bred man shows his good-breeding in good company; and it
would be injurious to you to suppose that your own good sense will not
point them out to you; and then your own good-nature will recommend, and
your self-interest enforce the practice.

There is a third sort of good-breeding, in which people are the most apt
to fail, from a very mistaken notion that they cannot fail at all.  I
mean with regard to one's most familiar friends and acquaintances, or
those who really are our inferiors; and there, undoubtedly, a greater
degree of ease is not only allowed, but proper, and contributes much to
the comforts of a private, social life.  But that ease and freedom have
their bounds too, which must by no means be violated.  A certain degree
of negligence and carelessness becomes injurious and insulting, from the
real or supposed inferiority of the persons: and that delightful liberty
of conversation among a few friends is soon destroyed, as liberty often
has been, by being carried to licentiousness.  But example explains
things best, and I will put a pretty strong case.  Suppose you and me
alone together; I believe you will allow that I have as good a right to
unlimited freedom in your company, as either you or I can possibly have
in any other; and I am apt to believe too, that you would indulge me in
that freedom as far as anybody would.  But, notwithstanding this, do you
imagine that I should think there were no bounds to that freedom?  I
assure you, I should not think so; and I take myself to be as much tied
down by a certain degree of good manners to you, as by other degrees of
them to other people.  Were I to show you, by a manifest inattention to
what you said to me, that I was thinking of something else the whole
time; were I to yawn extremely, snore, or break wind in your company, I
should think that I behaved myself to you like a beast, and should not
expect that you would care to frequent me.  No.  The most familiar and
intimate habitudes, connections, and friendships, require a degree of
good-breeding, both to preserve and cement them.  If ever a man and his
wife, or a man and his mistress, who pass nights as well as days
together, absolutely lay aside all good-breeding, their intimacy will
soon degenerate into a coarse familiarity, infallibly productive of
contempt or disgust.  The best of us have our bad sides, and it is as
imprudent, as it is ill-bred, to exhibit them.  I shall certainly not use
ceremony with you; it would be misplaced between us: but I shall
certainly observe that degree of good-breeding with you, which is, in the
first place, decent, and which I am sure is absolutely necessary to make
us like one another's company long.

I will say no more, now, upon this important subject of good-breeding,
upon which I have already dwelt too long, it may be, for one letter; and
upon which I shall frequently refresh your memory hereafter; but I will
conclude with these axioms:

That the deepest learning, without good-breeding, is unwelcome and
tiresome pedantry, and of use nowhere but in a man's own closet; and
consequently of little or no use at all.

That a man, Who is not perfectly well-bred, is unfit for good company and
unwelcome in it; will consequently dislike it soon, afterward renounce
it; and be reduced to solitude, or, what is worse, low and bad company.

That a man who is not well-bred, is full as unfit for business as for
company.

Make then, my dear child, I conjure you, good-breeding the great object
of your thoughts and actions, at least half the day.  Observe carefully
the behavior and manners of those who are distinguished by their good-
breeding; imitate, nay, endeavor to excel, that you may at least reach
them; and be convinced that good-breeding is, to all worldly
qualifications, what charity is to all Christian virtues.  Observe how it
adorns merit, and how often it covers the want of it.  May you wear it to
adorn, and not to cover you!  Adieu.




LETTER LXXXIX

LONDON, November 14, O. S.  1749.

DEAR BOY: There is a natural good-breeding which occurs to every man of
common sense, and is practiced by every man, of common good-nature.  This
good-breeding is general, independent of modes, and consists in endeavors
to please and oblige our fellow-creatures by all good offices, short of
moral duties.  This will be practiced by a good-natured American savage,
as essentially as by the best-bred European.  But then, I do not take it
to extend to the sacrifice of our own conveniences, for the sake of other
people's.  Utility introduced this sort of good-breeding as it introduced
commerce; and established a truck of the little 'agremens' and pleasures
of life.  I sacrifice such a conveniency to you, you sacrifice another to
me; this commerce circulates, and every individual finds his account in
it upon the whole.  The third sort of good-breeding is local, and is
variously modified, in not only different countries, but in different
towns of the same country.  But it must be founded upon the two former
sorts; they are the matter to which, in this case, fashion and custom
only give the different shapes and impressions.  Whoever has the two
first sorts will easily acquire this third sort of good-breeding, which
depends singly upon attention and observation.  It is, properly, the
polish, the lustre, the last finishing stroke of good-breeding.  It is to
be found only in capitals, and even there it varies; the good-breeding of
Rome differing, in some things, from that of Paris; that of Paris, in
others, from that of Madrid; and that of Madrid, in many things, from
that of London.  A man of sense, therefore, carefully attends to the
local manners of the respective places where he is, and takes for his
models those persons whom he observes to be at the head of fashion and
good-breeding.  He watches how they address themselves to their
superiors, how they accost their equals, and how they treat their
inferiors; and lets none of those little niceties escape him which are to
good-breeding what the last delicate and masterly touches are to a good
picture; and of which the vulgar have no notion, but by which good judges
distinguish the master.  He attends even to their air, dress, and
motions, and imitates them, liberally, and not servilely; he copies, but
does not mimic.  These personal graces are of very great consequence.
They anticipate the sentiments, before merit can engage the
understanding; they captivate the heart, and give rise, I believe, to the
extravagant notions of charms and philters.  Their effects were so
surprising, that they were reckoned supernatural.  The most graceful and
best-bred men, and the handsomest and genteelest women, give the most
philters; and, as I verily believe, without the least assistance of the
devil.  Pray be not only well dressed, but shining in your dress; let it
have 'du brillant'.  I do not mean by a clumsy load of gold and silver,
but by the taste and fashion of it.  The women like and require it; they
think it an attention due to them; but, on the other hand, if your
motions and carriage are not graceful, genteel, and natural, your fine
clothes will only display your awkwardness the more.  But I am unwilling
to suppose you still awkward; for surely, by this time, you must have
catched a good air in good company.  When you went from hence you were
naturally awkward; but your awkwardness was adventitious and
Westmonasterial.  Leipsig, I apprehend, is not the seat of the Graces;
and I presume you acquired none there.  But now, if you will be pleased
to observe what people of the first fashion do with their legs and arms,
heads and bodies, you will reduce yours to certain decent laws of motion.
You danced pretty well here, and ought to dance very well before you come
home; for what one is obliged to do sometimes, one ought to be able to do
well.  Besides, 'la belle danse donne du brillant a un jeune homme'.
And you should endeavor to shine.  A calm serenity, negative merit and
graces, do not become your age.  You should be 'alerte, adroit, vif'; be
wanted, talked of, impatiently expected, and unwillingly parted with in
company.  I should be glad to hear half a dozen women of fashion say,
'Ou est donc le petit Stanhope? due ne vient-il?  Il faut avouer qu'il
est aimable'.  All this I do not mean singly with regard to women as the
principal object; but, with regard to men, and with a view of your making
yourself considerable.  For with very small variations, the same things
that please women please men; and a man whose manners are softened and
polished by women of fashion, and who is formed by them to an habitual
attention and complaisance, will please, engage, and connect men, much
easier and more than he would otherwise.  You must be sensible that you
cannot rise in the world, without forming connections, and engaging
different characters to conspire in your point.  You must make them your
dependents without their knowing it, and dictate to them while you seem
to be directed by them.  Those necessary connections can never be formed,
or preserved, but by an uninterrupted series of complaisance, attentions,
politeness, and some constraint.  You must engage their hearts, if you
would have their support; you must watch the 'mollia tempora', and
captivate them by the 'agremens' and charms of conversation.  People will
not be called out to your service, only when you want them; and, if you
expect to receive strength from them, they must receive either pleasure
or advantage from you.

I received in this instant a letter from Mr. Harte, of the 2d N. S.,
which I will answer soon; in the meantime, I return him my thanks for it,
through you.  The constant good accounts which he gives me of you, will
make me suspect him of partiality, and think him 'le medecin tant mieux'.
Consider, therefore, what weight any future deposition of his against you
must necessarily have with me.  As, in that case, he will be a very
unwilling, he must consequently be a very important witness.  Adieu!




LETTER XC

DEAR Boy:  My last was upon the subject of good-breeding; but I think it
rather set before you the unfitness and disadvantages of ill-breeding,
than the utility and necessity of good; it was rather negative than
positive.  This, therefore, should go further, and explain to you the
necessity, which you, of all people living, lie under, not only of being
positively and actively well-bred, but of shining and distinguishing
yourself by your good-breeding.  Consider your own situation in every
particular, and judge whether it is not essentially your interest, by
your own good-breeding to others, to secure theirs to you and that, let
me assure you, is the only way of doing it; for people will repay, and
with interest too, inattention with inattention, neglect with neglect,
and ill manners with worse: which may engage you in very disagreeable
affairs.  In the next place, your profession requires, more than any
other, the nicest and most distinguished good-breeding.  You will
negotiate with very little success, if you do not previously, by your
manners, conciliate and engage the affections of those with whom you are
to negotiate.  Can you ever get into the confidence and the secrets of
the courts where you may happen to reside, if you have not those
pleasing, insinuating manners, which alone can procure them?  Upon my
word, I do not say too much, when I say that superior good-breeding,
insinuating manners, and genteel address, are half your business.  Your
knowledge will have but very little influence upon the mind, if your
manners prejudice the heart against you; but, on the other hand, how
easily will you DUPE the understanding, where you have first engaged the
heart?  and hearts are by no means to be gained by that mere common
civility which everybody practices.  Bowing again to those who bow to
you, answering dryly those who speak to you, and saying nothing offensive
to anybody, is such negative good-breeding that it is only not being a
brute; as it would be but a very poor commendation of any man's
cleanliness to say that he did not stink.  It is an active, cheerful,
officious, seducing, good-breeding that must gain you the good-will and
first sentiments of men, and the affections of the women.  You must
carefully watch and attend to their passions, their tastes, their little
humors and weaknesses, and 'aller au devant'.  You must do it at the same
time with alacrity and 'empressement', and not as if you graciously
condescended to humor their weaknesses.

For instance, suppose you invited anybody to dine or sup with you, you
ought to recollect if you had observed that they had any favorite dish,
and take care to provide it for them; and when it came you should say,
You SEEMED TO ME, AT SUCH AND SUCH A PLACE, TO GIVE THIS DISH A
PREFERENCE, AND THEREFORE I ORDERED IT; THIS IS THE WINE THAT I OBSERVED
YOU LIKED, AND THEREFORE I PROCURED SOME.  The more trifling these things
are, the more they prove your attention for the person, and are
consequently the more engaging.  Consult your own breast, and recollect
how these little attentions, when shown you by others, flatter that
degree of self-love and vanity from which no man living is free.  Reflect
how they incline and attract you to that person, and how you are
propitiated afterward to all which that person says or does.  The same
causes will have the same effects in your favor.  Women, in a great
degree, establish or destroy every man's reputation of good-breeding; you
must, therefore, in a manner, overwhelm them with these attentions: they
are used to them, they expect them, and, to do them justice, they
commonly requite them.  You must be sedulous, and rather over officious
than under, in procuring them their coaches, their chairs, their
conveniences in public places: not see what you should not see; and
rather assist, where you cannot help seeing.  Opportunities of showing
these attentions present themselves perpetually; but if they do not, make
them.  As Ovid advises his lover, when he sits in the Circus near his
mistress, to wipe the dust off her neck, even if there be none: 'Si
nullus, tamen excute nullum'.  Your conversation with women should always
be respectful; but, at the same time, enjoue, and always addressed to
their vanity.  Everything you say or do should convince them of the
regard you have (whether you have it or not) for their beauty, their wit,
or their merit.  Men have possibly as much vanity as women, though of
another kind; and both art and good-breeding require, that, instead of
mortifying, you should please and flatter it, by words and looks of
approbation.  Suppose (which is by no means improbable) that, at your
return to England, I should place you near the person of some one of the
royal family; in that situation, good-breeding, engaging address, adorned
with all the graces that dwell at courts, would very probably make you a
favorite, and, from a favorite, a minister; but all the knowledge and
learning in the world, without them, never would.  The penetration of
princes seldom goes deeper than the surface.

It is the exterior that always engages their hearts; and I would never
advise you to give yourself much trouble about their understanding.
Princes in general (I mean those 'Porphyrogenets' who are born and bred
in purple) are about the pitch of women; bred up like them, and are to be
addressed and gained in the same manner.  They always see, they seldom
weigh.  Your lustre, not your solidity, must take them; your inside will
afterward support and secure what your outside has acquired.  With weak
people (and they undoubtedly are three parts in four of mankind) good-
breeding, address, and manners are everything; they can go no deeper; but
let me assure you that they are a great deal even with people of the best
understandings.  Where the eyes are not pleased, and the heart is not
flattered, the mind will be apt to stand out.  Be this right or wrong,
I confess I am so made myself.  Awkwardness and ill-breeding shock me to
that degree, that where I meet with them, I cannot find in my heart to
inquire into the intrinsic merit of that person--I hastily decide in
myself that he can have none; and am not sure that I should not even be
sorry to know that he had any.  I often paint you in my imagination, in
your present 'lontananza', and, while I view you in the light of ancient
and modern learning, useful and ornamental knowledge, I am charmed with
the prospect; but when I view you in another light, and represent you
awkward, ungraceful, ill-bred, with vulgar air and manners, shambling
toward me with inattention and DISTRACTIONS, I shall not pretend to
describe to you what I feel; but will do as a skillful painter did
formerly--draw a veil before the countenance of the father.

I dare say you know already enough of architecture, to know that the
Tuscan is the strongest and most solid of all the orders; but at the same
time, it is the coarsest and clumsiest of them.  Its solidity does
extremely well for the foundation and base floor of a great edifice; but
if the whole building be Tuscan, it will attract no eyes, it will stop no
passengers, it will invite no interior examination; people will take it
for granted that the finishing and furnishing cannot be worth seeing,
where the front is so unadorned and clumsy.  But if, upon the solid
Tuscan foundation, the Doric, the Ionic, and the Corinthian orders rise
gradually with all their beauty, proportions, and ornaments, the fabric
seizes the most incurious eye, and stops the most careless passenger; who
solicits admission as a favor, nay, often purchases it.  Just so will it
fare with your, tittle fabric, which, at present, I fear, has more of the
Tuscan than of the Corinthian order.  You must absolutely change the
whole front, or nobody will knock at the door.  The several parts, which
must compose this new front, are elegant, easy, natural, superior good-
breeding; an engaging address; genteel motions; an insinuating softness
in your looks, words, and actions; a spruce, lively air, fashionable
dress; and all the glitter that a young fellow should have.

I am sure you would do a great deal for my sake; and therefore consider
at your return here, what a disappointment and concern it would be to me,
if I could not safely depute you to do the honors of my house and table;
and if I should be ashamed to present you to those who frequent both.
Should you be awkward, inattentive, and distrait, and happen to meet Mr.
L----- at my table, the consequences of that meeting must be fatal; you
would run your heads against each other, cut each other's fingers,
instead of your meat, or die by the precipitate infusion of scalding
soup.

This is really so copious a subject, that there is no end of being either
serious or ludicrous upon it.  It is impossible, too, to enumerate or
state to you the various cases in good-breeding; they are infinite; there
is no situation or relation in the world so remote or so intimate, that
does not require a degree of it.  Your own good sense must point it out
to you; your own good-nature must incline, and your interest prompt you
to practice it; and observation and experience must give you the manner,
the air and the graces which complete the whole.

This letter will hardly overtake you, till you are at or near Rome.
I expect a great deal in every way from your six months' stay there.
My morning hopes are justly placed in Mr. Harte, and the masters he will
give you; my evening ones, in the Roman ladies: pray be attentive to
both.  But I must hint to you, that the Roman ladies are not 'les femmes
savantes, et ne vous embrasseront point pour Pamour du Grec.  They must
have 'ilgarbato, il leggiadro, it disinvolto, il lusinghiero, quel non so
che, che piace, che alletta, che incanta'.

I have often asserted, that the profoundest learning and the politest
manners were by no means incompatible, though so seldom found united in
the same person; and I have engaged myself to exhibit you, as a proof of
the truth of this assertion.  Should you, instead of that, happen to
disprove me, the concern indeed would be mine, but the loss will be
yours.  Lord Bolingbroke is a strong instance on my side of the question;
he joins to the deepest erudition, the most elegant politeness and good-
breeding that ever any courtier and man of the world was adorned with.
And Pope very justly called him "All-accomplished St. John," with regard
to his knowledge and his manners.  He had, it is true, his faults; which
proceeded from unbounded ambition, and impetuous passions; but they have
now subsided by age and experience; and I can wish you nothing better
than to be, what he is now, without being what he has been formerly.  His
address pre-engages, his eloquence persuades, and his knowledge informs
all who approach him.  Upon the whole, I do desire, and insist, that from
after dinner till you go to bed, you make good-breeding, address, and
manners, your serious object and your only care.  Without them, you will
be nobody; with them, you may be anything.

Adieu, my dear child! My compliments to Mr. Harte.




LETTER XCI

LONDON, November 24, O. S.  1749.

DEAR Boy:  Every rational being (I take it for granted) proposes to
himself some object more important than mere respiration and obscure
animal existence.  He desires to distinguish himself among his fellow-
creatures; and, 'alicui negotio intentus, prreclari facinoris, aut artis
bonae, faman quaerit'.  Caesar, when embarking in a storm, said, that it
was not necessary he should live; but that it was absolutely necessary he
should get to the place to which he was going.  And Pliny leaves mankind
this only alternative; either of doing what deserves to be written, or of
writing what deserves to be read.  As for those who do neither, 'eorum
vitam mortemque juxta aestumo; quoniam de utraque siletur'.  You have, I
am convinced, one or both of these objects in view; but you must know and
use the necessary means, or your pursuit will be vain and frivolous.  In
either case, 'Sapere est princihium et fons'; but it is by no means all.
That knowledge must be adorned, it must have lustre as well as weight,
or it will be oftener taken, for lead than for gold.  Knowledge you have,
and will have: I am easy upon that article.  But my business, as your
friend, is not to compliment you upon what you have, but to tell you with
freedom what you want; and I must tell you plainly, that I fear you want
everything but knowledge.

I have written to you so often, of late, upon good-breeding, address,
'les manieres liantes', the Graces, etc., that I shall confine this
letter to another subject, pretty near akin to them, and which, I am
sure, you are full as deficient in; I mean Style.

Style is the dress of thoughts; and let them be ever so just, if your
style is homely, coarse, and vulgar, they will appear to as much
disadvantage, and be as ill received as your person, though ever so well
proportioned, would, if dressed in rags, dirt, and tatters.  It is not
every understanding that can judge of matter; but every ear can and does
judge, more or less, of style: and were I either to speak or write to the
public, I should prefer moderate matter, adorned with all the beauties
and elegancies of style, to the strongest matter in the world, ill-worded
and ill-delivered.  Your business is negotiation abroad, and oratory in
the House of Commons at home.  What figure can you make, in either case,
if your style be inelegant, I do not say bad?  Imagine yourself writing
an office-letter to a secretary of state, which letter is to be read by
the whole Cabinet Council, and very possibly afterward laid before
parliament; any one barbarism, solecism, or vulgarism in it, would, in a
very few days, circulate through the whole kingdom, to your disgrace and
ridicule.  For instance, I will suppose you had written the following
letter from The Hague to the Secretary of State at London; and leave you
to suppose the consequences of it:

MY LORD: I HAD, last night, the honor of your Lordship's letter of the
24th; and will SET ABOUT DOING the orders contained THEREIN; and IF so BE
that I can get that affair done by the next post, I will not fail FOR TO
give your Lordship an account of it by NEXT POST.  I have told the French
Minister, AS HOW THAT IF that affair be not soon concluded, your Lordship
would think it ALL LONG OF HIM; and that he must have neglected FOR TO
have wrote to his court about it.  I must beg leave to put your Lordship
in mind AS HOW, that I am now full three quarter in arrear; and if SO BE
that I do not very soon receive at least one half year, I shall CUT A
VERY BAD FIGURE; FOR THIS HERE place is very dear.  I shall be VASTLY
BEHOLDEN to your Lordship for THAT THERE mark of your favor; and so I
REST or REMAIN, Your, etc.


You will tell me, possibly, that this is a caricatura of an illiberal and
inelegant style: I will admit it; but assure you, at the same time, that
a dispatch with less than half these faults would blow you up forever.
It is by no means sufficient to be free from faults, in speaking and
writing; but you must do both correctly and elegantly.  In faults of this
kind, it is not 'ille optimus qui minimis arguetur'; but he is
unpardonable who has any at all, because it is his own fault: he need
only attend to, observe, and imitate the best authors.

It is a very true saying, that a man must be born a poet, but that he may
make himself an orator; and the very first principle of an orator is to
speak his own language, particularly, with the utmost purity and
elegance.  A man will be forgiven even great errors in a foreign
language; but in his own, even the least slips are justly laid hold of
and ridiculed.

A person of the House of Commons, speaking two years ago upon naval
affairs; asserted, that we had then the finest navy UPON THE FACE OF THE
YEARTH.  This happy mixture of blunder and vulgarism, you may easily
imagine, was matter of immediate ridicule; but I can assure you that it
continues so still, and will be remembered as long as he lives and
speaks.  Another, speaking in defense of a gentleman, upon whom a censure
was moved, happily said that he thought that gentleman was more LIABLE to
be thanked and rewarded, than censured.  You know, I presume, that LIABLE
can never be used in a good sense.

You have with you three or four of the best English authors, Dryden,
Atterbury, and Swift; read them with the utmost care, and with a
particular view to their language, and they may possibly correct that
CURIOUS INFELICITY OF DICTION, which you acquired at Westminster.
Mr. Harte excepted, I will admit that you have met with very few English
abroad, who could improve your style; and with many, I dare say, who
speak as ill as yourself, and, it may be, worse; you must, therefore,
take the more pains, and consult your authors and Mr. Harte the more.
I need not tell you how attentive the Romans and Greeks, particularly the
Athenians, were to this object.  It is also a study among the Italians
and the French; witness their respective academies and dictionaries for
improving and fixing their languages.  To our shame be it spoken, it is
less attended to here than in any polite country; but that is no reason
why you should not attend to it; on the contrary, it will distinguish you
the more.  Cicero says, very truly, that it is glorious to excel other
men in that very article, in which men excel brutes; SPEECH.

Constant experience has shown me, that great purity and elegance of
style, with a graceful elocution, cover a multitude of faults, in either
a speaker or a writer.  For my own part, I confess (and I believe most
people are of my mind) that if a speaker should ungracefully mutter or
stammer out to me the sense of an angel, deformed by barbarism and
solecisms, or larded with vulgarisms, he should never speak to me a
second time, if I could help it.  Gain the heart, or you gain nothing;
the eyes and the ears are the only roads to the heart.  Merit and
knowledge will not gain hearts, though they will secure them when gained.
Pray, have that truth ever in your mind.  Engage the eyes by your
address, air, and motions; soothe the ears by the elegance and harmony of
your diction; the heart will certainly follow; and the whole man, or
woman, will as certainly follow the heart.  I must repeat it to you,
over and over again, that with all the knowledge which you may have at
present, or hereafter acquire, and with all merit that ever man had,
if you have not a graceful address, liberal and engaging manners,
a prepossessing air, and a good degree of eloquence in speaking and
writing; you will be nobody; but will have the daily mortification of
seeing people, with not one-tenth part of your merit or knowledge, get
the start of you, and disgrace you, both in company and in business.

You have read "Quintilian," the best book in the world to form an orator;
pray read 'Cicero de Oratore', the best book in the world to finish one.
Translate and retranslate from and to Latin, Greek, and English; make
yourself a pure and elegant English style: it requires nothing but
application.  I do not find that God has made you a poet; and I am very
glad that he has not: therefore, for God's sake, make yourself an orator,
which you may do.  Though I still call you boy, I consider you no longer
as such; and when I reflect upon the prodigious quantity of manure that
has been laid upon you, I expect that you should produce more at
eighteen, than uncultivated soils do at eight-and-twenty.

Pray tell Mr. Harte that I have received his letter of the 13th, N. S.
Mr. Smith was much in the right not to let you go, at this time of the
year, by sea; in the summer you may navigate as much as you please; as,
for example, from Leghorn to Genoa, etc.  Adieu.




LETTER XCII

LONDON, November 27, O. S.  1749.

DEAR BOY: While the Roman Republic flourished, while glory was pursued,
and virtue practiced, and while even little irregularities and
indecencies, not cognizable by law, were, however, not thought below the
public care, censors were established, discretionally to supply, in
particular cases, the inevitable defects of the law, which must and can
only be general.  This employment I assume to myself with regard to your
little republic, leaving the legislative power entirely to Mr. Harte; I
hope, and believe, that he will seldom, or rather never, have occasion to
exert his supreme authority; and I do by no means suspect you of any
faults that may require that interposition.  But, to tell you the plain
truth, I am of opinion that my censorial power will not be useless to
you, nor a sinecure to me.  The sooner you make it both, the better for
us both.  I can now exercise this employment only upon hearsay, or, at
most, written evidence; and therefore shall exercise it with great lenity
and some diffidence; but when we meet, and that I can form my judgment
upon ocular and auricular evidence, I shall no more let the least
impropriety, indecorum, or irregularity pass uncensured, than my
predecessor Cato did.  I shall read you with the attention of a critic,
not with the partiality of an author: different in this respect, indeed,
from most critics, that I shall seek for faults only to correct and not
to expose them.  I have often thought, and still think, that there are
few things which people in general know less, than how to love and how to
hate.  They hurt those they love by a mistaken indulgence, by a
blindness, nay, often by a partiality to their faults.  Where they hate
they hurt themselves, by ill-timed passion and rage.  Fortunately for
you, I never loved you in that mistaken manner.  From your infancy, I
made you the object of my most serious attention, and not my plaything.
I consulted your real good, not your humors or fancies; and I shall
continue to do so while you want it, which will probably be the case
during our joint lives; for, considering the difference of our ages, in
the course of nature, you will hardly have acquired experience enough of
your own, while I shall be in condition of lending you any of mine.
People in general will much better bear being, told of their vices or
crimes, than of their little failings and weaknesses.  They, in some
degree, justify or excuse (as they think) the former, by strong passions,
seductions, and artifices of others, but to be told of, or to confess,
their little failings and weaknesses, implies an inferiority of parts,
too mortifying to that self-love and vanity, which are inseparable from
our natures.  I have been intimate enough with several people to tell
them that they had said or done a very criminal thing; but I never was
intimate enough with any man, to tell him, very seriously, that he had
said or done a very foolish one.  Nothing less than the relation between
you and me can possibly authorize that freedom; but fortunately for you,
my parental rights, joined to my censorial powers, give it me in its
fullest extent, and my concern for you will make me exert it.  Rejoice,
therefore, that there is one person in the world who can and will tell
you what will be very useful to you to know, and yet what no other man
living could or would tell you.  Whatever I shall tell you of this kind,
you are very sure, can have no other motive than your interest; I can
neither be jealous nor envious of your reputation or fortune, which I
must be both desirous and proud to establish and promote; I cannot be
your rival either in love or in business; on the contrary, I want the
rays of your rising to reflect new lustre upon my setting light.  In
order to this, I shall analyze you minutely, and censure you freely, that
you may not (if possible) have one single spot, when in your meridian.

There is nothing that a young fellow, at his first appearance in the
world, has more reason to dread,, and consequently should take more pains
to avoid, than having any ridicule fixed upon him.  It degrades him with
the most reasonable part of mankind; but it ruins him with the rest; and
I have known many a man undone by acquiring a ridiculous nickname: I
would not, for all the riches in the world, that you should acquire one
when you return to England.  Vices and crimes excite hatred and reproach;
failings, weaknesses, and awkwardnesses, excite ridicule; they are laid
hold of by mimics, who, though very contemptible wretches themselves,
often, by their buffoonery, fix ridicule upon their betters.  The little
defects in manners, elocution, address, and air (and even of figure,
though very unjustly), are the objects of ridicule, and the causes of
nicknames.  You cannot imagine the grief it would give me, and the
prejudice it would do you, if, by way of distinguishing you from others
of your name, you should happen to be called Muttering Stanhope, Absent
Stanhope, Ill-bred Stanhope, or Awkward, Left-legged Stanhope: therefore,
take great care to put it out of the power of Ridicule itself to give you
any of these ridiculous epithets; for, if you get one, it will stick to
you, like the envenomed shirt.  The very first day that I see you,
I shall be able to tell you, and certainly shall tell you, what degree of
danger you are in; and I hope that my admonitions, as censor, may prevent
the censures of the public.  Admonitions are always useful; is this one
or not?  You are the best judge; it is your own picture which I send you,
drawn, at my request, by a lady at Venice: pray let me know how far, in
your conscience, you think it like; for there are some parts of it which
I wish may, and others, which I should be sorry were.  I send you,
literally, the copy of that part of her letter, to her friend here, which
relates to you. --[In compliance to your orders, I have examined young
Stanhope carefully, and think I have penetrated into his character.  This
is his portrait, which I take to be a faithful one.  His face is
pleasing, his countenance sensible, and his look clever.  His figure is
at present rather too square; but if he shoots up, which he has matter
and years for, he will then be of a good size.  He has, undoubtedly, a
great fund of acquired knowledge; I am assured that he is master of the
learned languages.  As for French, I know he speaks it perfectly, and, I
am told, German as well.  The questions he asks are judicious; and denote
a thirst after knowledge.  I cannot say that he appears equally desirous
of pleasing, for he seems to neglect attentions and the graces.  He does
not come into a room well, nor has he that easy, noble carriage, which
would be proper for him.  It is true, he is as yet young and
inexperienced; one may therefore reasonably hope that his exercises,
which he has not yet gone through, and good company, in which he is still
a novice, will polish, and give all that is wanting to complete him.
What seems necessary for that purpose, would, be an attachment to some
woman of fashion, and who knows the world.  Some Madame de l'Ursay would
be the proper person.  In short, I can assure you, that he has everything
which Lord Chesterfield can wish him, excepting that carriage, those
graces, and the style used in the best company; which he will certainly
acquire in time, and by frequenting the polite world.  If he should not,
it would be great pity, since he so well deserves to possess them.  You
know their importance.  My Lord, his father, knows it too, he being
master of them all.  To conclude, if little Stanhope acquires the graces,
I promise you he will make his way; if not, he will be stopped in a
course, the goal of which he might attain with honor.]

Tell Mr. Harte that I have this moment received his letter of the 22d,
N. S., and that I approve extremely of the long stay you have made at
Venice.  I love long residences at capitals; running post through
different places is a most unprofitable way of traveling, and admits of
no application.  Adieu.

You see, by this extract, of what consequence other people think these
things.  Therefore, I hope you will no longer look upon them as trifles.
It is the character of an able man to despise little things in great
business: but then he knows what things are little, and what not.  He
does not suppose things are little, because they are commonly called so:
but by the consequences that may or may not attend them.  If gaining
people's affections, and interesting their hearts in your favor, be of
consequence, as it undoubtedly is, he knows very well that a happy
concurrence of all those, commonly called little things, manners, air,
address, graces, etc., is of the utmost consequence, and will never be at
rest till he has acquired them.  The world is taken by the outside of
things, and we must take the world as it is; you nor I cannot set it
right.  I know, at this time, a man of great quality and station, who has
not the parts of a porter; but raised himself to the station he is in,
singly by having a graceful figure, polite manners, and an engaging
address; which, by the way, he only acquired by habit; for he had not
sense enough to get them by reflection.  Parts and habit should conspire
to complete you.  You will have the habit of good company, and you have
reflection in your power.




LETTER XCIII

LONDON, December 5, O. S.  1749.

DEAR BOY: Those who suppose that men in general act rationally, because
they are called rational creatures, know very little of the world, and if
they act themselves upon that supposition, will nine times in ten find
themselves grossly mistaken.  That man is, 'animal bipes, implume,
risibile', I entirely agree; but for the 'rationale', I can only allow it
him 'in actu primo' (to talk logic) and seldom in 'actu secundo'.  Thus,
the speculative, cloistered pedant, in his solitary cell, forms systems
of things as they should be, not as they are; and writes as decisively
and absurdly upon war, politics, manners, and characters, as that pedant
talked, who was so kind as to instruct Hannibal in the art of war.  Such
closet politicians never fail to assign the deepest motives for the most
trifling actions; instead of often ascribing the greatest actions to the
most trifling causes, in which they would be much seldomer mistaken.
They read and write of kings, heroes, and statesmen, as never doing
anything but upon the deepest principles of sound policy.  But those who
see and observe kings, heroes, and statesmen, discover that they have
headaches, indigestions, humors, and passions, just like other people;
everyone of which, in their turns, determine their wills, in defiance of
their reason.  Had we only read in the "Life of Alexander," that he
burned Persepolis, it would doubtless have been accounted for from deep
policy: we should have been told, that his new conquest could not have
been secured without the destruction of that capital, which would have
been the constant seat of cabals, conspiracies, and revolts.  But,
luckily, we are informed at the same time, that this hero, this demi-god,
this son and heir of Jupiter Ammon, happened to get extremely drunk with
his w---e; and, by way of frolic, destroyed one of the finest cities in
the world.  Read men, therefore, yourself, not in books but in nature.
Adopt no systems, but study them yourself.  Observe their weaknesses,
their passions, their humors, of all which their understandings are, nine
times in ten, the dupes.  You will then know that they are to be gained,
influenced, or led, much oftener by little things than by great ones;
and, consequently, you will no longer think those things little, which
tend to such great purposes.

Let us apply this now to the particular object of this letter; I mean,
speaking in, and influencing public assemblies.  The nature of our
constitution makes eloquence more useful, and more necessary, in this
country than in any other in Europe.  A certain degree of good sense and
knowledge is requisite for that, as well as for everything else; but
beyond that, the purity of diction, the elegance of style, the harmony of
periods, a pleasing elocution, and a graceful action, are the things
which a public speaker should attend to the most; because his audience
certainly does, and understands them the best; or rather indeed
understands little else.  The late Lord Chancellor Cowper's strength as
an orator lay by no means in his reasonings, for he often hazarded very
weak ones.  But such was the purity and elegance of his style, such the
propriety and charms of his elocution, and such the gracefulness of his
action, that he never spoke without universal applause; the ears and the
eyes gave him up the hearts and the understandings of the audience.  On
the contrary, the late Lord Townshend always spoke materially, with
argument and knowledge, but never pleased.  Why?  His diction was not
only inelegant, but frequently ungrammatical, always vulgar; his cadences
false, his voice unharmonious, and his action ungraceful.  Nobody heard
him with patience; and the young fellows used to joke upon him, and
repeat his inaccuracies.  The late Duke of Argyle, though the weakest
reasoner, was the most pleasing speaker I ever knew in my life.  He
charmed, he warmed, he forcibly ravished the audience; not by his matter
certainly, but by his manner of delivering it.  A most genteel figure,
a graceful, noble air, an harmonious voice, an elegance of style, and a
strength of emphasis, conspired to make him the most affecting,
persuasive, and applauded speaker I ever saw.  I was captivated like
others; but when I came home, and coolly considered what he had said,
stripped of all those ornaments in which he had dressed it, I often found
the matter flimsy, the arguments weak, and I was convinced of the power
of those adventitious concurring circumstances, which ignorance of
mankind only calls trifling ones.  Cicero, in his book 'De Oratore', in
order to raise the dignity of that profession which he well knew himself
to be at the head of, asserts that a complete orator must be a complete
everything, lawyer, philosopher, divine, etc.  That would be extremely
well, if it were possible: but man's life is not long enough; and I hold
him to be the completest orator, who speaks the best upon that subject
which occurs; whose happy choice of words, whose lively imagination,
whose elocution and action adorn and grace his matter, at the same time
that they excite the attention and engage the passions of his audience.

You will be of the House of Commons as soon as you are of age; and you
must first make a figure there, if you would make a figure, or a fortune,
in your country.  This you can never do without that correctness and
elegance in your own language, which you now seem to neglect, and which
you have entirely to learn.  Fortunately for you, it is to be learned.
Care and observation will do it; but do not flatter yourself, that all
the knowledge, sense, and reasoning in the world will ever make you a
popular and applauded speaker, without the ornaments and the graces of
style, elocution, and action.  Sense and argument, though coarsely
delivered, will have their weight in a private conversation, with two or
three people of sense; but in a public assembly they will have none, if
naked and destitute of the advantages I have mentioned.  Cardinal de Retz
observes, very justly, that every numerous assembly is a mob, influenced
by their passions, humors, and affections, which nothing but eloquence
ever did or ever can engage.  This is so important a consideration for
everybody in this country, and more particularly for you, that I
earnestly recommend it to your most serious care and attention.  Mind
your diction, in whatever language you either write or speak; contract a
habit of correctness and elegance.  Consider your style, even in the
freest conversation and most familiar letters.  After, at least, if not
before, you have said a thing, reflect if you could not have said it
better.  Where you doubt of the propriety or elegance of a word or a
phrase, consult some good dead or living authority in that language.  Use
yourself to translate, from various languages into English; correct those
translations till they satisfy your ear, as well as your understanding.
And be convinced of this truth, that the best sense and reason in the
world will be as unwelcome in a public assembly, without these ornaments,
as they will in public companies, without the assistance of manners and
politeness.  If you will please people, you must please them in their own
way; and, as you cannot make them what they should be, you must take them
as they are.  I repeat it again, they are only to be taken by 'agremens',
and by what flatters their senses and their hearts.  Rabelais first wrote
a most excellent book, which nobody liked; then, determined to conform to
the public taste, he wrote Gargantua and Pantagruel, which everybody
liked, extravagant as it was.  Adieu.




LETTER XCIV

LONDON, December 9, O. S.  1749.

DEAR BOY: It is now above forty years since I have never spoken nor
written one single word, without giving myself at least one moment's time
to consider whether it was a good or a bad one, and whether I could not
find out a better in its place.  An unharmonious and rugged period, at
this time, shocks my ears; and I, like all the rest of the world, will
willingly exchange and give up some degree of rough sense, for a good
degree of pleasing sound.  I will freely and truly own to you, without
either vanity or false modesty, that whatever reputation I have acquired
as a speaker, is more owing to my constant attention to my diction than
to my matter, which was necessarily just the same as other people's.
When you come into parliament, your reputation as a speaker will depend
much more upon your words, and your periods, than upon the subject.  The
same matter occurs equally to everybody of common sense, upon the same
question; the dressing it well, is what excites the attention and
admiration of the audience.

It is in parliament that I have set my heart upon your making a figure;
it is there that I want to have you justly proud of yourself, and to make
me justly proud of you.  This means that you must be a good speaker
there; I use the word MUST, because I know you may if you will.  The
vulgar, who are always mistaken, look upon a speaker and a comet with the
same astonishment and admiration, taking them both for preternatural
phenomena.  This error discourages many young men from attempting that
character; and good speakers are willing to have their talent considered
as something very extraordinary, if not, a peculiar gift of God to his
elect.  But let you and me analyze and simplify this good speaker; let us
strip him of those adventitious plumes with which his own pride, and the
ignorance of others, have decked him, and we shall find the true
definition of him to be no more than this: A man of good common sense who
reasons justly and expresses himself elegantly on that subject upon which
he speaks.  There is, surely, no witchcraft in this.  A man of sense,
without a superior and astonishing degree of parts, will not talk
nonsense upon any subject; nor will he, if he has the least taste or
application, talk inelegantly.  What then does all this mighty art and
mystery of speaking in parliament amount to?  Why, no more than this:
that the man who speaks in the House of Commons, speaks in that House,
and to four hundred people, that opinion upon a given subject which he
would make no difficulty of speaking in any house in England, round the
fire, or at table, to any fourteen people whatsoever; better judges,
perhaps, and severer critics of what he says, than any fourteen gentlemen
of the House of Commons.

I have spoken frequently in parliament, and not always without some
applause; and therefore I can assure you, from my experience, that there
is very little in it.  The elegance of the style, and the turn of the
periods, make the chief impression upon the hearers.  Give them but one
or two round and harmonious periods in a speech, which they will retain
and repeat; and they will go home as well satisfied as people do from an
opera, humming all the way one or two favorite tunes that have struck
their ears, and were easily caught.  Most people have ears, but few have
judgment; tickle those ears, and depend upon it, you will catch their
judgments, such as they are.

Cicero, conscious that he was at the top of his profession (for in his
time eloquence was a profession), in order to set himself off, defines in
his treatise 'De Oratore', an orator to be such a man as never was, nor
never will be; and, by his fallacious argument, says that he must know
every art and science whatsoever, or how shall he speak upon them?  But,
with submission to so great an authority, my definition of an orator is
extremely different from, and I believe much truer than his.  I call that
man an orator, who reasons justly, and expresses himself elegantly, upon
whatever subject he treats.  Problems in geometry, equations in algebra,
processes in chemistry, and experiments in anatomy, are never, that I
have heard of, the object of eloquence; and therefore I humbly conceive,
that a man may be a very fine speaker, and yet know nothing of geometry,
algebra, chemistry, or anatomy.  The subjects of all parliamentary
debates are subjects of common sense singly.

Thus I write whatever occurs to me, that I think may contribute either to
form or inform you.  May my labor not be in vain! and it will not, if you
will but have half the concern for yourself that I have for you.  Adieu.




LETTER XCV

LONDON; December 12, O. S.  1749.

DEAR BOY: Lord Clarendon in his history says of Mr. John Hampden THAT HE
HAD A HEAD TO CONTRIVE, A TONGUE TO PERSUADE, AND A HAND TO EXECUTE
ANY
MISCHIEF.  I shall not now enter into the justness of this character of
Mr. Hampden, to whose brave stand against the illegal demand of ship-
money we owe our present liberties; but I mention it to you as the
character, which with the alteration of one single word, GOOD, instead of
MISCHIEF, I would have you aspire to, and use your utmost endeavors to
deserve.  The head to contrive, God must to a certain degree have given
you; but it is in your own power greatly to improve it, by study,
observation, and reflection.  As for the TONGUE TO PERSUADE, it wholly
depends upon yourself; and without it the best head will contrive to very
little purpose.  The hand to execute depends likewise, in my opinion,
in a great measure upon yourself.  Serious reflection will always give
courage in a good cause; and the courage arising from reflection is of a
much superior nature to the animal and constitutional courage of a foot
soldier.  The former is steady and unshaken, where the 'nodus' is 'dignus
vindice'; the latter is oftener improperly than properly exerted, but
always brutally.

The second member of my text (to speak ecclesiastically) shall be the
subject of my following discourse; THE TONGUE TO PERSUADE--as judicious,
preachers recommend those virtues, which they think their several
audiences want the most; such as truth and continence, at court;
disinterestedness, in the city; and sobriety, in the country.

You must certainly, in the course of your little experience, have felt
the different effects of elegant and inelegant speaking.  Do you not
suffer, when people accost you in a stammering or hesitating manner, in
an untuneful voice, with false accents and cadences; puzzling and
blundering through solecisms, barbarisms, and vulgarisms; misplacing even
their bad words, and inverting all method?  Does not this prejudice you
against their matter, be it what it will; nay, even against their
persons?  I am sure it does me.  On the other hand, do you not feel
yourself inclined, prepossessed, nay, even engaged in favor of those who
address you in the direct contrary manner?  The effects of a correct and
adorned style of method and perspicuity, are incredible toward
persuasion; they often supply the want of reason and argument, but, when
used in the support of reason and argument, they are irresistible.  The
French attend very much to the purity and elegance of their style, even
in common conversation; insomuch that it is a character to say of a man
'qu'il narre bien'.  Their conversations frequently turn upon the
delicacies of their language, and an academy is employed in fixing it.
The 'Crusca', in Italy, has the same object; and I have met with very few
Italians, who did not speak their own language correctly and elegantly.
How much more necessary is it for an Englishman to do so, who is to speak
it in a public assembly, where the laws and liberties of his country are
the subjects of his deliberation?  The tongue that would persuade there,
must not content itself with mere articulation.  You know what pains
Demosthenes took to correct his naturally bad elocution; you know that he
declaimed by the seaside in storms, to prepare himself for the noise of
the tumultuous assemblies he was to speak to; and you can now judge of
the correctness and elegance of his style.  He thought all these things
of consequence, and he thought right; pray do you think so too?  It is of
the utmost consequence to you to be of that opinion.  If you have the
least defect in your elocution, take the utmost care and pains to correct
it.  Do not neglect your style, whatever language you speak in, or
whoever you speak to, were it your footman.  Seek always for the best
words and the happiest expressions you can find.  Do not content yourself
with being barely understood; but adorn your thoughts, and dress them as
you would your person; which, however well proportioned it might be, it
would be very improper and indecent to exhibit naked, or even worse
dressed than people of your sort are.

I have sent you in a packet which your Leipsig acquaintance, Duval, sends
to his correspondent at Rome, Lord Bolingbroke's book,--["Letters on the
Spirit of Patriotism," on the Idea of a Patriot King which he published
about a year ago.]-- I desire that you will read it over and over again,
with particular attention to the style, and to all those beauties of
oratory with which it is adorned.  Till I read that book, I confess I did
not know all the extent and powers of the English language.  Lord
Bolingbroke has both a tongue and a pen to persuade; his manner of
speaking in private conversation is full as elegant as his writings;
whatever subject he either speaks or writes upon, he adorns with the most
splendid eloquence; not a studied or labored eloquence, but such a
flowing happiness of diction, which (from care perhaps at first) is
become so habitual to him, that even his most familiar conversations, if
taken down in writing, would bear the press, without the least correction
either as to method or style.  If his conduct, in the former part of his
life, had been equal to all his natural and acquired talents, he would
most justly have merited the epithet of all-accomplished.  He is himself
sensible of his past errors: those violent passions which seduced him in
his youth, have now subsided by age; and take him as he is now, the
character of all-accomplished is more his due than any man's I ever knew
in my life.

But he has been a most mortifying instance of the violence of human
passions and of the weakness of the most exalted human reason.  His
virtues and his vices, his reason and his passions, did not blend
themselves by a gradation of tints, but formed a shining and sudden
contrast.  Here the darkest, there the most splendid colors; and both
rendered more shining from their proximity.  Impetuosity, excess, and
almost extravagance, characterized not only his passions, but even his
senses.  His youth was distinguished by all the tumult and storm of
pleasures, in which he most licentiously triumphed, disdaining all
decorum.  His fine imagination has often been heated and exhausted, with
his body, in celebrating and deifying the prostitute of the night; and
his convivial joys were pushed to all the extravagance of frantic
Bacchanals.  Those passions were interrupted but by a stronger ambition.
The former impaired both his constitution and his character, but the
latter destroyed both his fortune and his reputation.

He has noble and generous sentiments, rather than fixed reflected
principles of good nature and friendship; but they are more violent than
lasting, and suddenly and often varied to their opposite extremes, with
regard to the same persons.  He receives the common attentions of
civility as obligations, which he returns with interest; and resents with
passion the little inadvertencies of human nature, which he repays with
interest too.  Even a difference of opinion upon a philosophical subject
would provoke, and prove him no practical philosopher at least.

Notwithstanding the dissipation of his youth, and the tumultuous
agitation of his middle age, he has an infinite fund of various and
almost universal knowledge, which, from the clearest and quickest
conception, and happiest memory, that ever man was blessed with, he
always carries about him.  It is his pocket-money, and he never has
occasion to draw upon a book for any sum.  He excels more particularly in
history, as his historical works plainly prove.  The relative political
and commercial interests of every country in Europe, particularly of his
own, are better known to him, than perhaps to any man in it; but how
steadily he has pursued the latter, in his public conduct, his enemies,
of all parties and denominations, tell with joy.

He engaged young, and distinguished himself in business; and his
penetration was almost intuition.  I am old enough to have heard him
speak in parliament.  And I remember that, though prejudiced against him
by party, I felt all the force and charms of his eloquence.  Like Belial
in Milton, "he made the worse appear the better cause."  All the internal
and external advantages and talents of an orator are undoubtedly his.
Figure, voice, elocution, knowledge, and, above all, the purest and most
florid diction, with the justest metaphors and happiest images, had
raised him to the post of Secretary at War, at four-and-twenty years old,
an age at which others are hardly thought fit for the smallest
employments.

During his long exile in France, he applied himself to study with his
characteristical ardor; and there he formed and chiefly executed the plan
of a great philosophical work.  The common bounds of human knowledge are
too narrow for his warm and aspiring imagination.  He must go 'extra
flammantia maenia Mundi', and explore the unknown and unknowable regions
of metaphysics; which open an unbounded field for the excursion of an
ardent imagination; where endless conjectures supply the defect of
unattainable knowledge, and too often usurp both its name and its
influence.

He has had a very handsome person, with a most engaging address in his
air and manners; he has all the dignity and good-breeding which a man of
quality should or can have, and which so few, in this country at least,
really have.

He professes himself a deist; believing in a general Providence, but
doubting of, though by no means rejecting (as is commonly supposed) the
immortality of the soul and a future state.

Upon the whole, of this extraordinary man, what can we say, but, alas,
poor human nature!

In your destination, you will have frequent occasions to speak in public;
to princes and states abroad; to the House of Commons at home; judge,
then, whether eloquence is necessary for you or not; not only common
eloquence, which is rather free from faults than adorned by beauties; but
the highest, the most shining degree of eloquence.  For God's sake, have
this object always in your view and in your thoughts.  Tune your tongue
early to persuasion; and let no jarring, dissonant accents ever fall from
it, Contract a habit of speaking well upon every occasion, and neglect
yourself in no one.  Eloquence and good-breeding, alone, with an
exceeding small degree of parts and knowledge, will carry a man a great
way; with your parts and knowledge, then, how far will they not carry
you?  Adieu.




LETTER XCVI

LONDON, December 16, O. S.  1749.

DEAR Boy: This letter will, I hope, find you safely arrived and well
settled at Rome, after the usual distresses and accidents of a winter
journey; which are very proper to teach you patience.  Your stay there I
look upon as a very important period of your life; and I do believe that
you will fill it up well.  I hope you will employ the mornings diligently
with Mr. Harte, in acquiring weight; and the evenings in the best
companies at Rome, in acquiring lustre.  A formal, dull father, would
recommend to you to plod out the evenings, too, at home, over a book by a
dim taper; but I recommend to you the evenings for your pleasures, which
are as much a part of your education, and almost as necessary a one, as
your morning studies.  Go to whatever assemblies or SPECTACLES people of
fashion go to, and when you are there do as they do.  Endeavor to
outshine those who shine there the most, get the 'Garbo', the
'Gentilezza', the 'Leggeadria' of the; Italians; make love to the most
impertinent beauty of condition that you meet with, and be gallant with
all the rest.  Speak Italian, right or wrong, to everybody; and if you do
but laugh at yourself first for your bad Italian, nobody else will laugh
at you for it.  That is the only way to speak it perfectly; which I
expect you will do, because I am sure you may, before you leave Rome.
View the most curious remains of antiquity with a classical spirit; and
they will clear up to you many passages of the classical authors;
particularly the Trajan and Antonine Columns; where you find the warlike
instruments, the dresses, and the triumphal ornaments of the Romans.  Buy
also the prints and explanations of all those respectable remains of
Roman grandeur, and compare them with the originals.  Most young
travelers are contented with a general view of those things, say they are
very fine, and then go about their business.  I hope you will examine
them in a very different way.  'Approfondissez' everything you see or
hear; and learn, if you can, the WHY and the WHEREFORE.  Inquire into the
meaning and the objects of the innumerable processions, which you will
see at Rome at this time.  Assist at all the ceremonies, and know the
reason, or at least the pretenses of them, and however absurd they may
be, see and speak of them with great decency.  Of all things, I beg of
you not to herd with your own countrymen, but to be always either with
the Romans, or with the foreign ministers residing at Rome.  You are sent
abroad to see the manners and characters, and learn the languages of
foreign countries; and not to converse with English, in English; which
would defeat all those ends.  Among your graver company, I recommend (as
I have done before) the Jesuits to you; whose learning and address will
both please and improve you; inform yourself, as much as you can, of the
history, policy, and practice of that society, from the time of its
founder, Ignatius of Loyola, who was himself a madman.  If you would know
their morality, you will find it fully and admirably stated in 'Les
Lettres d'un Provincial', by the famous Monsieur Pascal; and it is a book
very well worth your reading.  Few people see what they see, or hear what
they hear; that is, they see and hear so inattentively and superficially,
that they are very little the better for what they do see and hear.
This, I dare say, neither is, nor will be your case.  You will
understand, reflect upon, and consequently retain, what you see and hear.
You have still two years good, but no more, to form your character in the
world decisively; for, within two months after your arrival in England,
it will be finally and irrevocably determined, one way or another, in the
opinion of the public.  Devote, therefore, these two years to the pursuit
of perfection; which ought to be everybody's object, though in some
particulars unattainable; those who strive and labor the most, will come
the nearest to it.  But, above all things, aim at it in the two important
arts of speaking and pleasing; without them all your other talents are
maimed and crippled.  They are the wings upon which you must soar above
other people; without them you will only crawl with the dull mass of
mankind.  Prepossess by your air, address, and manners; persuade by your
tongue; and you will easily execute what your head has contrived.  I
desire that you will send me very minute accounts from Rome, not of what
you see, but, of who you see; of your pleasures and entertainments.  Tell
me what companies you frequent most, and how you are received.




LETTER XCVII

LONDON, December 19, O. S.  1749.

DEAR BOY: The knowledge of mankind is a very use ful knowledge for
everybody; a most necessary one for you, who are destined to an active,
public life.  You will have to do with all sorts of characters; you
should, therefore, know them thoroughly, in order to manage them ably.
This knowledge is not to be gotten systematically; you must acquire it
yourself by your own observation and sagacity; I will give you such hints
as I think may be useful land-marks in your intended progress.

I have often told you (and it is most true) that, with regard to mankind,
we must not draw general conclusions from certain particular principles,
though, in the main, true ones.  We must not suppose that, because a man
is a rational animal, he will therefore always act rationally; or,
because he has such or such a predominant passion, that he will act
invariably and consequentially in the pursuit of it.  No.  We are
complicated machines: and though we have one main-spring, that gives
motion to the whole, we have an infinity of little wheels, which, in
their turns, retard, precipitate, and sometimes stop that motion.  Let us
exemplify.  I will suppose ambition to be (as it commonly is) the
predominant passion of a minister of state; and I will suppose that
minister to be an able one.  Will he, therefore, invariably pursue the
object of that predominant passion?  May I be sure that he will do so and
so, because he ought?  Nothing less.  Sickness or low spirits, may damp
this predominant passion; humor and peevishness may triumph over it;
inferior passions may, at times, surprise it and prevail.  Is this
ambitious statesman amorous?  Indiscreet and unguarded confidences, made
in tender moments, to his wife or his mistress, may defeat all his
schemes.  Is he avaricious?  Some great lucrative object, suddenly
presenting itself, may unravel all the work of his ambition.  Is he
passionate?  Contradiction and provocation (sometimes, it may be, too,
artfully intended) may extort rash and inconsiderate expressions, or
actions destructive of his main object.  Is he vain, and open to
flattery?  An artful, flattering favorite may mislead him; and even
laziness may, at certain moments, make him neglect or omit the necessary
steps to that height at which he wants to arrive.  Seek first, then, for
the predominant passion of the character which you mean to engage and
influence, and address yourself to it; but without defying or despising
the inferior passions; get them in your interest too, for now and then
they will have their turns.  In many cases, you may not have it in your
power to contribute to the gratification of the prevailing passion; then
take the next best to your aid.  There are many avenues to every man; and
when you cannot get at him through the great one, try the serpentine
ones, and you will arrive at last.

There are two inconsistent passions, which, however, frequently accompany
each other, like man and wife; and which, like man and wife too, are
commonly clogs upon each other.  I mean ambition and avarice: the latter
is often the true cause of the former, and then is the predominant
passion.  It seems to have been so in Cardinal Mazarin, who did anything,
submitted to anything, and forgave anything, for the sake of plunder.
He loved and courted power, like a usurer, because it carried profit
along with it.  Whoever should have formed his opinion, or taken his
measures, singly, from the ambitious part of Cardinal Mazarin's
character, would have found himself often mistaken.  Some who had found
this out, made their fortunes by letting him cheat them at play.  On the
contrary, Cardinal Richelieu's prevailing passion seems to have been
ambition, and his immense riches only the natural consequences of that
ambition gratified; and yet, I make no doubt, but that ambition had now
and then its turn with the former, and avarice with the latter.
Richelieu (by the way) is so strong a proof of the inconsistency of human
nature, that I cannot help observing to you, that while he absolutely
governed both his king and his country, and was, in a great degree, the
arbiter of the fate of all Europe, he was more jealous of the great
reputation of Corneille than of the power of Spain; and more flattered
with being thought (what he was not) the best poet, than with being
thought (what he certainly was) the greatest statesman in Europe; and
affairs stood still while he was concerting the criticism upon the Cid.
Could one think this possible, if one did not know it to be true?  Though
men are all of one composition, the several ingredients are so
differently proportioned ,in each individual, that no two are exactly
alike; and no one at all times like himself.  The ablest man will
sometimes do weak things; the proudest man, mean things; the honestest
man, ill things; and the wickedest man, good ones.  Study individuals
then, and if you take (as you ought to do,) their outlines from their
prevailing passion, suspend your last finishing strokes till you have
attended to, and discovered the operations of their inferior passions,
appetites, and humors.  A man's general character may be that of the
honestest man of the world: do not dispute it; you might be thought
envious or ill-natured; but, at the same time, do not take this probity
upon trust to such a degree as to put your life, fortune, or reputation
in his power.  This honest man may happen to be your rival in power, in
interest, or in love; three passions that often put honesty to most
severe trials, in which it is too often cast; but first analyze this
honest man yourself; and then only you will be able to judge how far you
may, or may not, with safety trust him.

Women are much more like each other than men: they have, in truth, but
two passions, vanity and love; these are their universal characteristics.
An Agrippina may sacrifice them to ambition, or a Messalina to lust; but
those instances are rare; and, in general, all they say, and all they do,
tends to the gratification of their vanity or their love.  He who
flatters them most, pleases them best; and they are the most in love with
him, who they think is the most in love with them.  No adulation is too
strong for them; no assiduity too great; no simulation of passion too
gross; as, on the other hand, the least word or action that can possibly
be construed into a slight or contempt, is unpardonable, and never
forgotten.  Men are in this respect tender too, and will sooner forgive
an injury than an insult.  Some men are more captious than others; some
are always wrongheaded; but every man living has such a share of vanity,
as to be hurt by marks of slight and contempt.  Every man does not
pretend to be a poet, a mathematician, or a statesman, and considered as
such; but every man pretends to common sense, and to fill his place in
the world with common decency; and, consequently, does not easily forgive
those negligences, inattentions and slights which seem to call in
question, or utterly deny him both these pretensions.

Suspect, in general, those who remarkably affect any one virtue; who
raise it above all others, and who, in a manner, intimate that they
possess it exclusively.  I say suspect them, for they are commonly
impostors; but do not be sure that they are always so; for I have
sometimes known saints really religious, blusterers really brave,
reformers of manners really honest, and prudes really chaste.  Pry into
the recesses of their hearts yourself, as far as you are able, and never
implicitly adopt a character upon common fame; which, though generally
right as to the great outlines of characters, is always wrong in some
particulars.

Be upon your guard against those who upon very slight acquaintance,
obtrude their unasked and unmerited friendship and confidence upon you;
for they probably cram you with them only for their own eating; but, at
the same time, do not roughly reject them upon that general supposition.
Examine further, and see whether those unexpected offers flow from a warm
heart and a silly head, or from a designing head and a cold heart; for
knavery and folly have often the same symptoms.  In the first case, there
is no danger in accepting them, 'valeant quantum valere possunt'.  In the
latter case, it may be useful to seem to accept them, and artfully to
turn the battery upon him who raised it.

There is an incontinency of friendship among young fellows, who are
associated by their mutual pleasures only, which has, very frequently,
bad consequences.  A parcel of warm hearts and inexperienced heads,
heated by convivial mirth, and possibly a little too much wine, vow, and
really mean at the time, eternal friendships to each other, and
indiscreetly pour out their whole souls in common, and without the least
reserve.  These confidences are as indiscreetly repealed as they were
made; for new pleasures and new places soon dissolve this ill-cemented
connection; and then very ill uses are made of these rash confidences.
Bear your part, however, in young companies; nay, excel, if you can, in
all the social and convivial joy and festivity that become youth.  Trust
them with your love tales, if you please; but keep your serious views
secret.  Trust those only to some tried friend, more experienced than
yourself, and who, being in a different walk of life from you, is not
likely to become your rival; for I would not advise you to depend so much
upon the heroic virtue of mankind, as to hope or believe that your
competitor will ever be your friend, as to the object of that
competition.

These are reserves and cautions very necessary to have, but very
imprudent to show; the 'volto sciolto' should accompany them.  Adieu.




LETTER XCVIII

DEAR BOY:  Great talents and great virtues (if you should have them) will
procure you the respect and the admiration of mankind; but it is the
lesser talents, the 'leniores virtutes', which must procure you their
love and affection.  The former, unassisted and unadorned by the latter,
will extort praise; but will, at the same time, excite both fear and
envy; two sentiments absolutely incompatible with love and affection.

Caesar had all the great vices, and Cato all the great virtues, that men
could have.  But Caesar had the 'leniores virtutes' which Cato wanted,
and which made him beloved, even by his enemies, and gained him the
hearts of mankind, in spite of their reason: while Cato was not even
beloved by his friends, notwithstanding the esteem and respect which they
could not refuse to his virtues; ,and I am apt to think, that if Caesar
had wanted, and Cato possessed, those 'leniores virtutes', the former
would not have attempted (at least with success), and the latter could
have protected, the liberties of Rome.  Mr. Addison, in his "Cato," says
of Caesar (and I believe with truth),

          "Curse on his virtues, they've undone his country."

By which he means those lesser, but engaging virtues of gentleness,
affability, complaisance, and good humor.  The knowledge of a scholar,
the courage of a hero, and the virtue of a Stoic, will be admired; but if
the knowledge be accompanied with arrogance, the courage with ferocity,
and the virtue with inflexible severity, the man will never be loved.
The heroism of Charles XII. of Sweden (if his brutal courage deserves
that name) was universally admired, but the man nowhere beloved.  Whereas
Henry IV. of France, who had full as much courage, and was much longer
engaged in wars, was generally beloved upon account of his lesser and
social virtues.  We are all so formed, that our understandings are
generally the DUPES of our hearts, that is, of our passions; and the
surest way to the former is through the latter, which must be engaged by
the 'leniores virtutes' alone, and the manner of exerting them.  The
insolent civility of a proud man is (for example) if possible, more
shocking than his rudeness could be; because he shows you by his manner
that he thinks it mere condescension in him; and that his goodness alone
bestows upon you what you have no pretense to claim.  He intimates his
protection, instead of his friendship, by a gracious nod, instead of a
usual bow; and rather signifies his consent that you may, than his
invitation that you should sit, walk, eat, or drink with him.

The costive liberality of a purse-proud man insults the distresses it
sometimes relieves; he takes care to make you feel your own misfortunes,
and the difference between your situation and his; both which he
insinuates to be justly merited: yours, by your folly; his, by his
wisdom.  The arrogant pedant does not communicate, but promulgates his
knowledge.  He does not give it you, but he inflicts it upon you; and is
(if possible) more desirous to show you your own ignorance than his own
learning.  Such manners as these, not only in the particular instances
which I have mentioned, but likewise in all others, shock and revolt that
little pride and vanity which every man has in his heart; and obliterate
in us the obligation for the favor conferred, by reminding us of the
motive which produced, and the manner which accompanied it.

These faults point out their opposite perfections, and your own good
sense will naturally suggest them to you.

But besides these lesser virtues, there are what may be called the lesser
talents, or accomplishments, which are of great use to adorn and
recommend all the greater; and the more so, as all people are judges of
the one, and but few are of the other.  Everybody feels the impression,
which an engaging address, an agreeable manner of speaking, and an easy
politeness, makes upon them; and they prepare the way for the favorable
reception of their betters.  Adieu.




LETTER XCIX

LONDON, December 26, O. S.  1749.

MY DEAR FRIEND: The new year is the season in which custom seems more
particularly to authorize civil and harmless lies, under the name of
compliments.  People reciprocally profess wishes which they seldom form;
and concern, which they seldom feel.  This is not the case between you
and me, where truth leaves no room for compliments.

'Dii tibi dent annos, de to nam caetera sumes', was said formerly to one
by a man who certainly did not think it.  With the variation of one word
only, I will with great truth say it to you.  I will make the first part
conditional by changing, in the second, the 'nam' into 'si'.  May you
live as long as you are fit to live, but no longer! or may you rather die
before you cease to be fit to live, than after!  My true tenderness for
you makes me think more of the manner than of the length of your life,
and forbids me to wish it prolonged, by a single day, that should bring
guilt, reproach, and shame upon you.  I have not malice enough in my
nature, to wish that to my greatest enemy.  You are the principal object
of all my cares, the only object of all my hopes; I have now reason to
believe, that you will reward the former, and answer the latter; in that
case, may you live long, for you must live happy; 'de te nam caetera
sumes'.  Conscious virtue is the only solid foundation of all happiness;
for riches, power, rank, or whatever, in the common acceptation of the
word, is supposed to constitute happiness, will never quiet, much less
cure, the inward pangs of guilt.  To that main wish, I will add those of
the good old nurse of Horace, in his epistle to Tibullus: 'Sapere', you
have it in a good degree already.  'Et fari ut possit quae sentiat'.
Have you that?  More, much more is meant by it, than common speech or
mere articulation.  I fear that still remains to be wished for, and I
earnestly wish it to you.  'Gratia and Fama' will inevitably accompany
the above-mentioned qualifications.  The 'Valetudo' is the only one that
is not in your own power; Heaven alone can grant it you, and may it do so
abundantly!  As for the 'mundus victus, non deficiente crumena', do you
deserve, and I will provide them.

It is with the greatest pleasure that I consider the fair prospect which
you have before you.  You have seen, read, and learned more, at your age,
than most young fellows have done at two or three-and-twenty.  Your
destination is a shining one, and leads to rank, fortune, and
distinction.  Your education has been calculated for it; and, to do you
justice, that education has not been thrown away upon you.  You want but
two things, which do not want conjuration, but only care, to acquire:
eloquence and manners; that is, the graces of speech, and the graces of
behavior.  You may have them; they are as much in your power as powdering
your hair is; and will you let the want of them obscure (as it certainly
will do) that shining prospect which presents itself to you.  I am sure
you will not.  They are the sharp end, the point of the nail that you are
driving, which must make way first for the larger and more solid parts to
enter.  Supposing your moral character as pure, and your knowledge as
sound, as I really believe them both to be; you want nothing for that
perfection, which I have so constantly wished you, and taken so much
pains to give you, but eloquence and politeness.  A man who is not born
with a poetical genius, can never be a poet, or at best an extremely bad
one; but every man, who can speak at all, can speak elegantly and
correctly if he pleases, by attending to the best authors and orators;
and, indeed, I would advise those who do not speak elegantly, not to
speak at all; for I am sure they will get more by their silence than by
their speech.  As for politeness: whoever keeps good company, and is not
polite, must have formed a resolution, and take some pains not to be so;
otherwise he would naturally and insensibly take the air, the address,
and the turn of those he converses with.  You will, probably, in the
course of this year, see as great a variety of good company in the
several capitals you will be at, as in any one year of your life; and
consequently must (I should hope) catch some of their manners, almost
whether you will or not; but, as I dare say you will endeavor to do it,
I am convinced you will succeed, and that I shall have pleasure of
finding you, at your return here, one of the best-bred men in Europe.

I imagine, that when you receive my letters, and come to those parts of
them which relate to eloquence and politeness, you say, or at least
think, What, will he never have done upon those two subjects?  Has he not
said all he can say upon them?  Why the same thing over and over again?
If you do think or say so, it must proceed from your not yet knowing the
infinite importance of these two accomplishments, which I cannot
recommend to you too often, nor inculcate too strongly.  But if, on the
contrary, you are convinced of the utility, or rather the necessity of
those two accomplishments, and are determined to acquire them, my
repeated admonitions are only unnecessary; and I grudge no trouble which
can possibly be of the least use to you.

I flatter myself, that your stay at Rome will go a great way toward
answering all my views: I am sure it will, if you employ your time, and
your whole time, as you should.  Your first morning hours, I would have
you devote to your graver studies with Mr. Harte; the middle part of the
day I would have employed in seeing things; and the evenings in seeing
people.  You are not, I hope, of a lazy, inactive turn, in either body or
mind; and, in that case, the day is full long enough for everything;
especially at Rome, where it is not the fashion, as it is here and at
Paris, to embezzle at least half of it at table.  But if, by accident,
two or three hours are sometimes wanting for some useful purpose, borrow
them from your sleep.  Six, or at most seven hours sleep is, for a
constancy, as much as you or anybody can want; more is only laziness and
dozing; and is, I am persuaded, both unwholesome and stupefying.  If, by
chance, your business, or your pleasures, should keep you up till four or
five o'clock in the morning, I would advise you, however, to rise exactly
at your usual time, that you may not lose the precious morning hours; and
that the want of sleep may force you to go to bed earlier the next night.
This is what I was advised to do when very young, by a very wise man; and
what, I assure you, I always did in the most dissipated part of my life.
I have very often gone to bed at six in the morning and rose,
notwithstanding, at eight; by which means I got many hours in the morning
that my companions lost; and the want of sleep obliged me to keep good
hours the next, or at least the third night.  To this method I owe the
greatest part of my reading: for, from twenty to forty, I should
certainly have read very little, if I had not been up while my
acquaintances were in bed.  Know the true value of time; snatch, seize,
and enjoy every moment of it.  No idleness, no laziness, no
procrastination; never put off till to-morrow what you can do today.
That was the rule of the famous and unfortunate Pensionary De Witt; who,
by strictly following it, found time, not only to do the whole business
of the republic, but to pass his evenings at assemblies and suppers, as
if he had had nothing else to do or think of.

Adieu, my dear friend, for such I shall call you, and as such I shall,
for the future, live with you; for I disclaim all titles which imply an
authority, that I am persuaded you will never give me occasion to
exercise.

'Multos et felices', most sincerely, to Mr. Harte.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:


A joker is near akin to a buffoon. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ablest man will sometimes do weak things . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Above trifles, he is never vehement and eager about them . . . . . . .
Advise those who do not speak elegantly, not to speak. . . . . . . . .
Always does more than he says. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Always some favorite word for the time being . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Arrogant pedant. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ascribing the greatest actions to the most trifling causes . . . . . .
Assign the deepest motives for the most trifling actions . . . . . . .
Attend to the objects of your expenses, but not to the sums. . . . . .
Attention to the inside of books . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Awkward address, ungraceful attitudes and actions. . . . . . . . . . .
Being in the power of every man to hurt him. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Can hardly be said to see what they see. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cardinal Mazarin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cardinal Richelieu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Complaisance due to the custom of the place. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Conjectures supply the defect of unattainable knowledge. . . . . . . .
Connive at knaves, and tolerate fools. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Corneille. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Deep learning is generally tainted with pedantry . . . . . . . . . . .
Deepest learning, without good-breeding, is unwelcome. . . . . . . . .
Desirous of pleasing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dictate to them while you seem to be directed by them. . . . . . . . .
Dissimulation is only to hide our own cards. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Do not become a virtuoso of small wares. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Does not give it you, but he inflicts it upon you. . . . . . . . . . .
Endeavors to please and oblige our fellow-creatures. . . . . . . . . .
Every man pretends to common sense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Every numerous assembly is a mob . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Eyes and the ears are the only roads to the heart. . . . . . . . . . .
Few dare dissent from an established opinion.. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Few things which people in general know less, than how to love . . . .
Flattering people behind their backs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Fools never perceive where they are either ill-timed . . . . . . . . .
Friendship upon very slight acquaintance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Frivolous curiosity about trifles. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Frivolous, idle people, whose time hangs upon their own hands. . . . .
Gain the heart, or you gain nothing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
General conclusions from certain particular principles . . . . . . . .
Good manners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Haste and hurry are very different things. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Herd of mankind can hardly be said to think. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Human nature is always the same. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Hurt those they love by a mistaken indulgence. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Idleness is only the refuge of weak minds. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
If I don't mind his orders he won't mind my draughts.. . . . . . . . .
Inattention. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Inattentive, absent; and distrait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Incontinency of friendship among young fellows . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indiscriminate familiarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Inquisition. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Insist upon your neither piping nor fiddling yourself. . . . . . . . .
Insolent civility. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
It is not sufficient to deserve well; one must please well too . . . .
Know the true value of time. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Known people pretend to vices they had not . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Knows what things are little, and what not . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Learn, if you can, the WHY and the WHEREFORE . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Leave the company, at least as soon as he is wished out of it. . . . .
Led, much oftener by little things than by great ones. . . . . . . . .
Little failings and weaknesses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Love with him, who they think is the most in love with them. . . . . .
Machiavel. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mastery of one's temper. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
May you live as long as you are fit to live, but no longer!. . . . . .
May you rather die before you cease to be fit to live. . . . . . . . .
Moderation with your enemies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Most people have ears, but few have judgment; tickle those ears. . . .
Never implicitly adopt a character upon common fame. . . . . . . . . .
Never would know anything that he had not a mind to know . . . . . . .
Nickname . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
No man is distrait with the man he fears, or the woman he loves. . . .
Nothing in courts is exactly as it appears to be . . . . . . . . . . .
Our understandings are generally the DUPES of our hearts . . . . . . .
People will repay, and with interest too, inattention. . . . . . . . .
Perfection of everything that is worth doing at all. . . . . . . . . .
Pliny. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
POLITICIANS NEITHER LOVE NOR HATE. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Public speaking. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Quietly cherished error, instead of seeking for truth. . . . . . . . .
Reciprocally profess wishes which they seldom form . . . . . . . . . .
Reserve with your friends. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Six, or at most seven hours sleep. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sooner forgive an injury than an insult. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Style. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
There are many avenues to every man. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Those who remarkably affect any one virtue . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Three passions that often put honesty to most severe trials. . . . . .
To great caution, you can join seeming frankness and openness. . . . .
Trifling parts, with their little jargon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Truth leaves no room for compliments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
We have many of those useful prejudices in this country. . . . . . . .
Whatever pleases you most in others. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
World is taken by the outside of things. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .



End of this Project Gutenberg Etext of Letters to His Son, 1749
by The Earl of Chesterfield






LETTER C

LONDON, January 8, O. S.  1750

DEAR BOY: I have seldom or never written to you upon the subject of
religion and morality; your own reason, I am persuaded, has given you
true notions of both; they speak best for themselves; but if they wanted
assistance, you have Mr. Harte at hand, both for precept and example; to
your own reason, therefore, and to Mr. Harte, shall I refer you for the
reality of both, and confine myself in this letter to the decency, the
utility, and the necessity of scrupulously preserving the appearances of
both.  When I say the appearances of religion, I do not mean that you
should talk or act like a missionary or an enthusiast, nor that you
should take up a controversial cudgel against whoever attacks the sect
you are of; this would be both useless and unbecoming your age; but I
mean that you should by no means seem to approve, encourage, or applaud,
those libertine notions, which strike at religions equally, and which are
the poor threadbare topics of halfwits and minute philosophers.  Even
those who are silly enough to laugh at their jokes, are still wise enough
to distrust and detest their characters; for putting moral virtues at the
highest, and religion at the lowest, religion must still be allowed to be
a collateral security, at least, to virtue, and every prudent man will
sooner trust to two securities than to one.  Whenever, therefore, you
happen to be in company with those pretended 'Esprits forts', or with
thoughtless libertines, who laugh at all religion to show their wit, or
disclaim it, to complete their riot, let no word or look of yours
intimate the least approbation; on the contrary, let a silent gravity
express your dislike: but enter not into the subject and decline such
unprofitable and indecent controversies.  Depend upon this truth, that
every man is the worse looked upon, and the less trusted for being
thought to have no religion; in spite of all the pompous and specious
epithets he may assume, of , 'Esprit fort', freethinker, or moral
philosopher; and a wise atheist (if such a thing there is) would, for his
own interest and character in this world, pretend to some religion.

Your moral character must be not only pure, but, like Caesar's wife,
unsuspected.  The least speck or blemish upon it is fatal.  Nothing
degrades and vilifies more, for it excites and unites detestation and
contempt.  There are, however, wretches in the world profligate enough to
explode all notions of moral good and evil; to maintain that they are
merely local, and depend entirely upon the customs and fashions of
different countries; nay, there are still, if possible, more
unaccountable wretches; I mean those who affect to preach and propagate
such absurd and infamous notions without believing them themselves.
These are the devil's hypocrites.  Avoid, as much as possible, the
company of such people; who reflect a degree of discredit and infamy upon
all who converse with them.  But as you may, sometimes, by accident, fall
into such company, take great care that no complaisance, no good-humor,
no warmth of festal mirth, ever make you seem even to acquiesce, much
less to approve or applaud, such infamous doctrines.  On the other hand,
do not debate nor enter into serious argument upon a subject so much
below it: but content yourself with telling these APOSTLES that you know
they are not, serious; that you have a much better opinion of them than
they would have you have; and that, you are very sure, they would not
practice the doctrine they preach.  But put your private mark upon them,
and shun them forever afterward.

There is nothing so delicate as your moral character, and nothing which
it is your interest so much to preserve pure.  Should you be suspected of
injustice, malignity, perfidy, lying, etc., all the parts and knowledge
in the world will never procure you esteem, friendship, or respect.
A strange concurrence of circumstances has sometimes raised very bad men
to high stations, but they have been raised like criminals to a pillory,
where their persons and their crimes, by being more conspicuous, are only
the more known, the more detested, and the more pelted and insulted.
If, in any case whatsoever, affectation and ostentation are pardonable,
it is in the case of morality; though even there, I would not advise you
to a pharisaical pomp of virtue.  But I will recommend to you a most
scrupulous tenderness for your moral character, and the utmost care not
to say or do the least thing that may ever so slightly taint it.  Show
yourself, upon all occasions, the advocate, the friend, but not the bully
of virtue.  Colonel Chartres, whom you have certainly heard of (who was,
I believe, the most notorious blasted rascal in the world, and who had,
by all sorts of crimes, amassed immense wealth), was so sensible of the
disadvantage of a bad character, that I heard him once say, in his
impudent, profligate manner, that though he would not give one farthing
for virtue, he would give ten thousand pounds for a character; because he
should get a hundred thousand pounds by it; whereas, he was so blasted,
that he had no longer an opportunity of cheating people.  Is it possible,
then, that an honest man can neglect what a wise rogue would purchase so
dear?

There is one of the vices above mentioned, into which people of good
education, and, in the main, of good principles, sometimes fall, from
mistaken notions of skill, dexterity, and self-defense, I mean lying;
though it is inseparably attended with more infamy and loss than any
other.  The prudence and necessity of often concealing the truth,
insensibly seduces people to violate it.  It is the only art of mean
capacities, and the only refuge of mean spirits.  Whereas, concealing the
truth, upon proper occasions, is as prudent and as innocent, as telling a
lie, upon any occasion, is infamous and foolish.  I will state you a case
in your own department.  Suppose you are employed at a foreign court, and
that the minister of that court is absurd or impertinent enough to ask
you what your instructions are? will you tell him a lie, which as soon as
found out (and found out it certainly will be) must destroy your credit,
blast your character, and render you useless there?  No.  Will you tell
him the truth then, and betray your trust?  As certainly, No.  But you
will answer with firmness, That you are surprised at such a question,
that you are persuaded he does not expect an answer to it; but that, at
all events, he certainly will not have one.  Such an answer will give him
confidence in you; he will conceive an opinion of your veracity, of which
opinion you may afterward make very honest and fair advantages.  But if,
in negotiations, you are looked upon as a liar and a trickster, no
confidence will be placed in you, nothing will be communicated to you,
and you will be in the situation of a man who has been burned in the
cheek; and who, from that mark, cannot afterward get an honest livelihood
if he would, but must continue a thief.

Lord Bacon, very justly, makes a distinction between simulation and
dissimulation; and allows the latter rather than the former; but still
observes, that they are the weaker sort of politicians who have recourse
to either.  A man who has strength of mind and strength of parts, wants
neither of them.  Certainly (says he) the ablest men that ever were, have
all had an openness and frankness of dealing, and a name of certainty and
veracity; but then, they were like horses well managed; for they could
tell, passing well, when to stop or turn; and at such times, when they
thought the case indeed required some dissimulation, if then they used
it, it came to pass that the former opinion spread abroad of their good
faith and clearness of dealing, made them almost invisible.

There are people who indulge themselves in a sort of lying, which they
reckon innocent, and which in one sense is so; for it hurts nobody but
themselves.  This sort of lying is the spurious offspring of vanity,
begotten upon folly: these people deal in the marvelous; they have seen
some things that never existed; they have seen other things which they
never really saw, though they did exist, only because they were thought
worth seeing.  Has anything remarkable been said or done in any place,
or in any company? they immediately present and declare themselves eye or
ear witnesses of it.  They have done feats themselves, unattempted, or at
least unperformed by others.  They are always the heroes of their own
fables; and think that they gain consideration, or at least present
attention, by it.  Whereas, in truth, all that they get is ridicule and
contempt, not without a good degree of distrust; for one must naturally
conclude, that he who will tell any lie from idle vanity, will not
scruple telling a greater for interest.  Had I really seen anything so
very extraordinary as to be almost incredible I would keep it to myself,
rather than by telling it give anybody room to doubt, for one minute, of
my veracity.  It is most certain, that the reputation of chastity is not
so necessary for a women, as that of veracity is for a man; and with
reason; for it is possible for a woman to be virtuous, though not
strictly chaste, but it is not possible for a man to be virtuous without
strict veracity.  The slips of the poor women are sometimes mere bodily
frailties; but a lie in a man is a vice of the mind and of the heart.
For God's sake be scrupulously jealous of the purity of your moral
character; keep it immaculate, unblemished, unsullied; and it will be
unsuspected.  Defamation and calumny never attack, where there is no weak
place; they magnify, but they do not create.

There is a very great difference between the purity of character, which I
so earnestly recommend to you, and the stoical gravity and austerity of
character, which I do by no means recommend to you.  At your, age,
I would no more wish you to be a Cato than a Clodius.  Be, and be
reckoned, a man of pleasure as well as a man of business.  Enjoy this
happy and giddy time of your life; shine in the pleasures, and in the
company of people of your own age.  This is all to be done, and indeed
only can be done, without the least taint to the purity of your moral
character; for those mistaken young fellows, who think to shine by an
impious or immoral licentiousness, shine only from their stinking, like
corrupted flesh, in the dark.  Without this purity, you can have no
dignity of character; and without dignity of character it is impossible
to rise in the world.  You must be respectable, if you will be respected.
I have known people slattern away their character, without really
polluting it; the consequence of which has been, that they have become
innocently contemptible; their merit has been dimmed, their pretensions
unregarded, and all their views defeated.  Character must be kept bright,
as well as clean.  Content yourself with mediocrity in nothing.  In
purity of character and in politeness of manners labor to excel all, if
you wish to equal many.  Adieu.




LETTER CI

LONDON, January 11, O. S.  1750

MY DEAR FRIEND: Yesterday I received a letter from Mr. Harte, of the 31st
December, N. S., which I will answer soon; and for which I desire you to
return him my thanks now.  He tells me two things that give me great
satisfaction: one is that there are very few English at Rome; the other
is, that you frequent the best foreign companies.  This last is a very
good symptom; for a man of sense is never desirous to frequent those
companies, where he is not desirous to please, or where he finds that he
displeases; it will not be expected in those companies, that, at your
age, you should have the 'Garbo', the 'Disinvoltura', and the
'Leggiadria' of a man of five-and-twenty, who has been long used to keep
the best companies; and therefore do not be discouraged, and think
yourself either slighted or laughed at, because you see others, older and
more used to the world, easier, more familiar, and consequently rather
better received in those companies than yourself.  In time your turn will
come; and if you do but show an inclination, a desire to please, though
you should be embarrassed or even err in the means, which must
necessarily happen to you at first, yet the will (to use a vulgar
expression) will be taken for the deed; and people, instead of laughing
at you, will be glad to instruct you.  Good sense can only give you the
great outlines of good-breeding; but observation and usage can alone give
you the delicate touches, and the fine coloring.  You will naturally
endeavor to show the utmost respect to people of certain ranks and
characters, and consequently you will show it; but the proper, the
delicate manner of showing that respect, nothing but observation and time
can give.

I remember that when, with all the awkwardness and rust of Cambridge
about me, I was first introduced into good company, I was frightened out
of my wits.  I was determined to be, what I thought, civil; I made fine
low bows, and placed myself below everybody; but when I was spoken to,
or attempted to speak myself, 'obstupui, steteruntque comae, et vox
faucibus haesit'.  If I saw people whisper, I was sure it was at me; and
I thought myself the sole object of either the ridicule or the censure of
the whole company, who, God knows, did not trouble their heads about me.
In this way I suffered, for some time, like a criminal at the bar; and
should certainly have renounced all polite company forever, if I had not
been so convinced of the absolute necessity of forming my manners upon
those of the best companies, that I determined to persevere and suffer
anything, or everything, rather than not compass that point.  Insensibly
it grew easier to me; and I began not to bow so ridiculously low, and to
answer questions without great hesitation or stammering: if, now and
then, some charitable people, seeing my embarrassment, and being
'desoevre' themselves, came and spoke to me, I considered them as angels
sent to comfort me, and that gave me a little courage.  I got more soon
afterward, and was intrepid enough to go up to a fine woman, and tell her
that I thought it a warm day; she answered me, very civilly, that she
thought so too; upon which the conversation ceased, on my part, for some
time, till she, good-naturedly resuming it, spoke to me thus: "I see your
embarrassment, and I am sure that the few words you said to me cost you a
great deal; but do not be discouraged for that reason, and avoid good
company.  We see that you desire to please, and that is the main point;
you want only the manner, and you think that you want it still more than
you do.  You must go through your noviciate before you can profess good-
breeding: and, if you will be my novice, I will present you my
acquaintance as such."

You will easily imagine how much this speech pleased me, and how
awkwardly I answered it; I hemmed once or twice (for it gave me a bur in
my throat) before I could tell her that I was very much obliged to her;
that it was true, that I had a great deal of reason to distrust my own
behavior, not being used to fine company; and that I should be proud of
being her novice, and receiving her instructions.

As soon as I had fumbled out this answer, she called up three or four
people to her, and said: Savez-vous (for she was a foreigner, and I was
abroad) que j'ai entrepris ce jeune homme, et qu'il le faut rassurer?
Pour moi, je crois en avoir fait---- [Do you know that I have undertaken
this young man, and he must be encouraged?  As for me, I think I have
made a conquest of him; for he just now ventured to tell me, although
tremblingly, that it is warm.  You will assist me in polishing him.  He
must necessarily have a passion for somebody; if he does not think me
worthy of being the object, he will seek out some other.  However, my
novice, do not disgrace yourself by frequenting opera girls and
actresses; who will not require of you sentiments and politeness, but
will be your ruin in every respect.  I repeat it to you, my, friend, if
you should get into low, mean company, you will be undone.  Those
creatures will destroy your fortune and your health, corrupt your morals,
and you will never acquire the style of good company.]

The company laughed at this lecture, and I was stunned with it.  I did
not know whether she was serious or in jest.  By turns I was pleased,
ashamed, encouraged, and dejected.  But when I found afterward, that both
she, and those to whom she had presented me, countenanced and protected
me in company, I gradually got more assurance, and began not to be
ashamed of endeavoring to be civil.  I copied the best masters, at first
servilely, afterward more freely, and at last I joined habit and
invention.

All this will happen to you, if you persevere in the desire of pleasing
and shining as a man of the world; that part of your character is the
only one about which I have at present the least doubt.  I cannot
entertain the least suspicion of your moral character; your learned
character is out of question.  Your polite character is now the only
remaining object that gives me the least anxiety; and you are now in the
right way of finishing it.  Your constant collision with good company
will, of course, smooth and polish you.  I could wish that you would say,
to the five or six men or women with whom you are the most acquainted,
that you are sensible that, from youth and inexperience, you must make
many mistakes in good-breeding; that you beg of them to correct you,
without reserve, wherever they see you fail; and that you shall take such
admonition as the strongest proofs of their friendship.  Such a
confession and application will be very engaging to those to whom you
make them.  They will tell others of them, who will be pleased with that
disposition, and, in a friendly manner, tell you of any little slip or
error.  The Duke de Nivernois --[ At that time Ambassador from the Court
of France to Rome.]-- would, I am sure, be charmed, if you dropped such a
thing to him; adding, that you loved to address yourself always to the
best masters.  Observe also the different modes of good-breeding of
several nations, and conform yourself to them respectively.  Use an easy
civility with the French, more ceremony with the Italians, and still more
with the Germans; but let it be without embarrassment and with ease.
Bring it by use to be habitual to you; for, if it seems unwilling and
forced; it will never please.  'Omnis Aristippum decuit color, et res'.
Acquire an easiness and versatility of manners, as well as of mind; and,
like the chameleon, take the hue of the company you are with.

There is a sort of veteran women of condition, who having lived always in
the 'grande monde', and having possibly had some gallantries, together
with the experience of five-and-twenty, or thirty years, form a young
fellow better than all the rules that can be given him.  These women,
being past their bloom, are extremely flattered by the least attention
from a young fellow; and they will point out to him those manners and
ATTENTIONS that pleased and engaged them, when they were in the pride of
their youth and beauty.  Wherever you go, make some of those women your
friends; which a very little matter will do.  Ask their advice, tell them
your doubts or difficulties as to your behavior; but take great care not
to drop one word of their experience; for experience implies age; and the
suspicion of age, no woman, let her be ever so old, ever forgives.  I
long for your picture, which Mr. Harte tells me is now drawing.  I want
to see your countenance, your air, and even your dress; the better they
all three are, the better I am not wise enough to despise any one of
them.  Your dress, at least, is in your own power, and I hope that you
mind it to a proper degree.  Yours, Adieu.




LETTER CII

LONDON, January 18, O. S.  1750

MY DEAR FRIEND: I consider the solid part of your little edifice as so
near being finished and completed, that my only remaining care is about
the embellishments; and that must now be your principal care too. Adorn
yourself with all those graces and accomplishments, which, without
solidity, are frivolous; but without which solidity is, to a great
degree, useless.  Take one man, with a very moderate degree of knowledge,
but with a pleasing figure, a prepossessing address, graceful in all that
he says and does, polite, 'liant', and, in short, adorned with all the
lesser talents: and take another man, with sound sense and profound
knowledge, but without the above-mentioned advantages; the former will
not only get the better of the latter, in every pursuit of every KIND,
but in truth there will be no sort of competition between them.  But can
every man acquire these advantages?  I say, Yes, if he please, suppose he
is in a situation and in circumstances to frequent good company.
Attention, observation, and imitation, will most infallibly do it.

When you see a man whose first 'abord' strikes you, prepossesses you in
his favor, and makes you entertain a good opinion of him, you do not know
why, analyze that 'abord', and examine, within yourself, the several
parts that composed it; and you will generally find it to be the result,
the happy assemblage of modesty unembarrassed, respect without timidity,
a genteel, but unaffected attitude of body and limbs, an open, cheerful,
but unsmirking countenance, and a dress, by no means negligent, and yet
not foppish.  Copy him, then, not servilely, but as some of the greatest
masters of painting have copied others; insomuch that their copies have
been equal to the originals, both as to beauty and freedom.  When you see
a man who is universally allowed to shine as an agreeable, well-bred man,
and a fine gentleman (as, for example, the Duke de Nivernois), attend to
him, watch him carefully; observe in what manner he addresses himself to
his superiors, how he lives with his equals, and how he treats his
inferiors.  Mind his turn of conversation in the several situations of
morning visits, the table, and the evening amusements.  Imitate, without
mimicking him; and be his duplicate, but not his ape. You will find that
he takes care never to say or do any thing that can be construed into a
slight, or a negligence; or that can, in any degree, mortify people's
vanity and self-love; on the contrary, you will perceive that he makes
people pleased with him, by making them first pleased with themselves: he
shows respect, regard, esteem and attention, where they are severally
proper: he sows them with care, and he reaps them in plenty.

These amiable accomplishments are all to be acquired by use and
imitation; for we are, in truth, more than half what we are by imitation.
The great point is, to choose good models and to study them with care.
People insensibly contract, not only the air, the manners, and the vices,
of those with whom they commonly converse, but their virtues too, and
even their way of thinking.  This is so true, that I have known very
plain understandings catch a certain degree of wit, by constantly
conversing with those who had a great deal.  Persist, therefore, in
keeping the best company, and you will insensibly become like them; but
if you add attention and observation, you will very soon become one of
them.  The inevitable contagion of company shows you the necessity of
keeping the best, and avoiding all other; for in everyone, something will
stick.  You have hitherto, I confess, had very few opportunities of
keeping polite company.  Westminster school is, undoubtedly, the seat of
illiberal manners and brutal behavior.  Leipsig, I suppose, is not the
seat of refined and elegant manners.  Venice, I believe, has done
something; Rome, I hope, will do a great deal more; and Paris will, I
dare say, do all that you want; always supposing that you frequent the
best companies, and in the intention of improving and forming yourself;
for without that intention nothing will do.

I here subjoin a list of all those necessary, ornamental accomplishments
(without which, no man living can either please, or rise in the world)
which hitherto I fear you want, and which only require your care and
attention to possess.

To speak elegantly, whatever language you speak in; without which nobody
will hear you with pleasure, and consequently you will speak to very
little purpose.

An agreeable and distinct elocution; without which nobody will hear you
with patience: this everybody may acquire, who is not born with some
imperfection in the organs of speech.  You are not; and therefore it is
wholly in your power.  You need take much less pains for it than
Demosthenes did.

A distinguished politeness of manners and address; which common sense,
observation, good company, and imitation, will infallibly give you if you
will accept it.

A genteel carriage and graceful motions, with the air of a man of
fashion: a good dancing-master, with some care on your part, and some
imitation of those who excel, will soon bring this about.

To be extremely clean in your person, and perfectly well dressed,,
according to the fashion, be that what it will: Your negligence of your
dress while you were a schoolboy was pardonable, but would not be so now.

Upon the whole, take it for granted, that without these accomplishments,
all you know, and all you can do, will avail you very little.  Adieu.




LETTER CIII

LONDON, January 25, O. S.  1750

MY DEAR FRIEND: It is so long since I have heard from you, that I suppose
Rome engrosses every moment of your time; and if it engrosses it in the
manner I could wish, I willingly give up my share of it.  I would rather
'prodesse quam conspici'.  Put out your time, but to good interest; and I
do not desire to borrow much of it.  Your studies, the respectable
remains of antiquity, and your evening amusements cannot, and indeed
ought not, to leave you much time to write.  You will, probably, never
see Rome again; and therefore you ought to see it well now; by seeing it
well, I do not mean only the buildings, statues, and paintings, though
they undoubtedly deserve your attention: but I mean seeing into the
constitution and government of it.  But these things certainly occur to
your own common sense.

How go, your pleasures at Rome?  Are you in fashion there? that is, do
you live with the people who are? --the only way of being so yourself, in
time.  Are you domestic enough in any considerable house to be called 'le
petit Stanhope'?  Has any woman of fashion and good-breeding taken the
trouble of abusing and laughing at you amicably to your face?  Have you
found a good 'decrotteuse'.   For those are the steps by which you must
rise to politeness.  I do not presume to ask if you have any attachment,
because I believe you will not make me your confident; but this I will
say, eventually, that if you have one, 'il faut bien payer d'attentions
et de petits soin', if you would have your sacrifice propitiously
received.  Women are not so much taken by beauty as men are, but prefer
those men who show them the most attention.

               Would you engage the lovely fair?
               With gentlest manners treat her;
               With tender looks and graceful air,
               In softest accents greet her.

               Verse were but vain, the Muses fail,
               Without the Graces' aid;
               The God of Verse could not prevail
               To stop the flying maid.

               Attention by attentions gain,
               And merit care by cares;
               So shall the nymph reward your pain;
               And Venus crown your prayers.
                                        Probatum est.


A man's address and manner weigh much more with them than his beauty;
and, without them, the Abbati and Monsignori will get the better of you.
This address and manner should be exceedingly respectful, but at the same
time easy and unembarrassed.  Your chit-chat or 'entregent' with them
neither can, nor ought to be very solid; but you should take care to turn
and dress up your trifles prettily, and make them every now and then
convey indirectly some little piece of flattery.  A fan, a riband, or a
head-dress, are great materials for gallant dissertations, to one who has
got 'le ton leger et aimable de la bonne compagnie'.  At all events, a
man had better talk too much to women, than too little; they take silence
for dullness, unless where they think that the passion they have inspired
occasions it; and in that case they adopt the notion, that

                    Silence in love betrays more woe
                    Than words, though ne'er so witty;
                    The beggar that is dumb, we know,
                    Deserves a double pity.

'A propos' of this subject: what progress do you make in that language,
in which Charles the Fifth said that he would choose to speak to his
mistress?  Have you got all the tender diminutives, in 'etta, ina', and
'ettina', which, I presume, he alluded to?  You already possess, and, I
hope, take care not to forget, that language which he reserved for his
horse.  You are absolutely master, too, of that language in which he said
he would converse with men; French.  But, in every language, pray attend
carefully to the choice of your words, and to the turn of your
expression.  Indeed, it is a point of very great consequence.  To be
heard with success, you must be heard with pleasure: words are the dress
of thoughts; which should no more be presented in rags, tatters, and
dirt, than your person should.  By the way, do you mind your person and
your dress sufficiently?  Do you take great care of your teeth?  Pray
have them put in order by the best operator at Rome.  Are you be-laced,
bepowdered, and be-feathered, as other young fellows are, and should be?
At your age, 'il faut du brillant, et meme un peu de fracas, mais point
de mediocre; il faut un air vif, aise et noble.  Avec les hommes, un
maintien respectueux et en meme tems respectable; avec les femmes, un
caquet leger, enjoue, et badin, mais toujours fort poli'.

To give you an opportunity of exerting your talents, I send you, here
inclosed, a letter of recommendation from Monsieur Villettes to Madame de
Simonetti at Milan; a woman of the first fashion and consideration there;
and I shall in my next send you another from the same person to Madame
Clerici, at the same place.  As these two ladies' houses are the resort
of all the people of fashion at Milan, those two recommendations will
introduce you to them all.  Let me know, in due time, if you have
received these two letters, that I may have them renewed, in case of
accidents.

Adieu, my dear friend! Study hard; divert yourself heartily; distinguish
carefully between the pleasures of a man of fashion, and the vices of a
scoundrel; pursue the former, and abhor the latter, like a man of sense.




LETTER CIV

LONDON, February 5, O. S. 1750

MY DEAR FRIEND: Very few people are good economists of their fortune,
and still fewer of their time; and yet of the two, the latter is the most
precious.  I heartily wish you to be a good economist of both: and you
are now of an age to begin to think seriously of those two important
articles.  Young people are apt to think that they have so much time
before them, that they may squander what they please of it, and yet have
enough left; as very great fortunes have frequently seduced people to a
ruinous profusion.  Fatal mistakes, always repented of, but always too
late!  Old Mr. Lowndes, the famous Secretary of the Treasury in the
reigns of King William, Queen Anne, and King George the First, used to
say,--TAKE CARE OF THE PENCE, AND THE POUNDS WILL TAKE CARE OF
THEMSELVES.
To this maxim, which he not only preached but practiced, his two
grandsons
at this time owe the very considerable fortunes that he left them.

This holds equally true as to time; and I most earnestly recommend to you
the care of those minutes and quarters of hours, in the course of the
day, which people think too short to deserve their attention; and yet, if
summed up at the end of the year, would amount to a very considerable
portion of time.  For example: you are to be at such a place at twelve,
by appointment; you go out at eleven, to make two or three visits first;
those persons are not at home, instead of sauntering away that
intermediate time at a coffeehouse, and possibly alone, return home,
write a letter, beforehand, for the ensuing post, or take up a good book,
I do not mean Descartes, Malebranche, Locke, or Newton, by way of
dipping; but some book of rational amusement and detached pieces, as
Horace, Boileau, Waller, La Bruyere, etc.  This will be so much time
saved, and by no means ill employed.  Many people lose a great deal of
time by reading: for they read frivolous and idle books, such as the
absurd romances of the two last centuries; where characters, that never
existed, are insipidly displayed, and sentiments that were never felt,
pompously described: the Oriental ravings and extravagances of the
"Arabian Nights," and Mogul tales; or, the new flimsy brochures that now
swarm in France, of fairy tales, 'Reflections sur le coeur et l'esprit,
metaphysique de l'amour, analyse des beaux sentimens', and such sort of
idle frivolous stuff, that nourishes and improves the mind just as much
as whipped cream would the body.  Stick to the best established books in
every language; the celebrated poets, historians, orators, or
philosophers.  By these means (to use a city metaphor) you will make
fifty PER CENT.  Of that time, of which others do not make above three or
four, or probably nothing at all.

Many people lose a great deal of their time by laziness; they loll and
yawn in a great chair, tell themselves that they have not time to begin
anything then, and that it will do as well another time.  This is a most
unfortunate disposition, and the greatest obstruction to both knowledge
and business.  At your age, you have no right nor claim to laziness; I
have, if I please, being emeritus.  You are but just listed in the world,
and must be active, diligent, indefatigable.  If ever you propose
commanding with dignity, you must serve up to it with diligence.  Never
put off till tomorrow what you can do to-day.

Dispatch is the soul of business; and nothing contributes more to
dispatch than method.  Lay down a method for everything, and stick to it
inviolably, as far as unexpected incidents may allow.  Fix one certain
hour and day in the week for your accounts, and keep them together in
their proper order; by which means they will require very little time,
and you can never be much cheated.  Whatever letters and papers you keep,
docket and tie them up in their respective classes, so that you may
instantly have recourse to any one.  Lay down a method also for your
reading, for which you allot a certain share of your mornings; let it be
in a consistent and consecutive course, and not in that desultory and
unmethodical manner, in which many people read scraps of different
authors, upon different subjects.  Keep a useful and short commonplace
book of what you read, to help your memory only, and not for pedantic
quotations.  Never read history without having maps and a chronological
book, or tables, lying by you, and constantly recurred to; without which
history is only a confused heap of facts.  One method more I recommend to
you, by which I have found great benefit, even in the most dissipated
part of my life; that is, to rise early, and at the same hour every
morning, how late soever you may have sat up the night before.  This
secures you an hour or two, at least, of reading or reflection before the
common interruptions of the morning begin; and it will save your
constitution, by forcing you to go to bed early, at least one night in
three.

You will say, it may be, as many young people would, that all this order
and method is very troublesome, only fit for dull people, and a
disagreeable restraint upon the noble spirit and fire of youth.  I deny
it; and assert, on the contrary, that it will procure you both more time
and more taste for your pleasures; and, so far from being troublesome to
you, that after you have pursued it a month, it would be troublesome to
you to lay it aside.  Business whets the appetite, and gives a taste to
pleasure, as exercise does to food; and business can never be done
without method; it raises the spirits for pleasures; and a SPECTACLE, a
ball, an assembly, will much more sensibly affect a man who has employed,
than a man who has lost, the preceding part of the day; nay, I will
venture to say, that a fine lady will seem to have more charms to a man
of study or business, than to a saunterer.  The same listlessness runs
through his whole conduct, and he is as insipid in his pleasures, as
inefficient in everything else.

I hope you earn your pleasures, and consequently taste them; for, by the
way, I know a great many men, who call themselves men of pleasure, but
who, in truth, have none.  They adopt other people's indiscriminately,
but without any taste of their own.  I have known them often inflict
excesses upon themselves because they thought them genteel; though they
sat as awkwardly upon them as other people's clothes would have done.
Have no pleasures but your own, and then you will shine in them.  What
are yours?  Give me a short history of them.  'Tenez-vous votre coin a
table, et dans les bonnes compagnies? y brillez-vous du cote de la
politesse, de d'enjouement, du badinage?  Etes-vous galant?  Filex-vous
le parfait amour?  Est-il question de flechir par vos soins et par vos
attentions les rigueurs de quelque fiere Princesse'?  You may safely
trust me; for though I am a severe censor of vice and folly, I am a
friend and advocate for pleasures, and will contribute all in my power to
yours.

There is a certain dignity to be kept up in pleasures, as well as in
business.  In love, a man may lose his heart with dignity; but if he
loses his nose, he loses his character into the bargain.  At table, a man
may with decency have a distinguishing palate; but indiscriminate
voraciousness degrades him to a glutton.  A man may play with decency;
but if he games, he is disgraced.  Vivacity and wit make a man shine in
company; but trite jokes and loud laughter reduce him to a buffoon. [see
Mark Twain's identical advice in his 'Speeches'  D.W.]  Every virtue,
they say, has its kindred vice; every pleasure, I am sure, has its
neighboring disgrace.  Mark carefully, therefore, the line that separates
them, and rather stop a yard short, than step an inch beyond it.

I wish to God that you had as much pleasure in following my advice, as I
have in giving it you! and you may the more easily have it, as I give you
none that is inconsistent with your pleasure.  In all that I say to you,
it is your interest alone that I consider: trust to my experience; you
know you may to my affection.  Adieu.

I have received no letter yet from you or Mr. Harte.




LETTER CV

LONDON, February 8, O. S.  1750

MY DEAR FRIEND: You have, by this time, I hope and believe, made such a
progress in the Italian language, that you can read it with ease; I mean,
the easy books in it; and indeed, in that, as well as in every other
language, the easiest books are generally the best; for, whatever author
is obscure and difficult in his own language, certainly does not think
clearly.  This is, in my opinion, the case of a celebrated Italian
author; to whom the Italians, from the admiration they have of him, have
given the epithet of il divino; I mean Dante.  Though I formerly knew
Italian extremely well, I could never understand him; for which reason I
had done with him, fully convinced that he was not worth the pains
necessary to understand him.

The good Italian authors are, in my mind, but few; I mean, authors of
invention; for there are, undoubtedly, very good historians and excellent
translators.  The two poets worth your reading, and, I was going to say,
the only two, are Tasso and Ariosto.  Tasso's 'Gierusalemme Liberata' is
altogether unquestionably a fine poem, though--it has some low, and many
false thoughts in it: and Boileau very justly makes it the mark of a bad
taste, to compare 'le Clinquant Tasse a l' Or de Virgile'.  The image,
with which he adorns the introduction of his epic poem, is low and
disgusting; it is that of a froward, sick, puking child, who is deceived
into a dose of necessary physic by 'du bon-bon'.  These verses are these:

          "Cosi all'egro fanciul porgiamo aspersi
          Di soavi licor gli orli del vaso:
          Succhi amari ingannato intanto ei beve,
          E dall' inganno suo vita riceve."

However, the poem, with all its faults about it, may justly be called a
fine one.

If fancy, imagination, invention, description, etc., constitute a poet,
Ariosto is, unquestionably, a great one.  His "Orlando," it is true, is a
medley of lies and truths--sacred and profane--wars, loves, enchantments,
giants, madheroes, and adventurous damsels, but then, he gives it you
very fairly for what it is, and does not pretend to put it upon you for
the true 'epopee', or epic poem.  He says:

          "Le Donne, i Cavalier, l'arme, gli amori
          Le cortesie, l'audaci imprese, io canto."

The connections of his stories are admirable, his reflections just, his
sneers and ironies incomparable, and his painting excellent.  When
Angelica, after having wandered over half the world alone with Orlando,
pretends, notwithstanding,

          "--- ch'el fior virginal cosi avea salvo,
          Come selo porto dal matern' alvo."

The author adds, very gravely, --

          "Forse era ver, ma non pero credibile
          A chi del senso suo fosse Signore."

Astolpho's being carried to the moon by St. John, in order to look for
Orlando's lost wits, at the end of the 34th book, and the many lost
things that he finds there, is a most happy extravagancy, and contains,
at the same time, a great deal of sense.  I would advise you to read this
poem with attention.  It is, also, the source of half the tales, novels,
and plays, that have been written since.

The 'Pastor Fido' of Guarini is so celebrated, that you should read it;
but in reading it, you will judge of the great propriety of the
characters.  A parcel of shepherds and shepherdesses, with the TRUE
PASTORAL' SIMPLICITY, talk metaphysics, epigrams, 'concetti', and
quibbles, by the hour to each other.

The Aminto del Tasso, is much more what it is intended to be, a pastoral:
the shepherds, indeed, have their 'concetti' and their antitheses; but
are not quite so sublime and abstracted as those in Pastor Fido.  I think
that you will like it much the best of the two.

Petrarca is, in my mind, a sing-song, love-sick poet; much admired,
however, by the Italians: but an Italian who should think no better of
him than I do, would certainly say that he deserved his 'Laura' better
than his 'Lauro'; and that wretched quibble would be reckoned an
excellent piece of Italian wit.

The Italian prose-writers (of invention I mean) which I would recommend
to your acquaintance, are Machiavello and Boccacio; the former, for the
established reputation which he has acquired, of a consummate politician
(whatever my own private sentiments may be of either his politics or his
morality): the latter, for his great invention, and for his natural and
agreeable manner of telling his stories.

Guicciardini, Bentivoglio, Davila, etc., are excellent historians, and
deserved being read with attention.  The nature of history checks, a
little, the flights of Italian imaginations; which, in works of
invention, are very high indeed.  Translations curb them still more: and
their translations of the classics are incomparable; particularly the
first ten, translated in the time of Leo the Tenth, and inscribed to him,
under the title of Collana.  That original Collana has been lengthened
since; and if I mistake not, consist now of one hundred and ten volumes.

From what I have said, you will easily guess that I meant to put you upon
your guard; and not let your fancy be dazzled and your taste corrupted by
the concetti, the quaintnesses, and false thoughts, which are too much
the characteristics of the Italian and Spanish authors.  I think you are
in no great danger, as your taste has been formed upon the best ancient
models, the Greek and Latin authors of the best ages, who indulge
themselves in none of the puerilities I have hinted at.  I think I may
say, with truth; that true wit, sound taste, and good sense, are now, as
it were, engrossed by France and England.  Your old acquaintances, the
Germans, I fear, are a little below them; and your new acquaintances, the
Italians, are a great deal too much above them.  The former, I doubt,
crawl a little; the latter, I am sure, very often fly out of sight.

I recommended to you a good many years ago, and I believe you then read,
La maniere de bien penser dans les ouvrages d'esprit par le Pere
Bouhours; and I think it is very well worth your reading again, now that
you can judge of it better.  I do not know any book that contributes more
to form a true taste; and you find there, into the bargain, the most
celebrated passages, both of the ancients and the moderns, which refresh
your memory with what you have formerly read in them separately.  It is
followed by a book much of the same size, by the same author, entitled,
'Suite des Pensees ingenieuses'.

To do justice to the best English and French authors, they have not given
into that false taste; they allow no thoughts to be good, that are not
just and founded upon truth.  The age of Lewis XIV. was very like the
Augustan; Boileau, Moliere, La Fontaine, Racine,, etc., established the
true, and exposed the false taste.  The reign of King Charles II.
(meritorious in no other respect) banished false taste out of England,
and proscribed puns, quibbles, acrostics, etc.  Since that, false wit has
renewed its attacks, and endeavored to recover its lost empire, both in
England and France; but without success; though, I must say, with more
success in France than in England.  Addison, Pope, and Swift, have
vigorously defended the rights of good sense, which is more than can be
said of their contemporary French authors, who have of late had a great
tendency to 'le faux brillant', 'le raffinement, et l'entortillement'.
And Lord Roscommon would be more in the right now, than he was then, in
saying, that,

          "The English bullion of one sterling line,
          Drawn to French wire, would through whole pages shine."

Lose no time, my dear child, I conjure you, in forming your taste, your
manners, your mind, your everything; you have but two years' time to do
it in; for whatever you are, to a certain degree, at twenty, you will be,
more or less, all the rest of your life.  May it be a long and happy one.
Adieu.




LETTER CVI

LONDON, February 22, O. S.  1750

MY DEAR FRIEND: If the Italian of your letter to Lady Chesterfield was
all your own, I am very well satisfied with the progress which you have
made in that language in so short a time; according to that gradation,
you will, in a very little time more, be master of it.  Except at the
French Ambassador's, I believe you hear only Italian spoke; for the
Italians speak very little French, and that little generally very ill.
The French are even with them, and generally speak Italian as ill; for I
never knew a Frenchman in my life who could pronounce the Italian ce, ci,
or ge, gi.  Your desire of pleasing the Roman ladies will of course give
you not only the desire, but the means of speaking to them elegantly in
their own language.  The Princess Borghese, I am told, speaks French both
ill and unwillingly; and therefore you should make a merit to her of your
application to her language.  She is, by a kind of prescription (longer
than she would probably wish), at the head of the 'beau monde' at Rome;
and can, consequently, establish or destroy a young fellow's fashionable
character.  If she declares him 'amabile e leggiadro', others will think
him so, or at least those who do not will not dare to say so.  There are
in every great town some such women, whose rank, beauty, and fortune have
conspired to place them at the head of the fashion.  They have generally
been gallant, but within certain decent bounds.  Their gallantries have
taught, both them and their admirers, good-breeding; without which they
could keep up no dignity, but would be vilified by those very gallantries
which put them in vogue.  It is with these women, as with ministers and
favorites at court; they decide upon fashion and characters, as these do
of fortunes and preferments.  Pay particular court, therefore, wherever
you are, to these female sovereigns of the 'beau monde'; their
recommendation is a passport through all the realms of politeness.
But then, remember that they require minute officious attentions.  You
should, if possible, guess at and anticipate all their little fancies and
inclinations; make yourself familiarly and domestically useful to them,
by offering yourself for all their little commissions, and assisting in
doing the honors of their houses, and entering with seeming unction into
all their little grievances, bustles, and views; for they are always
busy.  If you are once 'ben ficcato' at the Palazzo Borghese, you twill
soon be in fashion at Rome; and being in fashion will soon fashion you;
for that is what you must now think of very seriously.

I am sorry that there is no good dancing-master at Rome, to form your
exterior air and carriage; which, I doubt, are not yet the genteelest in
the world.  But you may, and I hope you will, in the meantime, observe
the air and carriage of those who are reckoned to have the best, and form
your own upon them.  Ease, gracefulness, and dignity, compose the air and
address of a man of fashion; which is as unlike the affected attitudes
and motions of a 'petit maitre', as it is to the awkward, negligent,
clumsy, and slouching manner of a booby.

I am extremely pleased with the account Mr. Harte has given me of the
allotment of your time at Rome.  Those five hours every morning, which
you employ in serious studies with Mr. Harte, are laid out with great
interest, and will make you rich all the rest of your life.  I do not
look upon the subsequent morning hours, which you pass with your
Ciceroni, to be ill-disposed of; there is a kind of connection between
them; and your evening diversions in good company are, in their way, as
useful and necessary.  This is the way for you to have both weight and
lustre in the world; and this is the object which I always had in view in
your education.

Adieu, my friend! go on and prosper.

Mr. Grevenkop has just received Mr. Harte's letter of the 19th N. S.




LETTER CVII

LONDON, March 8, O. S.  1750

Young as you are, I hope you are in haste to live; by living, I mean
living with lustre and honor to yourself, with utility to society; doing
what may deserve to be written, or writing what may deserve to be read; I
should wish both.  Those who consider life in that light, will not idly
lavish one moment.  The present moments are the only ones we are sure of,
and as such the most valuable; but yours are doubly so at your age; for
the credit, the dignity, the comfort, and the pleasure of all your future
moments, depend upon the use you make of your present ones.

I am extremely satisfied with your present manner of employing your time;
but will you always employ it as well?  I am far from meaning always in
the same way; but I mean as well in proportion, in the variation of age
and circumstances.  You now, study five hours every morning; I neither
suppose that you will, nor desire that you should do so for the rest of
your life.  Both business and pleasure will justly and equally break in
upon those hours.  But then, will you always employ the leisure they
leave you in useful studies?  If you have but an hour, will you improve
that hour, instead of idling it away?  While you have such a friend and
monitor with you as Mr. Harte, I am sure you will.  But suppose that
business and situations should, in six or seen months, call Mr. Harte
away from you; tell me truly, what may I expect and depend upon from you,
when left to yourself ?  May I be sure that you will employ some part of
every day, in adding something to that stock of knowledge which he will
have left you?  May I hope that you will allot one hour in the week to
the care of your own affairs, to keep them in that order and method which
every prudent man does?  But, above all, may I be convinced that your
pleasures, whatever they may be, will be confined within the circle of
good company, and people of fashion?  Those pleasures I recommend to you;
I will promote them I will pay for them; but I will neither pay for, nor
suffer, the unbecoming, disgraceful, and degrading pleasures (they should
not be called pleasures), of low and profligate company.  I confess the
pleasures of high life are not always strictly philosophical; and I
believe a Stoic would blame, my indulgence; but I am yet no Stoic, though
turned of five-and-fifty; and I am apt to think that you are rather less
so, at eighteen.  The pleasures of the table, among people of the first
fashion, may indeed sometimes, by accident, run into excesses: but they
will never sink into a continued course of gluttony and drunkenness.
The gallantry of high life, though not strictly justifiable, carries,
at least, no external marks of infamy about it.  Neither the heart nor
the constitution is corrupted by it; neither nose nor character lost by
it; manners, possibly, improved.  Play, in good company, is only play,
and not gaming; not deep, and consequently not dangerous nor
dishonorable.  It is only the interacts of other amusements.

This, I am sure, is not talking to you like an old man, though it is
talking to you like an old friend; these are not hard conditions to ask
of you.  I am certain you have sense enough to know how reasonable they
are on my part, how advantageous they are on yours: but have you
resolution enough to perform them?  Can you withstand the examples,
and the invitations, of the profligate, and their infamous missionaries?
For I have known many a young fellow seduced by a 'mauvaise honte', that
made him ashamed to refuse.  These are resolutions which you must form,
and steadily execute for yourself, whenever you lose the friendly care
and assistance of your Mentor.  In the meantime, make a greedy use of
him; exhaust him, if you can, of all his knowledge; and get the prophet's
mantle from him, before he is taken away himself.

You seem to like Rome.  How do you go on there?  Are you got into the
inside of that extraordinary government?  Has your Abbate Foggini
discovered many of those mysteries to you?  Have you made an acquaintance
with some eminent Jesuits?  I know no people in the world more
instructive.  You would do very well to take one or two such sort of
people home with you to dinner every day.  It would be only a little
'minestra' and 'macaroni' the more; and a three or four hours'
conversation 'de suite' produces a thousand useful informations, which
short meetings and snatches at third places do not admit of; and many of
those gentlemen are by no means unwilling to dine 'gratis'.  Whenever you
meet with a man eminent in any way, feed him, and feed upon him at the
same time; it will not only improve you, but give you a reputation of
knowledge, and of loving it in others.

I have been lately informed of an Italian book, which I believe may be of
use to you, and which, I dare say, you may get at Rome, written by one
Alberti, about fourscore or a hundred years ago, a thick quarto.  It is
a classical description of Italy; from whence, I am assured, that Mr.
Addison, to save himself trouble, has taken most of his remarks and
classical references.  I am told that it is an excellent book for a
traveler in Italy.

What Italian books have you read, or are you reading?  Ariosto.  I hope,
is one of them.  Pray apply yourself diligently to Italian; it is so easy
a language, that speaking it constantly, and reading it often, must, in
six months more, make you perfect master of it: in which case you will
never forget it; for we only forget those things of which we know but
little.

But, above all things, to all that you learn, to all that you say, and to
all that you do, remember to join the Graces.  All is imperfect without
them; with them everything is at least tolerable.  Nothing could hurt me
more than to find you unattended by them.  How cruelly should I be
shocked, if, at our first meeting, you should present yourself to me
without them! Invoke them, and sacrifice to them every moment; they are
always kind, where they are assiduously courted.  For God's sake, aim at
perfection in everything: 'Nil actum reputans si quid superesset agendum.
Adieu.  Yours most tenderly.




LETTER CVIII

LONDON, March 19, O. S.  1750.

MY DEAR FRIEND: I acknowledge your last letter of the 24th February,
N. S.  In return for your earthquake, I can tell you that we have had
here more than our share of earthquakes; for we had two very strong ones
in eight-and-twenty days.  They really do too much honor to our cold
climate; in your warm one, they are compensated by favors from the sun,
which we do not enjoy.

I did not think that the present Pope was a sort of man to build seven
modern little chapels at the expense of so respectable a piece of
antiquity as the Coliseum.  However, let his Holiness's taste of 'virtu'
be ever so bad, pray get somebody to present you to him before you leave
Rome; and without hesitation kiss his slipper, or whatever else the
etiquette of that Court requires.  I would have you see all those
ceremonies; and I presume that you are, by this time, ready enough at
Italian to understand and answer 'il Santo Padre' in that language.
I hope, too, that you have acquired address and usage enough of the world
to be presented to anybody, without embarrassment or disapprobation.
If that is not yet quite perfect, as I cannot suppose it is entirely,
custom will improve it daily, and habit at last complete it.  I have for
some time told you, that the great difficulties are pretty well
conquered.  You have acquired knowledge, which is the 'principium et
fons'; but you have now a variety of lesser things to attend to, which
collectively make one great and important object.  You easily guess that
I mean the graces, the air, address, politeness, and, in short, the whole
'tournure' and 'agremens' of a man of fashion; so many little things
conspire to form that 'tournure', that though separately they seem too
insignificant to mention, yet aggregately they are too material for me
(who think for you down to the very lowest things) to omit.  For
instance, do you use yourself to carve, eat and drink genteelly,
and with ease?  Do you take care to walk, sit, stand, and present
yourself gracefully?  Are you sufficiently upon your guard against
awkward attitudes, and illiberal, ill-bred, and disgusting habits, such
as scratching yourself, putting your fingers in your mouth, nose, and
ears?  Tricks always acquired at schools, often too much neglected
afterward; but, however, extremely ill-bred and nauseous.  For I do not
conceive that any man has a right to exhibit, in company, any one
excrement more than another.  Do you dress well, and think a little of
the brillant in your person?  That, too, is necessary, because it is
'prevenant'.  Do you aim at easy, engaging, but, at the same time, civil
or respectful manners, according to the company you are in?  These, and a
thousand other things, which you will observe in people of fashion better
than I can describe them, are absolutely necessary for every man; but
still more for you, than for almost any man living.  The showish, the
shining, the engaging parts of the character of a fine gentleman, should
(considering your destination) be the principal objects, of your present
attention.

When you return here, I am apt to think that you will find something
better to do than to run to Mr. Osborne's at Gray's Inn, to pick up
scarce books.  Buy good books and read them; the best books are the
commonest, and the last editions are always the best, if the editors are
not blockheads, for they may profit of the former.  But take care not to
understand editions and title-pages too well.  It always smells of
pedantry, and not always of learning.  What curious books I have--they
are indeed but few--shall be at your service.  I have some of the old
Collana, and the Machiavel of 1550.  Beware of the 'Bibliomanie'.

In the midst of either your studies or your pleasures, pray never lose
view of the object of your destination: I mean the political affairs of
Europe.  Follow them politically, chronologically, and geographically,
through the newspapers, and trace up the facts which you meet with there
to their sources: as, for example, consult the treaties Neustadt and Abo,
with regard to the disputes, which you read of every day in the public
papers, between Russia and Sweden.  For the affairs of Italy, which are
reported to be the objects of present negotiations, recur to the
quadruple alliance of the year 1718, and follow them down through their
several variations to the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, 1748; in which (by
the bye) you will find the very different tenures by which the Infant Don
Philip, your namesake, holds Parma and Placentia.  Consult, also, the
Emperor Charles the Sixth's Act of Cession of the kingdoms of Naples and
Sicily, being a point which, upon the death of the present King of Spain,
is likely to occasion some disputes; do not lose the thread of these
matters; which is carried on with great ease, but if once broken, is
resumed with difficulty.

Pray tell Mr. Harte, that I have sent his packet to Baron Firmian by
Count Einsiedlen, who is gone from hence this day for Germany, and passes
through Vienna in his way to Italy; where he is in hopes of crossing upon
you somewhere or other.  Adieu, my friend.




LETTER CIX

LONDON, March 29, O. S.  1750

MY DEAR FRIEND: You are now, I suppose, at Naples, in a new scene of
'Virtu', examining all the curiosities of Herculaneum, watching the
eruptions of Mount Vesuvius, and surveying the magnificent churches and
public buildings, by which Naples is distinguished.

You have a court there into the bargain, which, I hope, you frequent and
attend to.  Polite manners, a versatility of mind, a complaisance even to
enemies, and the 'volto sciolto', with the 'pensieri stretti', are only
to be learned at courts, and must be well learned by whoever would either
shine or thrive in them.  Though they do not change the nature, they
smooth and soften the manners of mankind.  Vigilance, dexterity, and
flexibility supply the place of natural force; and it is the ablest mind,
not the strongest body that prevails there.  Monsieur and Madame Fogliani
will, I am sure, show you all the politeness of courts; for I know no
better bred people than they are.  Domesticate yourself there while you
stay at Naples, and lay aside the English coldness and formality.  You
have also a letter to Comte Mahony, whose house I hope you frequent, as
it is the resort of the best company.  His sister, Madame Bulkeley, is
now here; and had I known of your going so soon to Naples, I would have
got you, 'ex abundanti', a letter from her to her brother.  The
conversation of the moderns in the evening is full as necessary for you,
as that of the ancients in the morning.

You would do well, while you are at Naples, to read some very short
history of that kingdom.  It has had great variety of masters, and has
occasioned many wars; the general history of which will enable you to ask
many proper questions, and to receive useful informations in return.
Inquire into the manner and form of that government; for constitution it
has none, being an absolute one; but the most absolute governments have
certain customs and forms, which are more or less observed by their
respective tyrants.  In China it is the fashion for the emperors,
absolute as they are, to govern with justice and equity; as in the other
Oriental monarchies, it is the custom to govern by violence and cruelty.
The King of France, as absolute, in fact, as any of them, is by custom
only more gentle; for I know of no constitutional bar to his will.
England is now, the only monarchy in the world, that can properly be said
to have a constitution; for the people's rights and liberties are secured
by laws; and I cannot reckon Sweden and Poland to be monarchies, those
two kings having little more to say than the Doge of Venice.  I do not
presume to say anything of the constitution of the empire to you, who are
'jurisperitorum Germanicorum facile princeps'.

When you write to me, which, by the way, you do pretty seldom, tell me
rather whom you see, than what you see.  Inform me of your evening
transactions and acquaintances; where, and how you pass your evenings;
what people of learning you have made acquaintance with; and, if you will
trust me with so important an affair, what belle passion inflames you.
I interest myself most in what personally concerns you most; and this is
a very critical year in your life.  To talk like a virtuoso, your canvas
is, I think, a good one, and RAPHAEL HARTE has drawn the outlines
admirably; nothing is now wanting but the coloring of Titian, and the
Graces, the 'morbidezza' of Guido; but that is a great deal.  You must
get them soon, or you will never get them at all.  'Per la lingua
Italiana, sono sicuro ch'ella n'e adesso professore, a segno tale ch'io
non ardisca dirle altra cosa in quela lingua se non.  Addio'.




LETTER CX

LONDON, April 26, O. S.  1756.

MY DEAR FRIEND:  As your journey to Paris approaches, and as that period
will, one way or another, be of infinite consequence to you, my letters
will henceforward be principally calculated for that meridian.  You will
be left there to your own discretion, instead of Mr. Harte's, and you
will allow me, I am sure, to distrust a little the discretion of
eighteen.  You will find in the Academy a number of young fellows much
less discreet than yourself.  These will all be your acquaintances; but
look about you first, and inquire into their respective characters,
before you form any connections among them; and, 'caeteris paribus',
single out those of the most considerable rank and family.  Show them a
distinguishing attention; by which means you will get into their
respective houses, and keep the best company.  All those French young
fellows are excessively 'etourdis'; be upon your guard against scrapes
and quarrels; have no corporal pleasantries with them, no 'jeux de
mains', no 'coups de chambriere', which frequently bring on quarrels.
Be as lively as they, if you please, but at the same time be a little
wiser than they.  As to letters, you will find most of them ignorant;
do not reproach them with that ignorance, nor make them feel your
superiority.  It is not their faults, they are all bred up for the army;
but, on the other, hand, do not allow their ignorance and idleness to
break in upon those morning hours which you may be able to allot to your
serious, studies.  No breakfastings with them, which consume a great deal
of time; but tell them (not magisterially and sententiously) that you
will read two or three hours in the morning, and that for the rest of the
day you are very much at their service.  Though, by the way, I hope you
will keep wiser company in the evenings.

I must insist upon your never going to what is called the English coffee-
house at Paris, which is the resort of all the scrub English, and also of
the fugitive and attainted Scotch and Irish; party quarrels and drunken
squabbles are very frequent there; and I do not know a more degrading
place in all Paris.  Coffee-houses and taverns are by no means creditable
at Paris.  Be cautiously upon your guard against the infinite number of
fine-dressed and fine-spoken 'chevaliers d'industrie' and 'avanturiers'
which swarm at Paris: and keep everybody civilly at arm's length, of
whose real character or rank you are not previously informed.  Monsieur
le Comte or Monsieur le Chevalier, in a handsome laced coat, 'et tres
bien mis', accosts you at the play, or some other public place; he
conceives at first sight an infinite regard for you: he sees that you are
a stranger of the first distinction; he offers you his services, and
wishes nothing more ardently than to contribute, as far as may be in his
little power, to procure you 'les agremens de Paris'.  He is acquainted
with some ladies of condition, 'qui prefrent une petite societe agreable,
et des petits soupers aimables d'honnetes gens, au tumulte et a la
dissipation de Paris'; and he will with the greatest pleasure imaginable
have the honor of introducing you to those ladies of quality.  Well, if
you were to accept of this kind offer, and go with him, you would find
'au troisieme; a handsome, painted and p----d strumpet, in a tarnished
silver or gold second-hand robe, playing a sham party at cards for
livres, with three or four sharpers well dressed enough, and dignified by
the titles of Marquis, Comte, and Chevalier.  The lady receives you in
the most polite and gracious manner, and with all those 'complimens de
routine' which every French woman has equally.  Though she loves
retirement, and shuns 'le grande monde', yet she confesses herself
obliged to the Marquis for having procured her so inestimable, so
accomplished an acquaintance as yourself; but her concern is how to amuse
you: for she never suffers play at her house for above a livre; if you
can amuse yourself with that low play till supper, 'a la bonne heure'.
Accordingly you sit down to that little play, at which the good company
takes care that you shall win fifteen or sixteen livres, which gives them
an opportunity of celebrating both your good luck and your good play.
Supper comes up, and a good one it is, upon the strength of your being
able to pay for it.  'La Marquise en fait les honneurs au mieux, talks
sentiments, 'moeurs et morale', interlarded with 'enjouement', and
accompanied with some oblique ogles, which bid you not despair in time.
After supper, pharaoh, lansquenet, or quinze, happen accidentally to be
mentioned: the Marquise exclaims against it, and vows she will not suffer
it, but is at last prevailed upon by being assured 'que ce ne sera que
pour des riens'.  Then the wished-for moment is come, the operation
begins: you are cheated, at best, of all the money in your pocket, and if
you stay late, very probably robbed of your watch and snuff-box, possibly
murdered for greater security.  This I can assure you, is not an
exaggerated, but a literal description of what happens every day to some
raw and inexperienced stranger at Paris.  Remember to receive all these
civil gentlemen, who take such a fancy to you at first sight, very
coldly, and take care always to be previously engaged, whatever party
they propose to you.  You may happen sometimes, in very great and good
companies, to meet with some dexterous gentlemen, who may be very
desirous, and also very sure, to win your money, if they can but engage
you to play with them.  Therefore lay it down as an invariable rule never
to play with men, but only with women of fashion, at low play, or with
women and men mixed.  But, at the same time, whenever you are asked to
play deeper than you would, do not refuse it gravely and sententiously,
alleging the folly of staking what would be very inconvenient to one to
lose, against what one does not want to win; but parry those invitations
ludicrously, 'et en badinant'.  Say that, if you were sure to lose, you
might possibly play, but that as you may as well win, you dread
'l'embarras des richesses', ever since you have seen what an encumbrance
they were to poor Harlequin, and that, therefore, you are determined
never to venture the winning above two louis a-day; this sort of light
trifling way of declining invitations to vice and folly, is more becoming
your age, and at the same time more effectual, than grave philosophical
refusals.  A young fellow who seems to have no will of his own, and who
does everything that is asked of him, is called a very good-natured, but
at the same time, is thought a very silly young fellow.  Act wisely, upon
solid principles, and from true motives, but keep them to yourself, and
never talk sententiously.  When you are invited to drink, say that you
wish you could, but that so little makes you both drunk and sick, 'que le
jeu me vaut pas la chandelle'.

Pray show great attention, and make your court to Monsieur de la
Gueriniere; he is well with Prince Charles and many people of the first
distinction at Paris; his commendations will raise your character there,
not to mention that his favor will be of use to you in the Academy
itself.  For the reasons which I mentioned to you in my last, I would
have you be interne in the Academy for the first six months; but after
that, I promise you that you shall have lodgings of your own 'dans un
hotel garni', if in the meantime I hear well of you, and that you
frequent, and are esteemed in the best French companies.  You want
nothing now, thank God, but exterior advantages, that last polish, that
'tournure du monde', and those graces, which are so necessary to adorn,
and give efficacy to, the most solid merit.  They are only to be acquired
in the best companies, and better in the best French companies than in
any other.  You will not want opportunities, for I shall send you letters
that will establish you in the most distinguished companies, not only of
the beau monde, but of the beaux esprits, too.  Dedicate, therefore, I
beg of you, that whole year to your own advantage and final improvement,
and do not be diverted from those objects by idle dissipations, low
seduction, or bad example.  After that year, do whatever you please; I
will interfere no longer in your conduct; for I am sure both you and I
shall be safe then.  Adieu!




LETTER CXI

LONDON, April 30, O. S.  1750

MY DEAR FRIEND: Mr. Harte, who in all his letters gives you some dash of
panegyric, told me in his last a thing that pleases me extremely; which
was that at Rome you had constantly preferred the established Italian
assemblies to the English conventicles setup against them by dissenting
English ladies.  That shows sense, and that you know what you are sent
abroad for.  It is of much more consequence to know the 'mores multorem
hominum' than the 'urbes'.  Pray continue this judicious conduct wherever
you go, especially at Paris, where, instead of thirty, you will find
above three hundred English, herding together and conversing with no one
French body.

The life of 'les Milords Anglois' is regularly, or, if you will,
irregularly, this.  As soon as they rise, which is very late, they
breakfast together, to the utter loss of two good morning hours.  Then
they go by coachfuls to the Palais, the Invalides, and Notre-Dame; from
thence to the English coffee-house, where they make up their tavern party
for dinner.  From dinner, where they drink quick, they adjourn in
clusters to the play, where they crowd up the stage, dressed up in very
fine clothes, very ill-made by a Scotch or Irish tailor.  From the play
to the tavern again, where they get very drunk, and where they either
quarrel among themselves, or sally forth, commit some riot in the
streets, and are taken up by the watch.  Those who do not speak French
before they go, are sure to learn none there.  Their tender vows are
addressed to their Irish laundress, unless by chance some itinerant
Englishwoman, eloped from her husband, or her creditors, defrauds her of
them.  Thus they return home, more petulant, but not more informed, than
when they left it; and show, as they think, their improvement by
affectedly both speaking and dressing in broken French:--

                    "Hunc to Romane caveito."

Connect yourself, while you are in France, entirely with the French;
improve yourself with the old, divert yourself with the young; conform
cheerfully to their customs, even to their little follies, but not to
their vices.  Do not, however, remonstrate or preach against them, for
remonstrances do not suit with your age.  In French companies in general
you will not find much learning, therefore take care not to brandish
yours in their faces.  People hate those who make them feel their own
inferiority.  Conceal all your learning carefully, and reserve it for the
company of les Gens d'Eglise, or les Gens de Robe; and even then let them
rather extort it from you, than find you over-willing to draw it.  Your
are then thought, from that seeming unwillingness, to have still more
knowledge than it may be you really have, and with the additional merit
of modesty into the bargain.  A man who talks of, or even hints at, his
'bonnes fortunes', is seldom believed, or, if believed, much blamed;
whereas a man who conceals with care is often supposed to have more than
he has, and his reputation of discretion gets him others.  It is just so
with a man of learning; if he affects to show it, it is questioned, and
he is reckoned only superficial; but if afterward it appears that he
really has it, he is pronounced a pedant.  Real merit of any kind, 'ubi
est non potest diu celari'; it will be discovered, and nothing can
depreciate it but a man's exhibiting it himself.  It may not always be
rewarded as it ought, but it will always be known.  You will in general
find the women of the beau monde at Paris more instructed than the men,
who are bred up singly for the army, and thrown into it at twelve or
thirteen years old; but then that sort of education, which makes them
ignorant of books, gives them a great knowledge of the world, an easy
address, and polite manners.

Fashion is more tyrannical at Paris than in any other place in the world;
it governs even more absolutely than their king, which is saying a great
deal.  The least revolt against it is punished by proscription.  You must
observe, and conform to all the 'minutiae' of it, if you will be in
fashion there yourself; and if you are not in fashion, you are nobody.
Get, therefore, at all events, into the company of those men and women
'qui donnent le ton'; and though at first you should be admitted upon
that shining theatre only as a 'persona muta', persist, persevere, and
you will soon have a part given you.  Take great care never to tell in
one company what you see or hear in another, much less to divert the
present company at the expense of the last; but let discretion and
secrecy be known parts of your character.  They will carry you much
further, and much safer than more shining talents.  Be upon your guard
against quarrels at Paris; honor is extremely nice there, though the
asserting of it is exceedingly penal.  Therefore, 'point de mauvaises
plaisanteries, point de jeux de main, et point de raillerie piquante'.

Paris is the place in the world where, if you please, you may the best
unite the 'utile' and the 'dulce'.  Even your pleasures will be your
improvements, if you take them with the people of the place, and in high
life.  From what you have hitherto done everywhere else, I have just
reason to believe, that you will do everything that you ought at Paris.
Remember that it is your decisive moment; whatever you do there will be
known to thousands here, and your character there, whatever it is, will
get before you here.  You will meet with it at London.  May you and I
both have reason to rejoice at that meeting! Adieu.




LETTER CXII

LONDON, May 8, O. S.  1750

MY DEAR FRIEND: At your age the love of pleasures is extremely natural,
and the enjoyment of them not unbecoming: but the danger, at your age,
is mistaking the object, and setting out wrong in the pursuit.  The
character of a man of pleasure dazzles young eyes; they do not see their
way to it distinctly, and fall into vice and profligacy.  I remember a
strong instance of this a great many years ago.  A young fellow,
determined to shine as a man of pleasure, was at the play called the
"Libertine Destroyed," a translation of 'Le Festin de Pierre' of
Molieire's.  He was so struck with what he thought the fine character of
the libertine, that he swore he would be the LIBERTINE DESTROYED.  Some
friends asked him, whether he had not better content himself with being
only the libertine, but without being DESTROYED? to which he answered
with great warmth, "No, for that being destroyed was the perfection of
the whole."  This, extravagant as it seems in this light, is really the
case of many an unfortunate young fellow, who, captivated by the name of
pleasures, rushes indiscriminately, and without taste, into them all, and
is finally DESTROYED.  I am not stoically advising, nor parsonically
preaching to you to be a Stoic at your age; far from it: I am pointing
out to you the paths to pleasures, and am endeavoring only to quicken and
heighten them for you.  Enjoy pleasures, but let them be your own, and
then you will taste them; but adopt none; trust to nature for genuine
ones.  The pleasures that you would feel you must earn; the man who gives
himself up to all, feels none sensibly.  Sardanapalus, I am convinced,
never felt any in his life.  Those only who join serious occupations with
pleasures, feel either as they should do.  Alcibiades, though addicted to
the most shameful excesses, gave some time to philosophy, and some to
business.  Julius Caesar joined business with pleasure so properly, that
they mutually assisted each other; and though he was the husband of all
the wives at Rome, he found time to be one of the best scholars, almost
the best orator, and absolutely the best general there.  An uninterrupted
life of pleasures is as insipid as contemptible.  Some hours given every
day to serious business must whet both the mind and the senses, to enjoy
those of pleasure.  A surfeited glutton, an emaciated sot, and an
enervated rotten whoremaster, never enjoy the pleasures to which they
devote themselves; but they are only so many human sacrifices to false
gods.  The pleasures of low life are all of this mistaken, merely
sensual, and disgraceful nature; whereas, those of high life, and in good
company (though possibly in themselves not more moral) are more delicate,
more refined, less dangerous, and less disgraceful; and, in the common
course of things, not reckoned disgraceful at all.  In short, pleasure
must not, nay, cannot, be the business of a man of sense and character;
but it may be, and is, his relief, his reward.  It is particularly so
with regard to the women; who have the utmost contempt for those men,
that, having no character nor consideration with their own sex,
frivolously pass their whole time in 'ruelles' and at 'toilettes'.  They
look upon them as their lumber, and remove them whenever they can get
better furniture.  Women choose their favorites more by the ear than by
any other of their senses or even their understandings.  The man whom
they hear the most commended by the men, will always be the best received
by them.  Such a conquest flatters their vanity, and vanity is their
universal, if not their strongest passion.  A distinguished shining
character is irresistible with them; they crowd to, nay, they even
quarrel for the danger in hopes of the triumph.  Though, by the way (to
use a vulgar expression), she who conquers only catches a Tartar, and
becomes the slave of her captive.  'Mais c'est la leur affaire'.  Divide
your time between useful occupations and elegant pleasures.  The morning
seems to belong to study, business, or serious conversations with men of
learning and figure; not that I exclude an occasional hour at a toilette.
From sitting down to dinner, the proper business of the day is pleasure,
unless real business, which must never be postponed for pleasure, happens
accidentally to interfere.  In good company, the pleasures of the table
are always carried to a certain point of delicacy and gratification, but
never to excess and riot.  Plays, operas, balls, suppers, gay
conversations in polite and cheerful companies, properly conclude the
evenings; not to mention the tender looks that you may direct and the
sighs that you may offer, upon these several occasions, to some
propitious or unpropitious female deity, whose character and manners will
neither disgrace nor corrupt yours.  This is the life of a man of real
sense and pleasure; and by this distribution of your time, and choice of
your pleasures, you will be equally qualified for the busy, or the 'beau
monde'.  You see I am not rigid, and do not require that you and I should
be of the same age.  What I say to you, therefore, should have the more
weight, as coming from a friend, not a father.  But low company, and
their low vices, their indecent riots and profligacy, I never will bear
nor forgive.

I have lately received two volumes of treaties, in German and Latin, from
Hawkins, with your orders, under your own hand, to take care of them for
you, which orders I shall most dutifully and punctually obey, and they
wait for you in my library, together with your great collection of rare
books, which your Mamma sent me upon removing from her old house.

I hope you not only keep up, but improve in your German, for it will be
of great use to you when you cone into business; and the more so, as you
will be almost the only Englishman who either can speak or understand it.
Pray speak it constantly to all Germans, wherever you meet them, and you
will meet multitudes of them at Paris.  Is Italian now become easy and
familiar to you?  Can you speak it with the same fluency that you can
speak German?  You cannot conceive what an advantage it will give you in
negotiations to possess Italian, German, and French perfectly, so as to
understand all the force and finesse of those three languages.  If two
men of equal talents negotiate together, he who best understands the
language in which the negotiation is carried on, will infallibly get the
better of the other.  The signification and force of one single word is
often of great consequence in a treaty, and even in a letter.

Remember the GRACES, for without them 'ogni fatica e vana'.  Adieu.




LETTER CXIII

LONDON, May 17, O. S.  1750

MY DEAR FRIEND: Your apprenticeship is near out, and you are soon to set
up for yourself; that approaching moment is a critical one for you, and
an anxious one for me.  A tradesman who would succeed in his way, must
begin by establishing a character of integrity and good manners; without
the former, nobody will go to his shop at all; without the latter, nobody
will go there twice.  This rule does not exclude the fair arts of trade.
He may sell his goods at the best price he can, within certain bounds.
He may avail himself of the humor, the whims, and the fantastical tastes
of his customers; but what he warrants to be good must be really so, what
he seriously asserts must be true, or his first fraudulent profits will
soon end in a bankruptcy.  It is the same in higher life, and in the
great business of the world.  A man who does not solidly establish, and
really deserve, a character of truth, probity, good manners, and good
morals, at his first setting out in the world, may impose, and shine like
a meteor for a very short time, but will very soon vanish, and be
extinguished with contempt.  People easily pardon, in young men, the
common irregularities of the senses: but they do not forgive the least
vice of the heart.  The heart never grows better by age; I fear rather
worse; always harder.  A young liar will be an old one; and a young knave
will only be a greater knave as he grows older.  But should a bad young
heart, accompanied with a good head (which, by the way, very seldom is
the case), really reform in a more advanced age, from a consciousness of
its folly, as well as of its guilt; such a conversion would only be
thought prudential and political, but never sincere.  I hope in God, and
I verily.  believe, that you want no moral virtue.  But the possession of
all the moral virtues, in 'actu primo', as the logicians call it, is not
sufficient; you must have them in 'actu secundo' too; nay, that is not
sufficient neither--you must have the reputation of them also.  Your
character in the world must be built upon that solid foundation, or it
will soon fall, and upon your own head.  You cannot, therefore, be too
careful, too nice, too scrupulous, in establishing this character at
first, upon which your whole depends.  Let no conversation, no example,
no fashion, no 'bon mot', no silly desire of seeming to be above, what
most knaves, and many fools, call prejudices, ever tempt you to avow,
excuse, extenuate, or laugh at the least breach of morality; but show
upon all occasions, and take all occasions to show, a detestation and
abhorrence of it.  There, though young, you ought to be strict; and there
only, while young, it becomes you to be strict and severe.  But there,
too, spare the persons while you lash the crimes.  All this relates, as
you easily judge, to the vices of the heart, such as lying, fraud, envy,
malice, detraction, etc., and I do not extend it to the little frailties
of youth, flowing from high spirits and warm blood.  It would ill become
you, at your age, to declaim against them, and sententiously censure a
gallantry, an accidental excess of the table, a frolic, an inadvertency;
no, keep as free from them yourself as you can: but say nothing against
them in others.  They certainly mend by time, often by reason; and a
man's worldly character is not affected by them, provided it be pure in
all other respects.

To come now to a point of much less, but yet of very great consequence at
your first setting out.  Be extremely upon your guard against vanity, the
common failing of inexperienced youth; but particularly against that kind
of vanity that dubs a man a coxcomb; a character which, once acquired, is
more indelible than that of the priesthood.  It is not to be imagined by
how many different ways vanity defeats its own purposes.  One man decides
peremptorily upon every subject, betrays his ignorance upon many, and
shows a disgusting presumption upon the rest.  Another desires to appear
successful among the women; he hints at the encouragement he has
received, from those of the most distinguished rank and beauty, and
intimates a particular connection with some one; if it is true, it is
ungenerous; if false, it is infamous: but in either case he destroys the
reputation he wants to get.  Some flatter their vanity by little
extraneous objects, which have not the least relation to themselves; such
as being descended from, related to, or acquainted with, people of
distinguished merit and eminent characters.  They talk perpetually of
their grandfather such-a-one, their uncle such-a-one, and their intimate
friend Mr. Such-a-one, with whom, possibly, they are hardly acquainted.
But admitting it all to be as they would have it, what then?  Have they
the more merit for those accidents?  Certainly not.  On the contrary,
their taking up adventitious, proves their want of intrinsic merit; a
rich man never borrows.  Take this rule for granted, as a never-failing
one: That you must never seem to affect the character in which you have a
mind to shine.  Modesty is the only sure bait when you angle for praise.
The affectation of courage will make even a brave man pass only for a
bully; as the affectation of wit will make a man of parts pass for a
coxcomb.  By this modesty I do not mean timidity and awkward bashfulness.
On the contrary, be inwardly firm and steady, know your own value
whatever it may be, and act upon that principle; but take great care to.
let nobody discover that you do know your own value.  Whatever real merit
you have, other people will discover, and people always magnify their own
discoveries, as they lessen those of others.

For God's sake, revolve all these things seriously in your thoughts,
before you launch out alone into the ocean of Paris.  Recollect the
observations that you have yourself made upon mankind, compare and
connect them with my instructions, and then act systematically and
consequentially from them; not 'au jour la journee'.  Lay your little
plan now, which you will hereafter extend and improve by your own
observations, and by the advice of those who can never mean to mislead
you; I mean Mr. Harte and myself.




LETTER CXIV

LONDON, May 24., O. S.  1750

MY DEAR FRIEND: I received yesterday your letter of the 7th, N. S., from
Naples, to which place I find you have traveled, classically, critically,
and 'da virtuoso'.  You did right, for whatever is worth seeing at, all,
is worth seeing well, and better than most people see it. It is a poor
and frivolous excuse, when anything curious is talked of that one has
seen, to say, I SAW IT, BUT REALLY I DID NOT MUCH MIND IT.  Why did they
go to see it, if they would not mind it?  or why not mind it when they
saw it?  Now that you are at Naples, you pass part of your time there
'en honnete homme, da garbato cavaliere', in the court and the best
companies.  I am told that strangers are received with the utmost
hospitality at Prince -------'s, 'que lui il fait bonne chere, et que
Madame la Princesse donne chere entire; mais que sa chair est plus que
hazardee ou mortifiee meme'; which in plain English means, that she is
not only tender, but rotten.  If this be true, as I am pretty sure it is,
one may say to her in a little sense, 'juvenumque prodis, publics cura'.

Mr. Harte informs me that you are clothed in sumptuous apparel; a young
fellow should be so; especially abroad, where fine clothes are so
generally the fashion.  Next to their being fine, they should be well
made, and worn easily for a man is only the less genteel for a fine coat,
if, in wearing it, he shows a regard for it, and is not as easy in it as
if it were a plain one.

I thank you for your drawing, which I am impatient to see, and which I
shall hang up in a new gallery that I am building at Blackheath, and very
fond of; but I am still more impatient for another copy, which I wonder
I have not yet received, I mean the copy of your countenance.  I believe,
were that a whole length, it would still fall a good deal short of the
dimensions of the drawing after Dominichino, which you say is about eight
feet high; and I take you, as well as myself, to be of the family of the
Piccolomini.  Mr. Bathurst tells me that he thinks you rather taller than
I am; if so, you may very possibly get up to five feet eight inches,
which I would compound for, though I would wish you five feet ten.  In
truth, what do I not wish you, that has a tendency to perfection?  I say
a tendency only, for absolute perfection is not in human nature, so that
it would be idle to wish it.  But I am very willing to compound for your
coming nearer to perfection than the generality of your contemporaries:
without a compliment to you, I think you bid fair for that.  Mr. Harte
affirms (and if it were consistent with his character would, I believe,
swear) that you have no vices of the heart; you have undoubtedly a stock
of both ancient and modern learning, which I will venture to say nobody
of your age has, and which must now daily increase, do what you will.
What, then, do you want toward that practicable degree of perfection
which I wish you?  Nothing but the knowledge, the turn, and the manners
of the world; I mean the 'beau monde'.  These it is impossible that you
can yet have quite right; they are not given, they must be learned.  But
then, on the other hand, it is impossible not to acquire them, if one has
a mind to them; for they are acquired insensibly, by keeping good
company, if one has but the least attention to their characters and
manners.

Every man becomes, to a certain degree, what the people he generally
converses with are.  He catches their air, their manners, and even their
way of thinking.  If he observes with attention, he will catch them soon,
but if he does not, he will at long run contract them insensibly.  I know
nothing in the world but poetry that is not to be acquired by application
and care.  The sum total of this is a very comfortable one for you, as it
plainly amounts to this in your favor, that you now want nothing but what
even your pleasures, if they are liberal ones, will teach you.  I
congratulate both you and myself upon your being in such a situation,
that, excepting your exercises, nothing is now wanting but pleasures to
complete you.  Take them, but (as I am sure you will) with people of the
first fashion, whereever you are, and the business is done; your
exercises at Paris, which I am sure you will attend to, will supple and
fashion your body; and the company you will keep there will, with some
degree of observation on your part, soon give you their air, address,
manners, in short, 'le ton de la bonne compagnie'.  Let not these
considerations, however, make you vain: they are only between you and me
but as they are very comfortable ones, they may justly give you a manly
assurance, a firmness, a steadiness, without which a man can neither be
well-bred, or in any light appear to advantage, or really what he is.
They may justly remove all, timidity, awkward bashfulness, low diffidence
of one's self, and mean abject complaisance to every or anybody's
opinion.  La Bruyere says, very truly, 'on ne vaut dans ce monde, que ce
que l'on veut valoir'.  It is a right principle to proceed upon in the
world, taking care only to guard against the appearances and outward
symptoms of vanity.  Your whole then, you see, turns upon the company you
keep for the future.  I have laid you in variety of the best at Paris,
where, at your arrival you will find a cargo of letters to very different
sorts of people, as 'beaux esprils, savants, et belles dames'.  These, if
you will frequent them, will form you, not only by their examples,
advice, and admonitions in private, as I have desired them to do; and
consequently add to what you have the only one thing now needful.

Pray tell me what Italian books you have read, and whether that language
is now become familiar to you.

Read Ariosto and Tasso through, and then you will have read all the
Italian poets who in my opinion are worth reading.  In all events, when
you get to Paris, take a good Italian master to read Italian with you
three times a week; not only to keep what you have already, which you
would otherwise forget, but also to perfect you in the rest.  It is a
great pleasure, as well as a great advantage, to be able to speak to
people of all nations, and well, in their own language.  Aim at
perfection in everything, though in most things it is unattainable;
however, they who aim at it, and persevere, will come much nearer it,
than those whose laziness and despondency make them give it up as
unattainable.  'Magnis tamen excidit ausis' is a degree of praise which
will always attend a noble and shining temerity, and a much better sign
in a young fellow, than 'serpere humi, tutus nimium timidusque
procellae'.  For men as well as women:

               "---------born to be controlled,
               Stoop to the forward and the bold."

A man who sets out in the world with real timidity and diffidence has not
an equal chance for it; he will be discouraged, put by, or trampled upon.
But to succeed, a man, especially a young one, should have inward
firmness, steadiness, and intrepidity, with exterior modesty and SEEMING
diffidence.  He must modestly, but resolutely, assert his own rights and
privileges.  'Suaviter in modo', but 'fortiter in re'.  He should have an
apparent frankness and openness, but with inward caution and closeness.
All these things will come to you by frequenting and observing good
company.  And by good company, I mean that sort of company which is
called good company by everybody of that place.  When all this is over,
we shall meet; and then we will talk over, tete-a-tete, the various
little finishing strokes which conversation and, acquaintance
occasionally suggest, and which cannot be methodically written.

Tell Mr. Harte that I have received his two letters of the 2d and 8th
N. S., which, as soon as I have received a third, I will answer.  Adieu,
my dear!  I find you will do.




LETTER CXV

LONDON, June 5, O. S.  1750

MY DEAR FRIEND: I have received your picture, which I have long waited
for with impatience: I wanted to see your countenance from whence I am
very apt, as I believe most people are, to form some general opinion of
the mind.  If the painter has taken you as well as he has done Mr. Harte
(for his picture is by far the most like I ever saw in my life), I draw
good conclusions from your countenance, which has both spirit and finesse
in it.  In bulk you are pretty well increased since I saw you; if your
height has not increased in proportion, I desire that you will make haste
to, complete it.  Seriously, I believe that your exercises at Paris will
make you shoot up to a good size; your legs, by all accounts, seem to
promise it.  Dancing excepted, the wholesome part is the best part of
those academical exercises.  'Ils degraissent leur homme'.

'A propos' of exercises, I have prepared everything for your reception at
Monsieur de la Gueriniere's, and your room, etc., will be ready at your
arrival.  I am sure you must be sensible how much better it will be for
you to be interne in the Academy for the first six or seven months at
least, than to be 'en hotel garni', at some distance from it, and obliged
to go to it every morning, let the weather be what it will, not to
mention the loss of time too; besides, by living and boarding in the
Academy, you will make an acquaintance with half the young fellows of
fashion at Paris; and in a very little while be looked upon as one of
them in all French companies: an advantage that has never yet happened to
any one Englishman that I have known.  I am sure you do not suppose that
the difference of the expense, which is but a trifle, has any weight with
me in this resolution.  You have the French language so perfectly, and
you will acquire the French 'tournure' so soon, that I do not know
anybody likely to pass their time so well at Paris as yourself.  Our
young countrymen have generally too little French, and too bad address,
either to present themselves, or be well received in the best French
companies; and, as a proof of it, there is no one instance of an
Englishman's having ever been suspected of a gallantry with a French
woman of condition, though every French woman of condition is more than
suspected of having a gallantry.  But they take up with the disgraceful
and dangerous commerce of prostitutes, actresses, dancing-women, and that
sort of trash; though, if they had common address, better achievements
would be extremely easy.  'Un arrangement', which is in plain English a
gallantry, is, at Paris, as necessary a part of a woman of fashion's
establishment, as her house, stable, coach, etc.  A young fellow must
therefore be a very awkward one, to be reduced to, or of a very singular
taste, to prefer drabs and danger to a commerce (in the course of the
world not disgraceful) with a woman of health, education, and rank.
Nothing sinks a young man into low company, both of women and men, so
surely as timidity and diffidence of himself.  If he thinks that he shall
not, he may depend upon it he will not please.  But with proper endeavors
to please, and a degree of persuasion that he shall, it is almost certain
that he will.  How many people does one meet with everywhere, who, with
very moderate parts, and very little knowledge, push themselves pretty
far, simply by being sanguine, enterprising, and persevering?  They will
take no denial from man or woman; difficulties do not discourage them;
repulsed twice or thrice, they rally, they charge again, and nine times
in ten prevail at last.  The same means will much sooner, and, more
certainly, attain the same ends, with your parts and knowledge.  You have
a fund to be sanguine upon, and good forces to rally.  In business
(talents supposed) nothing is more effectual or successful, than a good,
though concealed opinion of one's self, a firm resolution, and an
unwearied perseverance.  None but madmen attempt impossibilities; and
whatever is possible, is one way or another to be brought about.  If one
method fails, try another, and suit your methods to the characters you
have to do with.  At the treaty of the Pyrenees, which Cardinal Mazarin
and Don Louis de Haro concluded, 'dans l'Isle des Faisans', the latter
carried some very important points by his constant and cool perseverance.

The Cardinal had all the Italian vivacity and impatience; Don Louis all
the Spanish phlegm and tenaciousness.  The point which the Cardinal had
most at heart was, to hinder the re-establishment of the Prince of Conde,
his implacable enemy; but he was in haste to conclude, and impatient to
return to Court, where absence is always dangerous.  Don Louis observed
this, and never failed at every conference to bring the affair of the
Prince of Conde upon the tapis.  The Cardinal for some time refused even
to treat upon it.  Don Louis, with the same 'sang froid', as constantly
persisted, till he at last prevailed: contrary to the intentions and the
interest both of the Cardinal and of his Court.  Sense must distinguish
between what is impossible, and what is only difficult; and spirit and
perseverance will get the better of the latter.  Every man is to be had
one way or another, and every woman almost any way.  I must not omit one
thing, which is previously necessary to this, and, indeed, to everything
else; which is attention, a flexibility of attention; never to be wholly
engrossed by any past or future object, but instantly directed to the
present one, be it what it will.  An absent man can make but few
observations; and those will be disjointed and imperfect ones, as half
the circumstance must necessarily escape him.  He can pursue nothing
steadily, because his absences make him lose his way.  They are very
disagreeable, and hardly to be tolerated in old age; but in youth they
cannot be forgiven.  If you find that you have the least tendency to
them, pray watch yourself very carefully, and you may prevent them now;
but if you let them grow into habit, you will find it very difficult to
cure them hereafter, and a worse distemper I do not know.

I heard with great satisfaction the other day, from one who has been
lately at Rome, that nobody was better received in the best companies
than yourself.  The same thing, I dare say, will happen to you at Paris;
where they are particularly kind to all strangers, who will be civil to
them, and show a desire of pleasing.  But they must be flattered a
little, not only by words, but by a seeming preference given to their
country, their manners, and their customs; which is but a very small
price to pay for a very good reception.  Were I in Africa, I would pay it
to a negro for his goodwill.  Adieu.




LETTER CXVI

LONDON, June 11, O. S.  1750

MY DEAR FRIEND: The President Montesquieu (whom you will be acquainted
with at Paris), after having laid down in his book, 'De l'Esprit des
Lois', the nature and principles of the three different kinds of
government, viz, the democratical, the monarchical, and the despotic,
treats of the education necessary for each respective form.  His chapter
upon the education proper for the monarchical I thought worth
transcribing and sending to you.  You will observe that the monarchy
which he has in his eye is France:--

"In monarchies, the principal branch of education is not taught in
colleges or academies.  It commences, in some measure, at our setting out
in the world; for this is the school of what we call honor, that
universal preceptor, which ought everywhere to be our guide.

"Here it is that we constantly hear three rules or maxims, viz : That we
should have a certain nobleness in our virtues, a kind of frankness in
our morals, and a particular politeness in our behavior.

"The virtues we are here taught, are less what we owe to others, than to
ourselves; they are not so much what draws us toward society, as what
distinguishes us from our fellow-citizens.

"Here the actions of men are judged, not as virtuous, but as shining; not
as just, but as great; not as reasonable, but as extraordinary.

"When honor here meets with anything noble in our actions, it is either a
judge that approves them, or a sophister by whom they are excused.

"It allows of gallantry, when united with the idea of sensible affection,
or with that of conquest; this is the reason why we never meet with so
strict a purity of morals in monarchies as in republican governments.

"It allows of cunning and craft, when joined with the notion of greatness
of soul or importance of affairs; as, for instance, in politics, with
whose finenesses it is far from being offended.

"It does not forbid adulation, but when separate from the idea of a large
fortune, and connected only with the sense of our mean condition.

"With regard to morals, I have observed, that the education of monarchies
ought to admit of a certain frankness and open carriage.  Truth,
therefore, in conversation, is here a necessary point.  But is it for the
sake of truth.  By no means.  Truth is requisite only, because a person
habituated to veracity has an air of boldness and freedom.  And, indeed,
a man of this stamp seems to lay a stress only on the things themselves,
not on the manner in which they are received.

"Hence it is, that in proportion as this kind of frankness is commended,
that of the common people is despised, which has nothing but truth and
simplicity for its object.

"In fine, the education of monarchies requires a certain politeness of
behavior.  Man, a sociable animal, is formed to please in society; and a
person that would break through the rules of decency, so as to shock
those he conversed with, would lose the public esteem, and become
incapable of doing any good.

"But politeness, generally speaking, does not derive its original from so
pure a source.  It arises from a desire of distinguishing ourselves.  It
is pride that renders us polite; we are flattered with being taken notice
of for a behavior that shows we are not of a mean condition, and that we
have not been bred up with those who in all ages are considered as the
scum of the people.

"Politeness, in monarchies, is naturalized at court.  One man excessively
great renders everybody else little.  Hence that regard which is paid to
our fellow-subjects; hence that politeness, equally pleasing to those by
whom, as to those toward whom, it is practiced; because it gives people
to understand that a person actually belongs, or at least deserves to
belong, to the court.

"A court air consists in quitting a real for a borrowed greatness.  The
latter pleases the courtier more than the former.  It inspires him with a
certain disdainful modesty, which shows itself externally, but whose
pride insensibly diminishes in proportion to his distance from the source
of this greatness.

"At court we find a delicacy of taste in everything; a delicacy arising
from the constant use of the superfluities of life; from the variety, and
especially the satiety of pleasures; from the multiplicity and even
confusion of fancies, which, if they are not agreeable, are sure of being
well received.

"These are the things which properly fall within the province of
education, in order to form what we call a man of honor, a man possessed
of all the qualities and virtues requisite in this kind of government.

"Here it is that honor interferes with everything, mixing even with
people's manner of thinking, and directing their very principles.

"To this whimsical honor it is owing that the virtues are only just what
it pleases; it adds rules of its own invention to everything prescribed
to us; it extends or limits our duties according to its own fancy,
whether they proceed from religion, politics, or morality.

"There is nothing so strongly inculcated in monarchies, by the laws, by
religion, and honor, as submission to the Prince's will, but this very
honor tells us, that the Prince never ought to command a dishonorable
action, because this would render us incapable of serving him.

"Crillon refused to assassinate the Duke of Guise, but offered to fight
him.  After the massacre of St. Bartholomew, Charles IX., having sent
orders to the governors in the several provinces for the Huguenots to be
murdered, Viscount Dorte, who commanded at Bayonne, wrote thus to the
King: 'Sire, Among the inhabitants of this town, and your Majesty's
troops, I could not find so much as one executioner; they are honest
citizens and brave soldiers.  We jointly, therefore, beseech your Majesty
to command our arms and lives in things that are practicable.' This great
and generous soul looked upon a base action as a thing impossible.

"There is nothing that honor more strongly recommends to the nobility,
than to serve their Prince in a military capacity.  And indeed this is
their favorite profession, because its dangers, its success, and even its
miscarriages, are the road to grandeur.  Yet this very law, of its own
making, honor chooses to explain; and in case of any affront, it requires
or permits us to retire.

"It insists also, that we should be at liberty either to seek or to
reject employments; a liberty which it prefers even to an ample fortune.

"Honor, therefore, has its supreme laws, to which education is obliged to
conform.  The chief of these are, that we are permitted to set a value
upon our fortune, but are absolutely forbidden to set any upon our lives.

"The second is, that when we are raised to a post or preferment, we
should never do or permit anything which may seem to imply that we look
upon ourselves as inferior to the rank we hold.

"The third is, that those things which honor forbids are more rigorously
forbidden, when the laws do not concur in the prohibition; and those it
commands are more strongly insisted upon, when they happen not to be
commanded by law."


Though our government differs considerably from the French, inasmuch as
we have fixed laws and constitutional barriers for the security of our
liberties and properties, yet the President's observations hold pretty
near as true in England as in France.  Though monarchies may differ a
good deal, kings differ very little.  Those who are absolute desire to
continue so, and those who are not, endeavor to become so; hence the same
maxims and manners almost in all courts: voluptuousness and profusion
encouraged, the one to sink the people into indolence, the other into
poverty--consequently into dependence.  The court is called the world
here as well as at Paris; and nothing more is meant by saying that a man
knows the world, than that he knows courts.  In all courts you must
expect to meet with connections without friendship, enmities without
hatred, honor without virtue, appearances saved, and realities
sacrificed; good manners with bad morals; and all vice and virtues so
disguised, that whoever has only reasoned upon both would know neither
when he first met them at court.  It is well that you should know the map
of that country, that when you come to travel in it, you may do it with
greater safety.

From all this you will of yourself draw this obvious conclusion: That you
are in truth but now going to the great and important school, the world;
to which Westminster and Leipsig were only the little preparatory
schools, as Marylebone, Windsor, etc., are to them.  What you have
already acquired will only place you in the second form of this new
school, instead of the first.  But if you intend, as I suppose you do, to
get into the shell, you have very different things to learn from Latin
and Greek: and which require much more sagacity and attention than those
two dead languages; the language of pure and simple nature; the language
of nature variously modified and corrupted by passions, prejudices, and
habits; the language of simulation and dissimulation: very hard, but very
necessary to decipher.  Homer has not half so many, nor so difficult
dialects, as the great book of the school you are now going to.  Observe,
therefore, progressively, and with the greatest attention, what the best
scholars in the form immediately above you do, and so on, until you get
into the shell yourself.  Adieu.

Pray tell Mr. Harte that I have received his letter of the 27th May,
N. S., and that I advise him never to take the English newswriters
literally, who never yet inserted any one thing quite right.  I have both
his patent and his mandamus, in both which he is Walter, let the
newspapers call him what they please.




LETTER CXVII

LONDON, July 9, O. S.  1750.

MY DEAR FRIEND: I should not deserve that appellation in return from you,
if I did not freely and explicitly inform you of every corrigible defect
which I may either hear of, suspect, or at any time discover in you.
Those who, in the common course of the world, will call themselves your
friends; or whom, according to the common notions of friendship, you may
possibly think such, will never tell you of your faults, still less of
your weaknesses.  But, on the contrary, more desirous to make you their
friend, than to prove themselves yours, they will flatter both, and, in
truth, not be sorry for either.  Interiorly, most people enjoy the
inferiority of their best friends.  The useful and essential part of
friendship, to you, is reserved singly for Mr. Harte and myself: our
relations to you stand pure and unsuspected of all private views.
In whatever we say to you, we can have no interest but yours.  We are
therefore authorized to represent, advise, and remonstrate; and your
reason must tell you that you ought to attend to and believe us.

I am credibly informed, that there is still a considerable hitch or
hobble in your enunciation; and that when you speak fast you sometimes
speak unintelligibly.  I have formerly and frequently laid my thoughts
before you so fully upon this subject, that I can say nothing new upon it
now.  I must therefore only repeat, that your whole depends upon it.
Your trade is to speak well, both in public and in private.  The manner
of your speaking is full as important as the matter, as more people have
ears to be tickled, than understandings to judge.  Be your productions
ever so good, they will be of no use, if you stifle and strangle them in
their birth.  The best compositions of Corelli, if ill executed and
played out of tune, instead of touching, as they do when well performed,
would only excite the indignation of the hearer's, when murdered by an
unskillful performer.  But to murder your own productions, and that
'coram Populo', is a MEDEAN CRUELTY, which Horace absolutely forbids.
Remember of what importance Demosthenes, and one of the Gracchi, thought
ENUNCIATION; and read what stress Cicero and Quintilian lay upon it; even
the herb-women at Athens were correct judges of it.  Oratory, with all
its graces, that of enunciation in particular, is full as necessary in
our government as it ever was in Greece or Rome.  No man can make a
fortune or a figure in this country, without speaking, and speaking well
in public.  If you will persuade, you must first please; and if you will
please, you must tune your voice to harmony, you must articulate every
syllable distinctly, your emphasis and cadences must be strongly and
properly marked; and the whole together must be graceful and engaging: If
you do not speak in that manner, you had much better not speak at all.
All the learning you have, or ever can have, is not worth one groat
without it.  It may be a comfort and an amusement to you in your closet,
but can be of no use to you in the world.  Let me conjure you, therefore,
to make this your only object, till you have absolutely conquered it,
for that is in your power; think of nothing else, read and speak for
nothing else.  Read aloud, though alone, and read articulately and
distinctly, as if you were reading in public, and on the most important
occasion.  Recite pieces of eloquence, declaim scenes of tragedies to Mr.
Harte, as if he were a numerous audience.  If there is any particular
consonant which you have a difficulty in articulating, as I think you had
with the R, utter it millions and millions of times, till you have
uttered it right.  Never speak quick, till you have first learned to
speak well.  In short, lay aside every book, and every thought, that does
not directly tend to this great object, absolutely decisive of your
future fortune and figure.

The next thing necessary in your destination, is writing correctly,
elegantly, and in a good hand too; in which three particulars, I am sorry
to tell you, that you hitherto fail.  Your handwriting is a very bad one,
and would make a scurvy figure in an office-book of letters, or even in a
lady's pocket-book.  But that fault is easily cured by care, since every
man, who has the use of his eyes and of his right hand, can write
whatever hand he pleases.  As to the correctness and elegance of your
writing, attention to grammar does the one, and to the best authors the
other.  In your letter to me of the 27th June, N. S., you omitted the
date of the place, so that I only conjectured from the contents that you
were at Rome.

Thus I have, with the truth and freedom of the tenderest affection, told
you all your defects, at least all that I know or have heard of.  Thank
God, they are all very curable; they must be cured, and I am sure, you
will cure them.  That once done, nothing remains for you to acquire, or
for me to wish you, but the turn, the manners, the address, and the
GRACES, of the polite world; which experience, observation, and good
company; will insensibly give you.  Few people at your age have read,
seen, and known, so much as you have; and consequently few are so near as
yourself to what I call perfection, by which I only, mean being very near
as well as the best.  Far, therefore, from being discouraged by what you
still want, what you already have should encourage you to attempt, and
convince you that by attempting you will inevitably obtain it.  The
difficulties which you have surmounted were much greater than any you
have now to encounter.  Till very lately, your way has been only through
thorns and briars; the few that now remain are mixed with roses.
Pleasure is now the principal remaining part of your education.  It will
soften and polish your manners; it will make you pursue and at last
overtake the GRACES.  Pleasure is necessarily reciprocal; no one feels,
who does not at the same time give it.  To be pleased one must please.
What pleases you in others, will in general please them in you.  Paris is
indisputably the seat of the GRACES; they will even court you, if you are
not too coy.  Frequent and observe the best companies there, and you will
soon be naturalized among them; you will soon find how particularly
attentive they are to the correctness and elegance of their language,
and to the graces of their enunciation: they would even call the
understanding of a man in question, who should neglect or not know the
infinite advantages arising from them.  'Narrer, reciter, declamer bien',
are serious studies among them, and well deserve to be so everywhere.
The conversations, even among the women, frequently turn upon the
elegancies and minutest delicacies of the French language.  An
'enjouement', a gallant turn, prevails in all their companies, to women,
with whom they neither are, nor pretend to be, in love; but should you
(as may very possibly happen) fall really in love there with some woman
of fashion and sense (for I do not suppose you capable of falling in love
with a strumpet), and that your rival, without half your parts or
knowledge, should get the better of you, merely by dint of manners,
'enjouement, badinage', etc., how would you regret not having
sufficiently attended to those accomplishments which you despised as
superficial and trifling, but which you would then find of real
consequence in the course of the world!  And men, as well as women,
are taken by those external graces.  Shut up your books, then, now as a
business, and open them only as a pleasure; but let the great book of the
world be your serious study; read it over and over, get it by heart,
adopt its style, and make it your own.

When I cast up your account as it now stands, I rejoice to see the
balance so much in your favor; and that the items per contra are so few,
and of such a nature, that they may be very easily cancelled.  By way of
debtor and creditor, it stands thus:

Creditor.   By French                   Debtor. To English
               German                              Enunciation
               Italian                             Manners
               Latin
               Greek
               Logic
               Ethics
               History
               |Naturae
           Jus |Gentium
               |Publicum

This, my dear friend, is a very true account; and a very encouraging one
for you.  A man who owes so little can clear it off in a very little
time, and, if he is a prudent man, will; whereas a man who, by long
negligence, owes a great deal, despairs of ever being able to pay; and
therefore never looks into his account at all.

When you go to Genoa, pray observe carefully all the environs of it, and
view them with somebody who can tell you all the situations and
operations of the Austrian army, during that famous siege, if it deserves
to be called one; for in reality the town never was besieged, nor had the
Austrians any one thing necessary for a siege.  If Marquis Centurioni,
who was last winter in England, should happen to be there, go to him with
my compliments, and he will show you all imaginable civilities.

I could have sent you some letters to Florence, but that I knew Mr. Mann
would be of more use to you than all of them.  Pray make him my
compliments.  Cultivate your Italian, while you are at Florence, where it
is spoken in its utmost purity, but ill pronounced.

Pray save me the seed of some of the best melons you eat, and put it up
dry in paper.  You need not send it me; but Mr. Harte will bring it in
his pocket when he comes over.  I should likewise be glad of some
cuttings of the best figs, especially la Pica gentile and the Maltese;
but as this is not the season for them, Mr. Mann will, I dare say,
undertake that commission, and send them to me at the proper time by
Leghorn.  Adieu.  Endeavor to please others, and divert yourself as much
as ever you can, in 'honnete et galant homme'.

P.  S.  I send you the inclosed to deliver to Lord Rochford, upon your
arrival at Turin.




LETTER CXVIII.

LONDON, August 6, O. S.  1750

MY DEAR FRIEND:  Since your letter from Sienna, which gave me a very
imperfect account both of your illness and your recovery, I have not
received one word either from you or Mr. Harte.  I impute this to the
carelessness of the post simply: and the great distance between us at
present exposes our letters to those accidents.  But when you come to
Paris, from whence the letters arrive here very regularly, I shall insist
upon you writing to me constantly once a week; and that upon the same
day, for instance, every Thursday, that I may know by what mail to expect
your letter.  I shall also require you to be more minute in your account
of yourself than you have hitherto been, or than I have required, because
of the informations which I receive from time to time from Mr. Harte.
At Paris you will be out of your time, and must set up for yourself; it
is then that I shall be very solicitous to know how you carry on your
business.  While Mr. Harte was your partner, the care was his share, and
the profit yours.  But at Paris, if you will have the latter, you must
take the former along with it.  It will be quite a new world to you; very
different from the little world that you have hitherto seen; and you will
have much more to do in it.  You must keep your little accounts
constantly every morning, if you would not have them run into confusion,
and swell to a bulk that would frighten you from ever looking into them
at all.  You must allow some time for learning what you do not know, and
some for keeping what you do know; and you must leave a great deal of
time for your pleasures; which (I repeat it, again) are now become the
most necessary part of your education.  It is by conversations, dinners,
suppers, entertainments, etc., in the best companies, that you must be
formed for the world.  'Les manieres les agremens, les graces' cannot be
learned by theory; they are only to be got by use among those who have
them; and they are now the main object of your life, as they are the
necessary steps to your fortune.  A man of the best parts, and the
greatest learning, if he does not know the world by his own experience
and observation, will be very absurd; and consequently very unwelcome in
company.  He may say very good things; but they will probably be so ill-
timed, misplaced, or improperly addressed, that he had much better hold
his tongue.  Full of his own matter, and uninformed of; or inattentive
to, the particular circumstances and situations of the company, he vents
it indiscriminately; he puts some people out of countenance; he shocks
others; and frightens all, who dread what may come out next.  The most
general rule that I can give you for the world, and which your experience
will convince you of the truth of, is, Never to give the tone to the
company, but to take it from them; and to labor more to put them in
conceit with themselves, than to make them admire you.  Those whom you
can make like themselves better, will, I promise you, like you very well.

A system-monger, who, without knowing anything of the world by
experience, has formed a system, of it in his dusty cell, lays it down,
for example, that (from the general nature of mankind) flattery is
pleasing.  He will therefore flatter.  But how?  Why, indiscriminately.
And instead of repairing and heightening the piece judiciously, with soft
colors and a delicate pencil,--with a coarse brush and a great deal of
whitewash, he daubs and besmears the piece he means to adorn.  His
flattery offends even his patron; and is almost too gross for his
mistress.  A man of the world knows the force of flattery as well as he
does; but then he knows how, when, and where to give it; he proportions
his dose to the constitution of the patient.  He flatters by application,
by inference, by comparison, by hint, and seldom directly.  In the course
of the world, there is the same difference in everything between system
and practice.

I long to have you at Paris, which is to be your great school; you will
be then in a manner within reach of me.

Tell me, are you perfectly recovered, or do you still find any remaining
complaint upon your lungs?  Your diet should be cooling, and at the same
time nourishing.  Milks of all kinds are proper for you; wines of all
kinds bad.  A great deal of gentle, and no violent exercise, is good for
you.  Adieu.  'Gratia, fama, et valetudo, contingat, abunde!'




LETTER CXIX

LONDON, October 22, O. S.  1750

MY DEAR FRIEND:  This letter will, I am persuaded, find you, and I hope
safely, arrived at Montpelier;  from whence I trust that Mr. Harte's
indisposition will, by being totally removed, allow you to get to Paris
before Christmas.  You will there find two people who, though both
English, I recommend in the strongest manner possible to your attention;
and advise you to form the most intimate connections with them both, in
their, different ways.  The one is a man whom you already know something
of, but not near enough: it is the Earl of Huntingdon; who, next to you,
is the truest object of my affection and esteem; and who (I am proud to
say it) calls me, and considers me as his adopted father.  His parts are
as quick as his knowledge is extensive; and if quality were worth putting
into an account, where every other item is so much more valuable, he is
the first almost in this country: the figure he will make in it, soon
after he returns to it, will, if I am not more mistaken than ever I was
in my life, equal his birth and my hopes.  Such a connection will be of
infinite advantage to you; and, I can assure you, that he is extremely
disposed to form it upon my account; and will, I hope and believe, desire
to improve and cement it upon your own.

In our parliamentary government, connections are absolutely necessary;
and, if prudently formed and ably maintained, the success of them is
infallible.  There are two sorts of connections, which I would always
advise you to have in view.  The first I will call equal ones; by which I
mean those, where the two connecting parties reciprocally find their
account, from pretty near an equal degree of parts and abilities.  In
those, there must be a freer communication; each must see that the other
is able, and be convinced that he is willing to be of use to him.  Honor
must be the principle of such connections; and there must be a mutual
dependence, that present and separate interest shall not be able to break
them.  There must be a joint system of action; and, in case of different
opinions, each must recede a little, in order at last to form an
unanimous one.  Such, I hope, will be your connection with Lord
Huntingdon.  You will both come into parliament at the same time; and if
you have an equal share of abilities and application, you and he, with
other young people, with whom you will naturally associate, may form a
band which will be respected by any administration, and make a figure in
the public.  The other sort of connections I call unequal ones; that is,
where the parts are all on one side, and the rank and fortune on the
other.  Here, the advantage is all on one side; but that advantage must
be ably and artfully concealed.  Complaisance, an engaging manner, and a
patient toleration of certain airs of superiority, must cement them.
The weaker party must be taken by the heart, his head giving no hold;
and he must be governed by being made to believe that he governs.
These people, skillfully led, give great weight to their leader.
I have formerly pointed out to you a couple that I take to be proper
objects for your skill; and you will meet with twenty more, for they are
very rife.

The other person whom I recommended to you is a woman; not as a woman,
for that is not immediately my business; besides, I fear that she is
turned of fifty.  It is Lady Hervey, whom I directed you to call upon at
Dijon, but who, to my great joy, because to your great advantage, passes
all this winter at Paris.  She has been bred all her life at courts; of
which she has acquired all the easy good-breeding and politeness, without
the frivolousness.  She has all the reading that a woman should have; and
more than any woman need have; for she understands Latin perfectly well,
though she wisely conceals it.  As she will look upon you as her son,
I desire that you will look upon her as my delegate: trust, consult,
and apply to her without reserve.  No woman ever had more than she has,
'le ton de la parfaitement bonne compagnie, les manieres engageantes, et
le je ne sais quoi qui plait'.  Desire her to reprove and correct any,
and every, the least error and in-, accuracy in your manners, air,
address, etc.  No woman in Europe can do it so well; none will do it more
willingly, or in a more proper and obliging manner.  In such a case she
will not put you out of countenance, by telling you of it in company;
but either intimate it by some sign, or wait for an opportunity when you
are alone together.  She is also in the best French company, where she
will not only introduce but PUFF you, if I may use so low a word.  And I
can assure you that it is no little help, in the 'beau monde', to be
puffed there by a fashionable woman.  I send you the inclosed billet to
carry her, only as a certificate of the identity of your person, which I
take it for granted she could not know again.

You would be so much surprised to receive a whole letter from me without
any mention of the exterior ornaments necessary for a gentleman, as
manners, elocution, air, address, graces, etc., that, to comply with your
expectations, I will touch upon them; and tell you, that when you come to
England, I will show you some people, whom I do not now care to name,
raised to the highest stations singly by those exterior and adventitious
ornaments, whose parts would never have entitled them to the smallest
office in the excise.  Are they then necessary, and worth acquiring, or
not?  You will see many instances of this kind at Paris, particularly a
glaring one, of a person --[M. le Marechal de Richelieu]-- raised to the
highest posts and dignities in France, as well as to be absolute
sovereign of the 'beau monde', simply by the graces of his person and
address; by woman's chit-chat, accompanied with important gestures; by an
imposing air and pleasing abord.  Nay, by these helps, he even passes for
a wit, though he hath certainly no uncommon share of it.  I will not name
him, because it would be very imprudent in you to do it.  A young fellow,
at his first entrance into the 'beau monde', must not offend the king 'de
facto' there.  It is very often more necessary to conceal contempt than
resentment, the former forgiven, but the latter sometimes forgot.

There is a small quarto book entitled, 'Histoire Chronologique de la
France', lately published by Le President Henault, a man of parts and
learning, with whom you will probably get acquainted at Paris.  I desire
that it may always lie upon your table, for your recourse as often as you
read history.  The chronology, though chiefly relative to the history of
France, is not singly confined to it; but the most interesting events of
all the rest of Europe are also inserted, and many of them adorned by
short, pretty, and just reflections.  The new edition of 'Les Memoires de
Sully', in three quarto volumes, is also extremely well worth your
reading, as it will give you a clearer, and truer notion of one of the
most interesting periods of the French history, than you can yet have
formed from all the other books you may have read upon the subject.  That
prince, I mean Henry the Fourth, had all the accomplishments and virtues
of a hero, and of a king, and almost of a man.  The last are the most
rarely seen.  May you possess them all!  Adieu.

Pray make my compliments to Mr. Harte, and let him know that I have this
moment received his letter of the 12th, N. S., from Antibes.  It requires
no immediate answer; I shall therefore delay mine till I have another
from him.  Give him the inclosed, which I have received from Mr. Eliot.




LETTER CXX

LONDON, November 1, O. S.  1750

MY DEAR FRIEND:  I hope that this letter will not find you still at
Montpelier, but rather be sent after you from thence to Paris, where,
I am persuaded, that Mr. Harte could find as good advice for his leg as
at Montpelier, if not better; but if he is of a different opinion, I am
sure you ought to stay there, as long as he desires.

While you are in France, I could wish that the hours you allot for
historical amusement should be entirely devoted to the history of France.
One always reads history to most advantage in that country to which it is
relative; not only books, but persons being ever at hand to solve doubts
and clear up difficulties.  I do by no means advise you to throw away
your time in ransacking, like a dull antiquarian, the minute and
unimportant parts of remote and fabulous times.  Let blockheads read what
blockheads wrote.  And a general notion of the history of France, from
the conquest of that country by the Franks, to the reign of Louis the
Eleventh, is sufficient for use, consequently sufficient for you.  There
are, however, in those remote times, some remarkable eras that deserve
more particular attention; I mean those in which some notable alterations
happened in the constitution and form of government.  As, for example,
in the settlement of Clovis in Gaul, and the form of government which he
then established; for, by the way; that form of government differed in
this particular from all the other Gothic governments, that the people,
neither collectively nor by representatives, had any share in it.  It was
a mixture of monarchy and aristocracy: and what were called the States
General of France consisted only of the nobility and clergy till the time
of Philip le Bel, in the very beginning of the fourteenth century, who
first called the people to those assemblies, by no means for the good of
the people, who were only amused by this pretended honor, but, in truth,
to check the nobility and clergy, and induce them to grant the money he
wanted for his profusion; this was a scheme of Enguerrand de Marigny, his
minister, who governed both him and his kingdom to such a degree as to,
be called the coadjutor and governor of the kingdom.  Charles Martel laid
aside these assemblies, and governed by open force.  Pepin restored them,
and attached them to him, and with them the nation; by which means he
deposed Childeric and mounted the throne.  This is a second period worth
your attention.  The third race of kings, which begins with Hugues Capet,
is a third period.  A judicious reader of history will save himself a
great deal of time and trouble by attending with care only to those
interesting periods of history which furnish remarkable events, and make
eras, and going slightly over the, common run of events.  Some people
read history as others read the "Pilgrim's Progress"; giving equal
attention to, and indiscriminately loading their memories with every part
alike.  But I would have you read it in a different manner; take the
shortest general history you can find of every country; and mark down in
that history the most important periods, such as conquests, changes of
kings, and alterations of the form of government; and then have recourse
to more extensive histories or particular treatises, relative to those
great points.  Consider them well, trace up their causes, and follow
their consequences.  For instance, there is a most excellent, though very
short history of France, by Le Gendre.  Read that with attention, and you
will know enough of the general history; but when you find there such
remarkable periods as are above mentioned, consult Mezeray, and other of
the best and minutest historians, as well as political treatises upon
those subjects.  In later times, memoirs, from those of Philip de
Commines, down to the innumerble ones in the reign of Louis the
Fourteenth, have been of great use, and thrown great light upon
particular parts of history.

Conversation in France, if you have the address and dexterity to turn it
upon useful subjects, will exceedingly improve your historical knowledge;
for people there, however classically ignorant they may be, think it a
shame to be ignorant of the history of their own country: they read that,
if they read nothing else, and having often read nothing else, are proud
of having read that, and talk of it willingly; even the women are well
instructed in that sort of reading.  I am far from meaning by this that
you should always be talking wisely in company, of books, history, and
matters of knowledge.  There are many companies which you will, and ought
to keep, where such conversations would be misplaced and ill-timed; your
own good sense must distinguish the company and the time.  You must
trifle only with triflers; and be serious only with the serious, but
dance to those who pipe.  'Cur in theatrum Cato severs venisti?'  was
justly said to an old man: how much more so would it be to one of your
age?  From the moment that you are dressed and go out, pocket all your
knowledge with your watch, and never pull it out in company unless
desired: the producing of the one unasked, implies that you are weary of
the company; and the producing of the other unrequired, will make the
company weary of you.  Company is a republic too jealous of its
liberties, to suffer a dictator even for a quarter of an hour; and yet in
that, as in republics, there are some few who really govern; but then it
is by seeming to disclaim, instead of attempting to usurp the power; that
is the occasion in which manners, dexterity, address, and the undefinable
'je ne sais quoi' triumph; if properly exerted, their conquest is sure,
and the more lasting for not being perceived.  Remember, that this is not
only your first and greatest, but ought to be almost your only object,
while you are in France.

I know that many of your countrymen are apt to call the freedom and
vivacity of the French petulancy and illbreeding; but, should you think
so, I desire upon many accounts that you will not say so; I admit that it
may be so in some instances of 'petits maitres Etourdis', and in some
young people unbroken to the world; but I can assure you, that you will
find it much otherwise with people of a certain rank and age, upon whose
model you will do very well to form yourself.  We call their steady
assurance, impudence why?  Only because what we call modesty is awkward
bashfulness and 'mauvaise honte'.  For my part, I see no impudence, but,
on the contrary, infinite utility and advantage in presenting one's self
with the same coolness and unconcern in any and every company.  Till one
can do that, I am very sure that one can never present one's self well.
Whatever is done under concern and embarrassment, must be ill done, and,
till a man is absolutely easy and unconcerned in every company, he will
never be thought to have kept good company, nor be very welcome in it.
A steady assurance, with seeming modesty, is possibly the most useful
qualification that a man can have in every part of life.  A man would
certainly make a very considerable fortune and figure in the world, whose
modesty and timidity should often, as bashfulness always does (put him in
the deplorable and lamentable situation of the pious AEneas, when
'obstupuit, steteruntque comae; et vox faucibus haesit!).  Fortune (as
well as women)--

               "---------born to be controlled,
               Stoops to the forward and the bold."

Assurance and intrepidity, under the white banner of seeming modesty,
clear the way for merit, that would otherwise be discouraged by
difficulties in its journey; whereas barefaced impudence is the noisy and
blustering harbinger of a worthless and senseless usurper.

You will think that I shall never have done recommending to you these
exterior worldly accomplishments, and you will think right, for I never
shall; they are of too great consequence to you for me to be indifferent
or negligent about them: the shining part of your future figure and
fortune depends now wholly upon them.  These are the acquisitions which
must give efficacy and success to those you have already made.  To have
it said and believed that you are the most learned man in England, would
be no more than was said and believed of Dr. Bentley; but to have it
said, at the same time, that you are also the best-bred, most polite, and
agreeable man in the kingdom, would be such a happy composition of a
character as I never yet knew any one man deserve; and which I will
endeavor, as well as ardently wish, that you may.  Absolute perfection
is, I well know, unattainable; but I know too, that a man of parts may be
unweariedly aiming at it, and arrive pretty near it.  Try, labor,
persevere.  Adieu.




LETTER CXXI

LONDON, November 8, O. S.  1750

MY DEAR FRIEND:  Before you get to Paris, where you will soon be left to
your own discretion, if you have any, it is necessary that we should
understand one another thoroughly; which is the most probable way of
preventing disputes.  Money, the cause of much mischief in the world, is
the cause of most quarrels between fathers and sons; the former commonly
thinking that they cannot give too little, and the latter, that they
cannot have enough; both equally in the wrong.  You must do me the
justice to acknowledge, that I have hitherto neither stinted nor grudged
any expense that could be of use or real pleasure to you; and I can
assure you, by the way, that you have traveled at a much more
considerable expense than I did myself; but I never so much as thought of
that, while Mr. Harte was at the head of your finances; being very sure
that the sums granted were scrupulously applied to the uses for which
they were intended.  But the case will soon be altered, and you will be
your own receiver and treasurer.  However, I promise you, that we will
not quarrel singly upon the quantum, which shall be cheerfully and freely
granted: the application and appropriation of it will be the material
point, which I am now going to clear up and finally settle with you.
I will fix, or even name, no settled allowance; though I well know in my
own mind what would be the proper one; but I will first try your
draughts, by which I can in a good degree judge of your conduct.  This
only I tell you in general, that if the channels through which my money
is to go are the proper ones, the source shall not be scanty; but should
it deviate into dirty, muddy, and obscure ones (which by the bye, it
cannot do for a week without my knowing it); I give you fair and timely
notice, that the source will instantly be dry.  Mr. Harte,
in establishing you at Paris, will point out to you those proper
channels; he will leave you there upon the foot of a man of fashion, and
I will continue you upon the same; you will have your coach, your valet
de chambre, your own footman, and a valet de place; which, by the way, is
one servant more than I had.  I would have you very well dressed, by
which I mean dressed as the generality of people of fashion are; that is,
not to be taken notice of, for being either more or less fine than other
people: it is by being well dressed, not finely dressed, that a gentleman
should be distinguished.  You must frequent 'les spectacles', which
expense I shall willingly supply.  You must play 'a des petits jeux de
commerce' in mixed companies; that article is trifling; I shall pay it
cheerfully.  All the other articles of pocket-money are very
inconsiderable at Paris, in comparison of what they are here, the silly
custom of giving money wherever one dines or sups, and the expensive
importunity of subscriptions, not being yet introduced there.  Having
thus reckoned up all the decent expenses of a gentleman, which I will
most readily defray, I come now to those which I will neither bear nor
supply.  The first of these is gaming, of which, though I have not the
least reason to suspect you, I think it necessary eventually to assure
you, that no consideration in the world shall ever make me pay your play
debts; should you ever urge to me that your honor is pawned, I should
most immovably answer you, that it was your honor, not mine, that was
pawned; and that your creditor might e'en take the pawn for the debt.

Low company, and low pleasures, are always much more costly than liberal
and elegant ones.  The disgraceful riots of a tavern are much more
expensive, as well as dishonorable, than the sometimes pardonable
excesses in good company.  I must absolutely hear of no tavern scrapes
and squabbles.

I come now to another and very material point; I mean women; and I will
not address myself to you upon this subject, either in a religious, a
moral, or a parental style.  I will even lay aside my age, remember
yours, and speak to you as one man of pleasure, if he had parts too,
would speak to another.  I will by no means pay for whores, and their
never-failing consequences, surgeons; nor will I, upon any account, keep
singers, dancers, actresses, and 'id genus omne'; and, independently of
the expense, I must tell you, that such connections would give me,
and all sensible people, the utmost contempt for your parts and address;
a young fellow must have as little sense as address, to venture, or more
properly to sacrifice, his health and ruin his fortune, with such sort of
creatures; in such a place as Paris especially, where gallantry is both
the profession and the practice of every woman of fashion.  To speak
plainly, I will not forgive your understanding c--------s and p-------s;
nor will your constitution forgive them you.  These distempers, as well
as their cures, fall nine times in ten upon the lungs.  This argument,
I am sure, ought to have weight with you: for I protest to you, that if
you meet with any such accident, I would not give one year's purchase for
your life.  Lastly, there is another sort of expense that I will not
allow, only because it is a silly one; I mean the fooling away your money
in baubles at toy shops.  Have one handsome snuff-box (if you take
snuff), and one handsome sword; but then no more pretty and very useless
things.

By what goes before, you will easily perceive that I mean to allow you
whatever is necessary, not only for the figure, but for the pleasures of
a gentleman, and not to supply the profusion of a rake.  This, you must
confess, does not savor of either the severity or parsimony of old age.
I consider this agreement between us, as a subsidiary treaty on my part,
for services to be performed on yours.  I promise you, that I will be as
punctual in the payment of the subsidies, as England has been during the
last war; but then I give you notice at the same time, that I require a
much more scrupulous execution of the treaty on your part, than we met
with on that of our allies; or else that payment will be stopped.  I hope
all that I have now said was absolutely unnecessary, and that sentiments
more worthy and more noble than pecuniary ones, would of themselves have
pointed out to you the conduct I recommend; but, at all events, I
resolved to be once for all explicit with you, that, in the worst that
can happen, you may not plead ignorance, and complain that I had not
sufficiently explained to you my intentions.

Having mentioned the word rake, I must say a word or two more on that
subject, because young people too frequently, and always fatally, are apt
to mistake that character for that of a man of pleasure; whereas, there
are not in the world two characters more different.  A rake is a
composition of all the lowest, most ignoble, degrading, and shameful
vices; they all conspire to disgrace his character, and to ruin his
fortune; while wine and the p-------s contend which shall soonest and
most effectually destroy his constitution.  A dissolute, flagitious
footman, or porter, makes full as good a rake as a man of the first
quality.  By the bye, let me tell you, that in the wildest part of my
youth, I never was a rake, but, on the contrary, always detested and
despised that character.

A man of pleasure, though not always so scrupulous as he should be, and
as one day he will wish he had been, refines at least his pleasures by
taste, accompanies them with decency, and enjoys them with dignity.
Few men can be men of pleasure, every man may be a rake.  Remember that
I shall know everything you say or do at Paris, as exactly as if, by the
force of magic, I could follow you everywhere, like a sylph or a gnome,
invisible myself.  Seneca says, very prettily, that one should ask
nothing of God, but what one should be willing that men should know; nor
of men, but what one should be willing that God should know.  I advise
you to say and do nothing at Paris, but what you would be willing that
I should know.  I hope, nay, I believe, that will be the case.  Sense,
I dare say, you do not want; instruction, I am sure, you have never
wanted: experience you are daily gaining: all which together must
inevitably (I should think) make you both 'respectable et aimable', the
perfection of a human character.  In that case nothing shall be wanting
on my part, and you shall solidly experience all the extent and
tenderness of my affection for you; but dread the reverse of both! Adieu!

P. S.  When you get to Paris, after you have been to wait on Lord
Albemarle, go to see Mr. Yorke, whom I have particular reasons for
desiring that you should be well with, as I shall hereafter explain to
you.  Let him know that my orders, and your own inclinations, conspired
to make you desire his friendship and protection.




LETTER CXXII


MY DEAR FRIEND: I have sent you so many preparatory letters for Paris,
that this, which will meet you there, shall only be a summary of them
all.

You have hitherto had more liberty than anybody of your age ever had;
and I must do you the justice to own, that you have made a better use of
it than most people of your age would have done; but then, though you had
not a jailer, you had a friend with you.  At Paris, you will not only be
unconfined, but unassisted.  Your own good sense must be your only guide:
I have great confidence in it, and am convinced that I shall receive just
such accounts of your conduct at Paris as I could wish; for I tell you
beforehand, that I shall be most minutely informed of all that you do,
and almost of all that you say there.  Enjoy the pleasures of youth,
you cannot do better: but refine and dignify them like a man, of parts;
let them raise, and not sink; let them adorn and not vilify your
character; let them, in short, be the pleasures of a gentleman, and taken
with your equals at least, but rather with your superiors, and those
chiefly French.

Inquire into the characters of the several Academicians, before you form
a connection with any of them; and be most upon your guard against those
who make the most court to you.

You cannot study much in the Academy; but you may study usefully there,
if you are an economist of your time, and bestow only upon good books
those quarters and halves of hours, which occur to everybody in the
course of almost every day; and which, at the year's end, amount to a
very considerable sum of time.  Let Greek, without fail, share some part
of every day; I do not mean the Greek poets, the catches of Anacreon, or
the tender complaints of Theocritus, or even the porter-like language of
Homer's heroes; of whom all smatterers in Greek know a little, quote
often, and talk of always; but I mean Plato, Aristoteles, Demosthenes,
and Thucydides, whom none but adepts know.  It is Greek that must
distinguish you in the learned world, Latin alone will not: and Greek
must be sought to be retained, for it never occurs like Latin.  When you
read history or other books of amusement, let every language you are
master of have its turn, so that you may not only retain, but improve in
everyone.  I also desire that you will converse in German and Italian,
with all the Germans and the Italians with whom you converse at all.
This will be a very agreeable and flattering thing to them, and a very
useful one to you.

Pray apply yourself diligently to your exercises; for though the doing
them well is not supremely meritorious, the doing them ill is illiberal,
vulgar, and ridiculous.

I recommend theatrical representations to you; which are excellent at
Paris.  The tragedies of Corneille and Racine, and the comedies of
Moliere, well attended to, are admirable lessons, both for the heart and
the head.  There is not, nor ever was, any theatre comparable to the
French.  If the music of the French operas does not please your Italian
ear, the words of them, at least, are sense and poetry, which is much
more than I can, say of any Italian opera that I ever read or heard in my
life.

I send you the inclosed letter of recommendation to Marquis Matignon,
which I would have you deliver to him as soon as you can; you will, I am
sure, feel the good effects of his warm friendship for me and Lord
Bolingbroke, who has also wrote to him upon your subject.  By that, and
by the other letters which I have sent you, you will be at once so
thoroughly introduced into the best French company, that you must take
some pains if you will keep bad; but that is what I do not suspect you
of.  You have, I am sure, too much right ambition to prefer low and
disgraceful company to that of your superiors, both in rank and age.
Your character, and consequently your fortune, absolutely depends upon
the company you keep, and the turn you take at Paris.  I do not in the
least mean a grave turn; on the contrary, a gay, a sprightly, but, at the
same time, an elegant and liberal one.

Keep carefully out of all scrapes and quarrels.  They lower a character
extremely; and are particularly dangerous in France; where a man is
dishonored by not resenting an affront, and utterly ruined by resenting
it.  The young Frenchmen are hasty, giddy, and petulant; extremely
national, and 'avantageux'.  Forbear from any national jokes or
reflections, which are always improper, and commonly unjust.  The colder
northern nations generally look upon France as a whistling, singing,
dancing, frivolous nation; this notion is very far from being a true one,
though many 'Petits maitres' by their behavior seem to justify it; but
those very 'petits maltres', when mellowed by age and experience, very
often turn out very able men.  The number of great generals and
statesmen, as well as excellent authors, that France has produced, is an
undeniable proof, that it is not that frivolous, unthinking, empty nation
that northern prejudices suppose it.  Seem to like and approve of
everything at first, and I promise you that you will like and approve of
many things afterward.

I expect that you will write to me constantly, once every week, which I
desire may be every Thursday; and that your letters may inform me of your
personal transactions: not of what you see, but of whom you see, and what
you do.

Be your own monitor, now that you will have no other.  As to enunciation,
I must repeat it to you again and again, that there is no one thing so
necessary: all other talents, without that, are absolutely useless,
except in your own closet.

It sounds ridiculously to bid you study with your dancing-master; and yet
I do.  The bodily-carriage and graces are of infinite consequence to
everybody, and more particularly to you.

Adieu for this time, my dear child.  Yours tenderly.




LETTER CXXIII

LONDON, November 12, O. S.  1750

MY DEAR FRIEND: You will possibly think, that this letter turns upon
strange, little, trifling objects; and you will think right, if you
consider them separately; but if you take them aggregately, you will be
convinced that as parts, which conspire to form that whole, called the
exterior of a man of fashion, they are of importance.  I shall not dwell
now upon these personal graces, that liberal air, and that engaging
address, which I have so often recommended to you; but descend still
lower, to your dress, cleanliness, and care of your person.

When you come to Paris, you may take care to be extremely well dressed;
that is, as the fashionable people are; this does by no means consist in
the finery, but in the taste, fitness, and manner of wearing your
clothes; a fine suit ill-made, and slatternly or stiffly worn, far from
adorning, only exposes the awkwardness of the wearer.  Get the best
French tailor to make your clothes, whatever they are, in the fashion,
and to fit you: and then wear them, button them, or unbutton them, as the
genteelest people you see do.  Let your man learn of the best friseur to
do your hair well, for that is a very material part of your dress.  Take
care to have your stockings well gartered up, and your shoes well
buckled; for nothing gives a more slovenly air to a man than ill-dressed
legs.  In your person you must be accurately clean; and your teeth,
hands, and nails, should be superlatively so; a dirty mouth has real ill
consequences to the owner, for it infallibly causes the decay, as well as
the intolerable pain of the teeth, and it is very offensive to his
acquaintance, for it will most inevitably stink.  I insist, therefore,
that you wash your teeth the first thing you do every morning, with a
soft sponge and swarm water, for four or five minutes; and then wash your
mouth five or six times.  Mouton, whom I desire you will send for upon
your arrival at Paris, will give you an opiate, and a liquor to be used
sometimes.  Nothing looks more ordinary, vulgar, and illiberal, than
dirty hands, and ugly, uneven, and ragged nails: I do not suspect you of
that shocking, awkward trick, of biting yours; but that is not enough:
you must keep the ends of them smooth and clean, not tipped with black,
as the ordinary people's always are.  The ends of your nails should be
small segments of circles, which, by a very little care in the cutting,
they are very easily brought to; every time that you wipe your hands, rub
the skin round your nails backward, that it may not grow up, and shorten
your nails too much.  The cleanliness of the rest of your person, which,
by the way, will conduce greatly to your health, I refer from time to
time to the bagnio.  My mentioning these particulars arises (I freely
own) from some suspicion that the hints are not unnecessary; for, when
you were a schoolboy, you were slovenly and dirty above your fellows.
I must add another caution, which is that upon no account whatever, you
put your fingers, as too many people are apt to do, in your nose or ears.
It is the most shocking, nasty, vulgar rudeness, that can be offered to
company; it disgusts one, it turns one's stomach; and, for my own part,
I would much rather know that a man's fingers were actually in his
breech, than see them in his nose.  Wash your ears well every morning,
and blow your nose in your handkerchief whenever you have occasion; but,
by the way, without looking at it , afterward.  There should be in the
least, as well as in the greatest parts of a gentleman, 'les manieres
nobles'.  Sense will teach you some, observation others; attend carefully
to the manners, the diction, the motions, of people of the first fashion,
and form your own upon them.  On the other hand, observe a little those
of the vulgar, in order to avoid them: for though the things which they
say or do may be the same, the manner is always totally different: and in
that, and nothing else, consists the characteristic of a man of fashion.
The lowest peasant speaks, moves, dresses, eats, and drinks, as much as a
man of the first fashion, but does them all quite differently; so that by
doing and saying most things in a manner opposite to that of the vulgar,
you have a great chance of doing and saying them right.  There are
gradations in awkwardness and vulgarism, as there are in everything else.
'Les manieres de robe', though not quite right, are still better than
'les manieres bourgeoises'; and these, though bad, are still better than
'les manieres de campagne'.  But the language, the air, the dress, and
the manners of the court, are the only true standard 'des manieres
nobles, et d'un honnete homme.  Ex pede Herculem' is an old and true
saying, and very applicable to our present subject; for a man of parts,
who has been bred at courts, and used to keep the best company, will
distinguish himself, and is to be known from the vulgar by every word,
attitude, gesture, and even look.  I cannot leave these seeming
'minutiae', without repeating to you the necessity of your carving well;
which is an article, little as it is, that is useful twice every day of
one's life; and the doing it ill is very troublesome to one's self, and
very disagreeable, often ridiculous, to others.

Having said all this, I cannot help reflecting, what a formal dull
fellow, or a cloistered pedant, would say, if they were to see this
letter: they would look upon it with the utmost contempt, and say that
surely a father might find much better topics for advice to a son.
I would admit it, if I had given you, or that you were capable of
receiving, no better; but if sufficient pains have been taken to form
your heart and improve your mind, and, as I hope, not without success,
I will tell those solid gentlemen, that all these trifling things,
as they think them, collectively, form that pleasing 'je ne sais quoi',
that ensemble, which they are utter strangers to both in themselves and
others.  The word aimable is not known in their language, or the thing in
their manners.  Great usage of the world, great attention, and a great
desire of pleasing, can alone give it; and it is no trifle.  It is from
old people's looking upon these things as trifles, or not thinking of
them at all, that so many young people are so awkward and so ill-bred.
Their parents, often careless and unmindful of them, give them only the
common run of education, as school, university, and then traveling;
without examining, and very often without being able to judge, if they
did examine, what progress they make in any one of these stages.  Then,
they carelessly comfort themselves, and say, that their sons will do like
other people's sons; and so they do, that is, commonly very ill.  They
correct none of the childish nasty tricks, which they get at school;
nor the illiberal manners which they contract at the university; nor the
frivolous and superficial pertness, which is commonly all that they
acquire by their travels.  As they do not tell them of these things,
nobody else can; so they go on in the practice of them, without ever
hearing, or knowing, that they are unbecoming, indecent, and shocking.
For, as I have often formerly observed to you, nobody but a father can
take the liberty to reprove a young fellow, grown up, for those kinds of
inaccuracies and improprieties of behavior.  The most intimate
friendship, unassisted by the paternal superiority, will not authorize
it.  I may truly say, therefore, that you are happy in having me for a
sincere, friendly, and quick-sighted monitor.  Nothing will escape me:
I shall pry for your defects, in order to correct them, as curiously as
I shall seek for your perfections, in order to applaud and reward them,
with this difference only, that I shall publicly mention the latter, and
never hint at the former, but in a letter to, or a tete-d-tete with you.
I will never put you out of countenance before company; and I hope you
will never give me reason to be out of countenance for you, as any one of
the above-mentioned defects would make me.  'Praetor non, curat de
minimis', was a maxim in the Roman law; for causes only of a certain
value were tried by him but there were inferior jurisdictions, that took
cognizance of the smallest.  Now I shall try you, not only as 'praetor'
in the greatest, but as 'censor' in lesser, and as the lowest magistrate
in the least cases.

I have this moment received Mr. Harte's letter of the 1st November,
N. S., by which I am very glad to find that he thinks of moving toward
Paris, the end of this month, which looks as if his leg were better;
besides, in my opinion, you both of you only lose time at Montpelier;
he would find better advice, and you better company, at Paris.  In the
meantime, I hope you go into the best company there is at Montpelier;
and there always is some at the Intendant's, or the Commandant's.  You
will have had full time to learn 'les petites chansons Languedociennes',
which are exceedingly pretty ones, both words and tunes.  I remember,
when I was in those parts, I was surprised at the difference which I
found between the people on one side, and those on the other side of the
Rhone.  The Provencaux were, in general, surly, ill-bred, ugly, and
swarthy; the Languedocians the very reverse: a cheerful, well-bred,
handsome people.  Adieu! Yours most affectionately.

P. S.  Upon reflection, I direct this letter to Paris; I think you must
have left Montpelier before it could arrive there.




LETTER CXXIV

LONDON, November 19, O. S. 1750

MY DEAR FRIEND: I was very glad to find by your letter of the 12th,
N. S., that you had informed yourself so well of the state of the French
marine at Toulon, and of the commerce at Marseilles; they are objects
that deserve the inquiry and attention of every man who intends to be
concerned in public affairs.  The French are now wisely attentive to
both; their commerce is incredibly increased within these last thirty
years; they have beaten us out of great part of our Levant trade; their
East India trade has greatly affected ours; and, in the West Indies,
their Martinico establishment supplies, not only France itself, but the
greatest part of Europe, with sugars whereas our islands, as Jamaica,
Barbadoes, and the Leeward, have now no other market for theirs but
England.  New France, or Canada, has also greatly lessened our fur and
skin trade.  It is true (as you say) that we have no treaty of commerce
subsisting (I do not say WITH MARSEILLES) but with France.  There was a
treaty of commerce made between England and France, immediately after the
treaty of Utrecht; but the whole treaty was conditional, and to depend
upon the parliament's enacting certain things which were stipulated in
two of the articles; the parliament, after a very famous debate, would
not do it; so the treaty fell to the ground: however, the outlines of
that treaty are, by mutual and tacit consent, the general rules of our
present commerce with France.  It is true, too, that our commodities
which go to France, must go in our bottoms; the French having imitated in
many respects our famous Act of Navigation, as it is commonly called.
This act was made in the year 1652, in the parliament held by Oliver
Cromwell.  It forbids all foreign ships to bring into England any
merchandise or commodities whatsoever, that were not of the growth and
produce of that country to which those ships belonged, under penalty of
the forfeiture of such ships.  This act was particularly leveled at the
Dutch, who were at that time the carriers of almost all Europe, and got
immensely by freight.  Upon this principle, of the advantages arising
from freight, there is a provision in the same act, that even the growth
and produce of our own colonies in America shall not be carried from
thence to any other country in Europe, without first touching in England;
but this clause has lately been repealed, in the instances of some
perishable commodities, such as rice, etc., which are allowed to be
carried directly from our American colonies to other countries.  The act
also provides, that two-thirds, I think, of those who navigate the said
ships shall be British subjects.  There is an excellent, and little book,
written by the famous Monsieur Huet Ev6que d'Avranches, 'Sur le Commerce
des Anciens', which is very well worth your reading, and very soon read.
It will give you a clear notion of the rise and progress of commerce.
There are many other books, which take up the history of commerce where
Monsieur d'Avranches leaves it, and bring it down to these times.  I
advise you to read some of them with care; commerce being a very
essential part of political knowledge in every country; but more
particularly in that which owes all its riches and power to it.

I come now to another part of your letter, which is the orthography, if I
may call bad spelling ORTHOGRAPHY.  You spell induce, ENDUCE; and
grandeur, you spell grandURE; two faults of which few of my housemaids
would have been guilty.  I must tell you that orthography, in the true
sense of the word, is so absolutely necessary for a man of letters; or a
gentleman, that one false spelling may fix ridicule upon him for the rest
of his life; and I know a man of quality, who never recovered the
ridicule of having spelled WHOLESOME without the w.

Reading with care will secure everybody from false spelling; for books
are always well spelled, according to the orthography of the times.  Some
words are indeed doubtful, being spelled differently by different authors
of equal authority; but those are few; and in those cases every man has
his option, because he may plead his authority either way; but where
there is but one right way, as in the two words above mentioned, it is
unpardonable and ridiculous for a gentleman to miss it; even a woman of a
tolerable education would despise and laugh, at ,a lover, who should send
her an ill-spelled billet-doux.  I fear and suspect, that you have taken
it into your head, in most cases, that the matter is all, and the manner
little or nothing.  If you have, undeceive yourself, and be convinced
that, in everything, the manner is full as important as the matter.  If
you speak the sense of an angel, in bad words and with a disagreeable
utterance, nobody will hear you twice, who can help it.  If you write
epistles as well as Cicero, but in a very bad hand, and very ill-spelled,
whoever receives will laugh at them; and if you had the figure of Adonis,
with an awkward air and motions, it will disgust instead of pleasing.
Study manner, therefore, in everything, if you would be anything.  My
principal inquiries of my friends at Paris, concerning you, will be
relative to your manner of doing whatever you do.  I shall not inquire
whether you understand Demosthenes, Tacitus, or the 'Jus Publicum
Imperii'; but I shall inquire, whether your utterance is pleasing, your
style not only pure, but elegant, your manners noble and easy, your air
and address engaging in short, whether you are a gentleman, a man of
fashion, and fit to keep good company, or not; for, till I am satisfied
in these particulars, you and I must by no means meet; I could not
possibly stand it.  It is in your power to become all this at Paris, if
you please.  Consult with Lady Hervey and Madame Monconseil upon all
these matters; and they will speak to you, and advise you freely.  Tell
them, that 'bisogna compatire ancora', that you are utterly new in the
world; that you are desirous to form yourself; that you beg they will
reprove, advise, and correct you; that you know that none can do it so
well; and that you will implicitly follow their directions.  This,
together with your careful observation of the manners of the best
company, will really form you.

Abbe Guasco, a friend of mine, will come to you as soon as he knows of
your arrival at Paris; he is well received in the best companies there,
and will introduce you to them.  He will be desirous to do you any
service he can; he is active and curious, and can give you information
upon most things.  He is a sort of 'complaisant' of the President
Montesquieu, to whom you have a letter.

I imagine that this letter will not wait for you very long at Paris,
where I reckon you will be in about a fortnight.  Adieu.




LETTER CXXV

LONDON, December 24, 1750

DEAR FRIEND: At length you are become a Parisian, and consequently must
be addressed in French; you will also answer me in the same language,
that I may be able to judge of the degree in which you possess the
elegance, the delicacy, and the orthography of that language which is,
in a manner, become the universal one of Europe.  I am assured that you
speak it well, but in that well there are gradations.  He, who in the
provinces might be reckoned to speak correctly, would at Paris be looked
upon as an ancient Gaul.  In that country of mode, even language is
subservient to fashion, which varies almost as often as their clothes.

The AFFECTED, the REFINED, the NEOLOGICAL, OR NEW FASHIONABLE STYLE are
at present too much in vogue at Paris.  Know, observe, and occasionally
converse (if you please) according to those different styles; but do not
let your taste be infected by them.  Wit, too, is there subservient to
fashion; and actually, at Paris, one must have wit, even in despite of
Minerva.  Everybody runs after it; although if it does not come naturally
and of itself; it never can be overtaken.  But, unfortunately for those
who pursue, they seize upon what they take for wit, and endeavor to pass
it for such upon others.  This is, at best, the lot of Ixion, who
embraced a cloud instead of the goddess he pursued.  Fine sentiments,
which never existed, false and unnatural thoughts, obscure and far-sought
expressions, not only unintelligible, but which it is even impossible to
decipher, or to guess at, are all the consequences of this error; and
two-thirds of the new French books which now appear are made up of those
ingredients.  It is the new cookery of Parnassus, in which the still is
employed instead of the pot and the spit, and where quintessences and
extracts ate chiefly used.  N. B.  The Attic salt is proscribed.

You will now and then be obliged to eat of this new cookery, but do not
suffer your taste to be corrupted by it.  And when you, in your turn, are
desirous of treating others, take the good old cookery of Lewis XIV.'s
reign for your rule.  There were at that time admirable head cooks, such
as Corneille, Boileau, Racine, and La Fontaine.  Whatever they prepared
was simple, wholesome, and solid.  But laying aside all metaphors, do not
suffer yourself to be dazzled by false brilliancy, by unnatural
expressions, nor by those antitheses so much in fashion: as a protection
against such innovations, have a recourse to your own good sense, and to
the ancient authors.  On the other hand, do not laugh at those who give
into such errors; you are as yet too young to act the critic, or to stand
forth a severe avenger of the violated rights of good sense.  Content
yourself with not being perverted, but do not think of converting others;
let them quietly enjoy their errors in taste, as well as in religion.
Within the course of the last century and a half, taste in France has
(as well as that kingdom itself) undergone many vicissitudes.  Under the
reign of I do not say Lewis XIII. but of Cardinal de Richelieu, good
taste first began to make its way.  It was refined under that of Lewis
XIV., a great king, at least, if not a great man.  Corneille was the
restorer of true taste, and the founder of the French theatre; although
rather inclined to the Italian 'Concetti' and the Spanish 'Agudeze'.
Witness those epigrams which he makes Chimene utter in the greatest
excess of grief.

Before his time, those kind of itinerant authors, called troubadours or
romanciers, were a species of madmen who attracted the admiration of
fools.  Toward the end of Cardinal de Richelieu's reign, and the
beginning of Lewis XIV.'s, the Temple of Taste was established at the
Hotel of Rambouillet; but that taste was not judiciously refined this
Temple of Taste might more properly have been named a Laboratory of Wit,
where good sense was put to the torture, in order to extract from it the
most subtile essence.  There it was that Voiture labored hard and
incessantly to create wit.  At length, Boileau and Moliere fixed the
standard of true taste.  In spite of the Scuderys, the Calprenedes, etc.,
they defeated and put to flight ARTAMENES, JUBA, OROONDATES, and all
those heroes of romance, who were, notwithstanding (each of them), as
good as a whole Army.  Those madmen then endeavored to obtain an asylum
in libraries; this they could not accomplish, but were under a necessity
of taking shelter in the chambers of some few ladies.  I would have you
read one volume of "Cleopatra," and one of "Clelia"; it will otherwise be
impossible for you to form any idea of the extravagances they contain;
but God keep you from ever persevering to the twelfth.

During almost the whole reign of Lewis XIV., true taste remained in its
purity, until it received some hurt, although undesignedly, from a very
fine genius, I mean Monsieur de Fontenelle; who, with the greatest sense
and the most solid learning, sacrificed rather too much to the Graces,
whose most favorite child and pupil he was.  Admired with reason, others
tried to imitate him; but, unfortunately for us, the author of the
"Pastorals," of the "History of Oracles," and of the "French Theatre,"
found fewer imitators than the Chevalier d'Her did mimics.  He has since
been taken off by a thousand authors: but never really imitated by anyone
that I know of.

At this time, the seat of true taste in France seems to me not well
established.  It exists, but torn by factions.  There is one party of
petits maitres, one of half-learned women, another of insipid authors
whose works are 'verba et voces, et praeterea nihil'; and, in short, a
numerous and very fashionable party of writers, who, in a metaphysical
jumble, introduce their false and subtle reasonings upon the movements
and the sentiments of THE SOUL, THE HEART, and THE MIND.

Do not let yourself be overpowered by fashion, nor by particular sets of
people with whom you may be connected; but try all the different coins
before you receive any in payment.  Let your own good sense and reason
judge of the value of each; and be persuaded, that NOTHING CAN BE
BEAUTIFUL UNLESS TRUE: whatever brilliancy is not the result of the
solidity and justness of a thought, it is but a false glare.  The Italian
saying upon a diamond is equally just with regard to thoughts, 'Quanto
Piu sodezza, tanto piu splendore'.

All this ought not to hinder you from conforming externally to the modes
and tones of the different companies in which you may chance to be.  With
the 'petits maitres' speak epigrams; false sentiments, with frivolous
women; and a mixture of all these together, with professed beaux esprits.
I would have you do so; for at your age you ought not to aim at changing
the tone of the company, but conform to it.  Examine well, however; weigh
all maturely within yourself; and do not mistake the tinsel of Tasso for
the gold of Virgil.

You will find at Paris good authors, and circles distinguished by the
solidity of their reasoning.  You will never hear TRIFLING, AFFECTED, and
far-sought conversations, at Madame de Monconseil's, nor at the hotels of
Matignon and Coigni, where she will introduce you.  The President
Montesquieu will not speak to you in the epigrammatic style.  His book,
the "Spirit of the Laws," written in the vulgar tongue, will equally
please and instruct you.

Frequent the theatre whenever Corneille, Racine, and Moliere's pieces are
played.  They are according to nature and to truth.  I do not mean by
this to give an exclusion to several admirable modern plays, particularly
"Cenie," --[Imitated in English by Mr. Francis, in a play called
"Eugenia."]--  replete with sentiments that are true, natural, and
applicable to one's self.  If you choose to know the characters of people
now in fashion, read Crebillon the younger, and Marivaux's works.  The
former is a most excellent painter; the latter has studied, and knows the
human heart, perhaps too well.  Crebillon's 'Egaremens du Coeur et de
l'Esprit is an excellent work in its kind; it will be of infinite
amusement to you, and not totally useless.  The Japanese history of
"Tanzar and Neadarne," by the same author, is an amiable extravagancy,
interspersed with the most just reflections.  In short, provided you do
not mistake the objects of your attention, you will find matter at Paris
to form a good and true taste.

As I shall let you remain at Paris without any person to direct your
conduct, I flatter myself that you will not make a bad use of the
confidence I repose in you.  I do not require that you should lead the
life of a Capuchin friar; quite the contrary: I recommend pleasures to
you; but I expect that they shall be the pleasures of a gentleman.  Those
add brilliancy to a young man's character; but debauchery vilifies and
degrades it.  I shall have very true and exact accounts of your conduct;
and, according to the informations I receive, shall be more, or less, or
not at all, yours.  Adieu.

P. S.  Do not omit writing to me once a-week; and let your answer to this
letter be in French.  Connect yourself as much as possible with the
foreign ministers; which is properly traveling into different countries,
without going from one place.  Speak Italian to all the Italians, and
German to all the Germans you meet, in order not to forget those two
languages.

I wish you, my dear friend, as many happy new years as you deserve, and
not one more.  May you deserve a great number!




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:


Absurd romances of the two last centuries. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Advocate, the friend, but not the bully of virtue. . . . . . . . . . .
Ariosto. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Assurance and intrepidity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Attention. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Author is obscure and difficult in his own language. . . . . . . . . .
Characters, that never existed, are insipidly displayed. . . . . . . .
Collana. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Commanding with dignity, you must serve up to it with diligence. . . .
Complaisance to every or anybody's opinion . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Conceal all your learning carefully. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Connections. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Contempt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Content yourself with mediocrity in nothing. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Court mores. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dance to those who pipe. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dante. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Decides peremptorily upon every subject. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Desire to please, and that is the main point . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Desirous to make you their friend. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Despairs of ever being able to pay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Difference in everything between system and practice.. . . . . . . . .
Dignity to be kept up in pleasures, as well as in business . . . . . .
Distinction between simulation and dissimulation . . . . . . . . . . .
Do not mistake the tinsel of Tasso for the gold of Virgil. . . . . . .
Doing what may deserve to be written . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Done under concern and embarrassment, must be ill done . . . . . . . .
Dressed as the generality of people of fashion are . . . . . . . . . .
Economist of your time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Economists . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Establishing a character of integrity and good manners . . . . . . . .
Feed him, and feed upon him at the same time . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Flattery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Fortune stoops to the forward and the bold . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Frivolous and superficial pertness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gentlemen, who take such a fancy to you at first sight . . . . . . . .
Guard against those who make the most court to you . . . . . . . . . .
Have no pleasures but your own . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
If you will persuade, you must first please. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Improve yourself with the old, divert yourself with the young. . . . .
Indiscriminately loading their memories with every part alike. . . . .
Insipid in his pleasures, as inefficient in everything else. . . . . .
Labor more to put them in conceit with themselves. . . . . . . . . . .
Lay down a method for everything, and stick to it inviolably . . . . .
Leo the Tenth. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Let blockheads read what blockheads wrote. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Let nobody discover that you do know your own value. . . . . . . . . .
Let them quietly enjoy their errors in taste . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lying. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Man is dishonored by not resenting an affront. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Manner is full as important as the matter. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Modesty is the only sure bait when you angle for praise. . . . . . . .
Money, the cause of much mischief. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Montesquieu. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
More people have ears to be tickled, than understandings to judg . . .
Most people enjoy the inferiority of their best friends. . . . . . . .
Necessity of scrupulously preserving the appearances . . . . . . . . .
Never affect the character in which you have a mind to shine . . . . .
Never put you out of countenance before company. . . . . . . . . . . .
Never read history without having maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
No one feels pleasure, who does not at the same time give it.. . . . .
Not only pure, but, like Caesar's wife, unsuspected. . . . . . . . . .
Often more necessary to conceal contempt than resentment . . . . . . .
Passes for a wit, though he hath certainly no uncommon share . . . . .
Patient toleration of certain airs of superiority. . . . . . . . . . .
People hate those who make them feel their own inferiority . . . . . .
People lose a great deal of time by reading. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pleased with him, by making them first pleased with themselves . . . .
Pleasure is necessarily reciprocal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pocket all your knowledge with your watch. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Put out your time, but to good interest. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Real merit of any kind will be discovered. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Resentment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Respect without timidity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rich man never borrows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Same coolness and unconcern in any and every company . . . . . . . . .
Seem to like and approve of everything at first. . . . . . . . . . . .
Sentiments that were never felt, pompously described . . . . . . . . .
Shall be more, or less, or not at all, yours.. . . . . . . . . . . . .
She has all the reading that a woman should have . . . . . . . . . . .
She who conquers only catches a Tartar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Silence in love betrays more woe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spare the persons while you lash the crimes. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Steady assurance, with seeming modesty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Suspicion of age, no woman, let her be ever so old, ever forgive . . .
Take the hue of the company you are with.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Taking up adventitious, proves their want of intrinsic merit . . . . .
Tasso. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The present moments are the only ones we are sure of . . . . . . . . .
Those whom you can make like themselves better . . . . . . . . . . . .
Timidity and diffidence. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
To be heard with success, you must be heard with pleasure. . . . . . .
To be pleased one must please. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Trifle only with triflers; and be serious only with the serious. . . .
Trite jokes and loud laughter reduce him to a buffoon. . . . . . . . .
Unwilling and forced; it will never please . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Well dressed, not finely dressed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
What is impossible, and what is only difficult . . . . . . . . . . . .
What pleases you in others, will in general please them in you . . . .
Whatever real merit you have, other people will discover . . . . . . .
Wish you, my dear friend, as many happy new years as you deserve . . .
Women choose their favorites more by the ear . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Words are the dress of thoughts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Writing what may deserve to be read. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
You must be respectable, if you will be respected. . . . . . . . . . .
Your character there, whatever it is, will get before you here . . . .




End of this Project Gutenberg Etext of Letters to His Son, 1750
by The Earl of Chesterfield






LETTER CXXVI

LONDON, January 8, O.S.  1751

MY DEAR FRIEND: By your letter of the 5th, N. S., I find that your
'debut' at Paris has been a good one; you are entered into good company,
and I dare say you will, not sink into bad.  Frequent the houses where
you have been once invited, and have none of that shyness which makes
most of your countrymen strangers, where they might be intimate and
domestic if they pleased.  Wherever you have a general invitation to sup
when you please, profit of it, with decency, and go every now and then.
Lord Albemarle will, I am sure, be extremely kind to you, but his house
is only a dinner house; and, as I am informed, frequented by no French
people.  Should he happen to employ you in his bureau, which I much
doubt, you must write a better hand than your common one, or you will get
no credit by your manuscripts; for your hand is at present an illiberal
one; it is neither a hand of business nor of a gentleman, but the hand of
a school-boy writing his exercise, which he hopes will never be read.

Madame de Monconseil gives me a favorable account of you; and so do
Marquis de Matignon and Madame du Boccage; they all say that you desire
to please, and consequently promise me that you will; and they judge
right; for whoever really desires to please, and has (as you now have)
the means of learning how, certainly will please and that is the great
point of life; it makes all other things easy.  Whenever you are with
Madame de Monconseil, Madame du Boccage, or other women of fashion, with
whom you are tolerably free, say frankly and naturally: "I know little of
the world; I am quite a novice in it; and although very desirous of
pleasing, I am at a loss for the means.  Be so good, Madame, as to let me
into your secret of pleasing everybody.  I shall owe my success to it,
and you will always have more than falls to your share."  When, in
consequence of this request, they shall tell you of any little error,
awkwardness, or impropriety, you should not only feel, but express the
warmest acknowledgment.  Though nature should suffer, and she will at
first hearing them, tell them, that you will look upon the most severe
criticisms as the greatest proof of their friendship.  Madame du Boccage
tells me, particularly, to inform you: "I shall always, receive the honor
of his visits with pleasure; it is true, that at his age the pleasures of
conversation are cold; but I will endeavor to make him acquainted with
young people," etc.

Make use of this invitation, and as you live, in a manner, next door to
her, step in and out there frequently.  Monsieur du Boccage will go with
you, he tells me, with great pleasure, to the plays, and point out to you
whatever deserves your knowing there.  This is worth your acceptance too;
he has a very good taste.  I have not yet heard from Lady Hervey upon
your subject; but as you inform me that you have already supped with her
once, I look upon you as adopted by her; consult her in all your little
matters; tell her any difficulties that may occur to you; ask her what
you should do or say in such or such cases; she has 'l'usage du monde en
perfection', and will help you to acquire it.  Madame de Berkenrode 'est
paitrie de graces', and your quotation is very applicable to her.  You
may be there, I dare say, as often as you please, and I would advise you
to sup there once a week.

You say, very justly, that as Mr. Harte is leaving you, you shall want
advice more than ever; you shall never want mine; and as you have already
had so much of it, I must rather repeat than add to what I have already
given you; but that I will do, and add to it occasionally, as
circumstances may require.  At present I shall only remind you of your
two great objects, which you should always attend to; they are parliament
and foreign affairs.  With regard to the former, you can do nothing while
abroad but attend carefully to the purity, correctness, and elegance of
your diction; the clearness and gracefulness of your utterance, in
whatever language you speak.  As for the parliamentary knowledge, I will
take care of that when you come home.  With regard to foreign affairs,
everything you do abroad may and ought to tend that way.  Your reading
should be chiefly historical; I do not mean of remote, dark, and fabulous
history, still less of jimcrack natural history of fossils, minerals,
plants, etc., but I mean the useful, political, and constitutional
history of Europe, for these last three centuries and a half.  The other
thing necessary for your foreign object, and not less necessary than
either ancient or modern knowledge, is a great knowledge of the world,
manners, politeness, address, and 'le ton de la bonne compagnie'.  In
that view, keeping a great deal of good company, is the principal point
to which you are now to attend.  It seems ridiculous to tell you, but it
is most certainly true, that your dancing-master is at this time the man
in all Europe of the greatest importance to you.  You must dance well,
in order to sit, stand, and walk well; and you must do all these well in
order to please.  What with your exercises, some reading, and a great
deal of company, your day is, I confess, extremely taken up; but the day,
if well employed, is long enough for everything; and I am sure you will
not slattern away one moment of it in inaction.  At your age, people have
strong and active spirits, alacrity and vivacity in all they do; are
'impigri', indefatigable, and quick.  The difference is, that a young
fellow of parts exerts all those happy dispositions in the pursuit of
proper objects; endeavors to excel in the solid, and in the showish parts
of life; whereas a silly puppy, or a dull rogue, throws away all his
youth and spirit upon trifles, where he is serious or upon disgraceful
vices, while he aims at pleasures.  This I am sure will not be your case;
your good sense and your good conduct hitherto are your guarantees with
me for the future.  Continue only at Paris as you have begun, and your
stay there will make you, what I have always wished you to be, as near
perfection as our nature permits.

Adieu, my dear; remember to write to me once a-week, not as to a father,
but, without reserve, as to a friend.




LETTER CXXVII

LONDON, January 14, O. S.  1751

MY DEAR FRIEND:  Among the many good things Mr. Harte has told me of you,
two in particular gave me great pleasure.  The first, that you are
exceedingly careful and jealous of the dignity of your character; that is
the sure and solid foundation upon which you must both stand and rise.
A man's moral character is a more delicate thing than a woman's
reputation of chastity.  A slip or two may possibly be forgiven her, and
her character may be clarified by subsequent and continued good conduct:
but a man's moral character once tainted is irreparably destroyed.  The
second was, that you had acquired a most correct and extensive knowledge
of foreign affairs, such as the history, the treaties, and the forms of
government of the several countries of Europe.  This sort of knowledge,
little attended to here, will make you not only useful, but necessary,
in your future destination, and carry you very far.  He added that you
wanted from hence some books relative to our laws and constitution, our
colonies, and our commerce; of which you know less than of those of any
other part of Europe.  I will send you what short books I can find of
that sort, to give you a general notion of those things: but you cannot
have time to go into their depths at present--you cannot now engage with
new folios; you and I will refer the constitutional part of this country
to our meeting here, when we will enter seriously into it, and read the
necessary books together.  In the meantime, go on in the course you are
in, of foreign matters; converse with ministers and others of every
country, watch the transactions of every court, and endeavor to trace
them up to their source.  This, with your physics, your geometry, and
your exercises, will be all that you can possibly have time for at Paris;
for you must allow a great deal for company and pleasures: it is they
that must give you those manners, that address, that 'tournure' of the
'beau monde', which will qualify you for your future destination.  You
must first please, in order to get the confidence, and consequently the
secrets, of the courts and ministers for whom and with whom you
negotiate.

I will send you by the first opportunity a short book written by Lord
Bolingbroke, under the name of Sir John Oldcastle, containing remarks
upon the history of England; which will give you a clear general notion
of our constitution, and which will serve you, at the same time, like all
Lord Bolingbroke's works, for a model of eloquence and style.  I will
also send you Sir Josiah Childe's little book upon trade, which may
properly be called the Commercial Grammar."  He lays down the true
principles of commerce, and his conclusions from them are generally very
just.

Since you turn your thoughts a little toward trade and commerce, which I
am very glad you do, I will recommend a French book to you, which you
will easily get at Paris, and which I take to be the best book in the
world of that kind: I mean the 'Dictionnaire de Commerce de Savory', in
three volumes in folio; where you will find every one thing that relates
to trade, commerce, specie, exchange, etc., most clearly stated; and not
only relative to France, but to the whole world.  You will easily
suppose, that I do not advise you to read such a book 'tout de suite';
but I only mean that you should have it at hand, to have recourse to
occasionally.

With this great stock of both useful and ornamental knowledge, which you
have already acquired, and which, by your application and industry, you
are daily increasing, you will lay such a solid foundation of future
figure and fortune, that if you complete it by all the accomplishments of
manners, graces, etc., I know nothing which you may not aim at, and in
time hope for.  Your great point at present at Paris, to which all other
considerations must give way, is to become entirely a man of fashion: to
be well-bred without ceremony, easy without negligence, steady and
intrepid with modesty, genteel without affectation, insinuating without
meanness, cheerful without being noisy, frank without indiscretion, and
secret without mysteriousness; to know the proper time and place for
whatever you say or do, and to do it with an air of condition all this is
not so soon nor so easily learned as people imagine, but requires
observation and time.  The world is an immense folio, which demands a
great deal of time and attention to be read and understood as it ought to
be; you have not yet read above four or five pages of it; and you will
have but barely time to dip now and then in other less important books.

Lord Albemarle has, I know, wrote {It is a pleasure for an ordinary
mortal to find Lord Chesterfield in gramatical error--and he did it again
in the last sentence of this paragraph--but this was 1751?  D.W.} to a
friend of his here, that you do not frequent him so much as he expected
and desired; that he fears somebody or other has given you wrong
impressions of him; and that I may possibly think,
from your being seldom at his house, that he has been wanting in his
attentions to you.  I told the person who told me this, that, on the
contrary, you seemed, by your letters to me, to be extremely pleased with
Lord Albemarle's behavior to you: but that you were obliged to give up
dining abroad during your course of experimental philosophy.  I guessed
the true reason, which I believe was, that, as no French people frequent
his house, you rather chose to dine at other places, where you were
likely to meet with better company than your countrymen and you were in
the right of it.  However, I would have you show no shyness to Lord
Albemarle, but go to him, and dine with him oftener than it may be you
would wish, for the sake of having him speak well of you here when he
returns.  He is a good deal in fashion here, and his PUFFING you (to use
an awkward expression) before you return here, will be of great use to
you afterward.  People in general take characters, as they do most
things, upon trust, rather than be at the trouble of examining them
themselves; and the decisions of four or five fashionable people, in
every place, are final, more particularly with regard to characters,
which all can hear, and but few judge of.  Do not mention the least of
this to any mortal; and take care that Lord Albemarle do not suspect that
you know anything of the matter.

Lord Huntingdon and Lord Stormount are, I hear, arrived at Paris; you
have, doubtless, seen them.  Lord Stormount is well spoken of here;
however, in your connections, if you form any with them, show rather a
preference to Lord Huntingdon, for reasons which you will easily guess.

Mr. Harte goes this week to Cornwall, to take possession of his living;
he has been installed at Windsor; he will return here in about a month,
when your literary correspondence with him will be regularly carried on.
Your mutual concern at parting was a good sign for both.

I have this moment received good accounts of you from Paris.  Go on 'vous
etes en bon train'.  Adieu.




LETTER CXXVIII

LONDON, January 21, O. S..  1751

MY DEAR FRIEND:  In all my letters from Paris, I have the pleasure of
finding, among many other good things, your docility mentioned with
emphasis; this is the sure way of improving in those things, which you
only want.  It is true they are little, but it is as true too that they
are necessary things.  As they are mere matters of usage and mode, it is
no disgrace for anybody of your age to be ignorant of them; and the most
compendious way of learning them is, fairly to avow your ignorance, and
to consult those who, from long usage and experience, know them best.
Good sense and good-nature suggest civility in general; but, in good-
breeding there are a thousand little delicacies, which are established
only by custom; and it is these little elegances of manners which
distinguish a courtier and a man of fashion from the vulgar.  I am
assured by different people, that your air is already much improved; and
one of my correspondents makes you the true French compliment of saying,
'F'ose vous promettre qu'il sera bientot comme un de nos autres'.
However unbecoming this speech may be in the mouth of a Frenchman, I am
very glad that they think it applicable to you; for I would have you not
only adopt, but rival, the best manners and usages of the place you are
at, be they what they will; that is the versatility of manners which is
so useful in the course of the world.  Choose your models well at Paris,
and then rival them in their own way.  There are fashionable words,
phrases, and even gestures, at Paris, which are called 'du bon ton'; not
to mention 'certaines Petites politesses et attentions, qui ne sont rien
en elle-memes', which fashion has rendered necessary.  Make yourself
master of all these things; and to such a degree, as to make the French
say, 'qu'on diroit que c'est un Francois'; and when hereafter you shall
be at other courts, do the same thing there; and conform to the
fashionable manners and usage of the place; that is what the French
themselves are not apt to do; wherever they go, they retain their own
manners, as thinking them the best; but, granting them to be so, they are
still in the wrong not to conform to those of the place.  One would
desire to please, wherever one is; and nothing is more innocently
flattering than an approbation, and an imitation of the people one
converses with.

I hope your colleges with Marcel go on prosperously.  In these
ridiculous, though, at the same time, really important lectures, pray
attend, and desire your professor also to attend, more particularly to
the chapter of the arms.  It is they that decide of a man's being genteel
or otherwise, more than any other part of the body.  A twist or stiffness
in the wrist, will make any man in Europe look awkward.  The next thing
to be attended to is, your coming into a room, and presenting yourself to
a company.  This gives the first impression; and the first impression is
often a lasting one.  Therefore, pray desire Professor Marcel to make you
come in and go out of his room frequently, and in the supposition of
different companies being there; such as ministers, women, mixed
companies, etc.  Those who present themselves well, have a certain
dignity in their air, which, without the least seeming mixture of pride,
at once engages, and is respected.

I should not so often repeat, nor so long dwell upon such trifles, with
anybody that had less solid and valuable knowledge than you have.
Frivolous people attend to those things, 'par preference'; they know
nothing else; my fear with you is, that, from knowing better things, you
should despise these too much, and think them of much less consequence
than they really are; for they are of a great deal, and more especially
to you.

Pleasing and governing women may, in time, be of great service to you.
They often please and govern others.  'A propos', are you in love with
Madame de Berkenrode still, or has some other taken her place in your
affections?  I take it for granted, that 'qua to cumque domat Venus, non
erubescendis adurit ignibus.  Un arrangement honnete sied bien a un
galant homme'.  In that case I recommend to you the utmost discretion,
and the profoundest silence.  Bragging of, hinting at, intimating, or
even affectedly disclaiming and denying such an arrangement will equally
discredit you among men and women.  An unaffected silence upon that
subject is the only true medium.

In your commerce with women, and indeed with men too, 'une certaine
douceur' is particularly engaging; it is that which constitutes that
character which the French talk of so much, and so justly value, I mean
'l'aimable'.  This 'douceur' is not so easily described as felt.  It is
the compound result of different things; a complaisance, a flexibility,
but not a servility of manners; an air of softness in the countenance,
gesture, and expression, equally whether you concur or differ with the
person you converse with.  Observe those carefully who have that
'douceur' that charms you and others; and your own good sense will soon
enable you to discover the different ingredients of which it is composed.
You must be more particularly attentive to this 'douceur', whenever you
are obliged to refuse what is asked of you, or to say what in itself
cannot be very agreeable to those to whom you say it.  It is then the
necessary gilding of a disagreeable pill.  'L'aimable' consists in a
thousand of these little things aggregately.  It is the 'suaviter in
modo', which I have so often recommended to you.  The respectable, Mr.
Harte assures me, you do not want, and I believe him.  Study, then,
carefully; and acquire perfectly, the 'Aimable', and you will have
everything.

Abbe Guasco, who is another of your panegyrists, writes me word that he
has taken you to dinner at Marquis de St. Germain's; where you will be
welcome as often as you please, and the oftener the better.  Profit of
that, upon the principle of traveling in different countries, without
changing places.  He says, too, that he will take you to the parliament,
when any remarkable cause is to be tried.  That is very well; go through
the several chambers of the parliament, and see and hear what they are
doing; join practice and observation to your theoretical knowledge of
their rights and privileges.  No Englishman has the least notion of them.

I need not recommend you to go to the bottom of the constitutional and
political knowledge of countries; for Mr. Harte tells me that you have a
peculiar turn that way, and have informed yourself most correctly of
them.

I must now put some queries to you, as to a 'juris publici peritus',
which I am sure you can answer me, and which I own I cannot answer
myself; they are upon a subject now much talked of.

1st.  Are there any particular forms requisite for the election of a King
of the Romans, different from those which are necessary for the election
of an Emperor?

2d.  Is not a King of the Romans as legally elected by the votes of a
majority of the electors, as by two-thirds, or by the unanimity of the
electors?

3d.  Is there any particular law or constitution of the empire, that
distinguishes, either in matter or in, form, the election of a King of
the Romans from that of an Emperor?  And is not the golden bull of
Charles the Fourth equally the rule for both?

4th.  Were there not, at a meeting of a certain number of the electors (I
have forgotten when), some rules and limitations agreed upon concerning
the election of a King of the Romans?  And were those restrictions legal,
and did they obtain the force of law?

How happy am I, my dear child, that I can apply to you for knowledge, and
with a certainty of being rightly informed!  It is knowledge, more than
quick, flashy parts, that makes a man of business.  A man who is master
of his matter, twill, with inferior parts, be too hard in parliament, and
indeed anywhere else, for a man of-better parts, who knows his subject
but superficially: and if to his knowledge he joins eloquence and
elocution, he must necessarily soon be at the head of that assembly; but
without those two, no knowledge is sufficient.

Lord Huntingdon writes me word that he has seen you, and that you have
renewed your old school-acquaintance.

Tell me fairly your opinion of him, and of his friend Lord Stormount: and
also of the other English people of fashion you meet with.  I promise you
inviolable secrecy on my part.  You and I must now write to each other-
as friends, and without the least reserve; there will for the future be a
thousand-things in my letters, which I would not have any mortal living
but yourself see or know.  Those you will easily distinguish, and neither
show nor repeat; and I will do the same by you.

To come to another subject (for I have a pleasure in talking over every
subject with you): How deep are you in Italian ?  Do you understand
Ariosto, Tasso, Boccaccio and Machiavelli?  If you do, you know enough of
it and may know all the rest, by reading, when you have time.  Little or
no business is written in Italian, except in Italy; and if you know
enough of it to understand the few Italian letters that may in time come
in your way, and to speak Italian tolerably to those very few Italians
who speak no French, give yourself no further trouble about that language
till you happen to have full leisure to perfect yourself in it.  It is
not the same with regard to German; your speaking and writing it well,
will particularly distinguish you from every other man in England; and
is, moreover, of great use to anyone who is, as probably you will be,
employed in the Empire.  Therefore, pray cultivate them sedulously, by
writing four or five lines of German every day, and by speaking it to
every German you meet with.

You have now got a footing in a great many good houses at Paris, in which
I advise you to make yourself domestic.  This is to be done by a certain
easiness of carriage, and a decent familiarity.  Not by way of putting
yourself upon the frivolous footing of being 'sans consequence', but by
doing in some degree, the honors of the house and table, calling yourself
'en badinant le galopin d'ici', saying to the masters or mistress, 'ceci
est de mon departement; je m'en charge; avouez, que je m'en acquitte a
merveille.'  This sort of 'badinage' has something engaging and 'liant'
in it, and begets that decent familiarity, which it is both agreeable and
useful to establish in good houses and with people of fashion.  Mere
formal visits, dinners, and suppers, upon formal invitations, are not the
thing; they add to no connection nor information; but it is the easy,
careless ingress and egress at all hours, that forms the pleasing and
profitable commerce of life.

The post is so negligent, that I lose some letters from Paris entirely,
and receive others much later than I should.  To this I ascribe my having
received no letter from you for above a fortnight, which to my impatience
seems a long time.  I expect to hear from you once a-week.  Mr. Harte is
gone to Cornwall, and will be back in about three weeks.  I have a packet
of books to send you by the first opportunity, which I believe will be
Mr. Yorke's return to Paris.  The, Greek books come from Mr. Harte, and
the English ones from your humble servant.  Read Lord Bolingbroke's with
great attention, as well to the style as to the matter.  I wish you could
form yourself such a style in every language.  Style is the dress of
thoughts; and a well-dressed thought, like a well-dressed man, appears to
great advantage.  Yours.  Adieu.




LETTER CXXIX

LONDON, August 28, O. S.  1751

MY DEAR FRIEND: A bill for ninety pounds sterling was brought me the
other day, said to be drawn upon me by you: I scrupled paying it at
first, not upon account of the sum, but because you had sent me no letter
of advice, which is always done in those transactions; and still more,
because I did not perceive that you had signed it.  The person who
presented it, desired me to look again, and that I should discover your
name at the bottom : accordingly I looked again, and, with the help of my
magnifying glass, did perceive that what I had first taken only for
somebody's mark, was, in truth, your name, written in the worst and
smallest hand I ever saw in my life.

However, I paid it at a venture; though I would almost rather lose the
money, than that such a signature should be yours.  All gentlemen, and
all men of business, write their names always in the same way, that their
signature may be so well known as not to be easily counterfeited; and
they generally sign in rather larger character than their common hand;
whereas your name was in a less, and a worse, than your common writing.
This suggested to me the various accidents which may very probably happen
to you, while you write so ill.  For instance, if you were to write in
such a character to the Secretary's office, your letter would immediately
be sent to the decipherer, as containing matters of the utmost secrecy,
not fit to be trusted to the common character.  If you were to write so
to an antiquarian, he (knowing you to be a man of learning) would
certainly try it by the Runic, Celtic, or Sclavonian alphabet, never
suspecting it to be a modern character.  And, if you were to send a
'poulet' to a fine woman, in such a hand, she would think that it really
came from the 'poulailler'; which, by the bye, is the etymology of the
word 'poulet'; for Henry the Fourth of France used to send billets-doux
to his mistresses by his 'poulailler', under pretense of sending them
chickens; which gave the name of poulets to those short, but expressive
manuscripts.  I have often told you that every man who has the use of his
eyes and of his hand, can write whatever hand he pleases; and it is plain
that you can, since you write both the Greek and German characters, which
you never learned of a writing-master, extremely well, though your common
hand, which you learned of a master, is an exceedingly bad and illiberal
one; equally unfit for business or common use.  I do not desire that you
should write the labored, stiff character of a writing-master: a man of
business must write quick and well, and that depends simply upon use.
I would therefore advise you to get some very good writing-master at
Paris, and apply to it for a month only, which will be sufficient; for,
upon my word, the writing of a genteel plain hand of business is of much
more importance than you think.  You will say, it may be, that when you
write so very ill, it is because you are in a hurry, to which I answer,
Why are you ever in a hurry?  A man of sense may be in haste, but can
never be in a hurry, because he knows that whatever he does in a hurry,
he must necessarily do very ill.  He may be in haste to dispatch an
affair, but he will care not to let that haste hinder his doing it well.
Little minds are in a hurry, when the object proves (as it commonly does)
too big for them; they run, they hare, they puzzle, confound, and perplex
themselves: they want to do everything at once, and never do it at all.
But a man of sense takes the time necessary for doing the thing he is
about, well; and his haste to dispatch a business only appears by the
continuity of his application to it: he pursues it with a cool
steadiness, and finishes it before he begins any other.  I own your time
is much taken up, and you have a great many different things to do; but
remember that you had much better do half of them well and leave the
other half undone, than do them all indifferently.  Moreover, the few
seconds that are saved in the course of the day, by writing ill instead
of well, do not amount to an object of time by any means equivalent to
the disgrace or ridicule of writing the scrawl of a common whore.
Consider, that if your very bad writing could furnish me with matter of
ridicule, what will it not do to others who do not view you in that
partial light that I do?  There was a pope, I think it was Cardinal
Chigi, who was justly ridiculed for his attention to little things, and
his inability in great ones: and therefore called maximus in minimis, and
minimus in maximis.  Why?  Because he attended to little things when he
had great ones to do.  At this particular period of your life, and at the
place you are now in, you have only little things to do; and you should
make it habitual to you to do them well, that they may require no
attention from you when you have, as I hope you will have, greater things
to mind.  Make a good handwriting familiar to you now, that you may
hereafter have nothing but your matter to think of, when you have
occasion to write to kings and ministers.  Dance, dress, present
yourself, habitually well now, that you may have none of those little
things to think of hereafter, and which will be all necessary to be done
well occasionally, when you will have greater things to do.

As I am eternally thinking of everything that can be relative to you, one
thing has occurred to me, which I think necessary to mention to you, in
order to prevent the difficulties which it might otherwise lay you under;
it is this as you get more acquaintances at Paris, it will be impossible
for you to frequent your first acquaintances so much as you did, while
you had no others.  As, for example, at your first 'debut', I suppose you
were chiefly at Madame Monconseil's, Lady Hervey's, and Madame du
Boccage's.  Now, that you have got so many other houses, you cannot be at
theirs so often as you used; but pray take care not to give them the
least reason to think that you neglect, or despise them, for the sake of
new and more dignified and shining acquaintances; which would be
ungrateful and imprudent on your part, and never forgiven on theirs.
Call upon them often, though you do not stay with them so long as
formerly; tell them that you are sorry you are obliged to go away, but
that you have such and such engagements, with which good-breeding obliges
you to comply; and insinuate that you would rather stay with them.  In
short, take care to make as many personal friends, and as few personal
enemies, as possible.  I do not mean, by personal friends, intimate and
confidential friends, of which no man can hope to have half a dozen in
the whole course of his life; but I mean friends, in the common
acceptation of the word; that is, people who speak well of you, and
who would rather do you good than harm, consistently with their own
interest, and no further.  Upon the whole, I recommend to you, again and
again, 'les Graces'.  Adorned by them, you may, in a manner, do what you
please; it will be approved of; without them, your best qualities will
lose half their efficacy.  Endeavor to be fashionable among the French,
which will soon make you fashionable here.  Monsieur de Matignon already
calls you 'le petit Francois'.  If you can get that name generally at
Paris, it will put you 'a la mode'.  Adieu, my dear child.




LETTER CXXX

LONDON, February 4, O. S. 1751

MY DEAR FRIEND: The accounts which I receive of you from Paris grow every
day more and more satisfactory.  Lord Albemarle has wrote a sort of
panegyric of you, which has been seen by many people here, and which will
be a very useful forerunner for you.  Being in fashion is an important
point for anybody anywhere; but it would be a very great one for you to
be established in the fashion here before you return.  Your business will
be half done by it, as I am sure you would not give people reason to
change their favorable presentiments of you.  The good that is said of
you will not, I am convinced, make you a coxcomb; and, on the other hand,
the being thought still to want some little accomplishments, will, I am
persuaded, not mortify you, but only animate you to acquire them: I will,
therefore, give you both fairly, in the following extract of a letter
which I lately received from an impartial and discerning friend:--

"Permit me to assure you, Sir, that Mr. Stanhope will succeed.  He has a
great fund of knowledge, and an uncommonly good memory, although he does
not make any parade of either the one or the other.  He is desirous of
pleasing, and he will please.  He has an expressive countenance; his
figure is elegant, although little.  He has not the least awkwardness,
though he has not as yet acquired all-the graces requisite; which Marcel
and the ladies will soon give him.  In short, he wants nothing but those
things, which, at his age, must unavoidably be wanting; I mean, a certain
turn and delicacy of manners, which are to be acquired only by time, and
in good company.  Ready as he is, he will soon learn them; particularly
as he frequents such companies as are the most proper to give them."

By this extract, which I can assure you is a faithful one, you and I have
both of us the satisfaction of knowing how much you have, and how little
you want.  Let what you have give you (if possible) rather more SEEMING
modesty, but at the same time more interior firmness and assurance; and
let what you want, which you see is very attainable, redouble your
attention and endeavors to acquire it.  You have, in truth, but that one
thing to apply to and a very pleasing application it is, since it is
through pleasures you must arrive at it.  Company, suppers, balls,
spectacles, which show you the models upon which you should form
yourself, and all the little usages, customs, and delicacies, which you
must adopt and make habitual to you, are now your only schools and
universities; in which young fellows and fine women will give you the
best lectures.

Monsieur du Boccage is another of your panegyrists; and he tells me that
Madame Boccage 'a pris avec vous le ton de mie et de bonne'; and that you
like it very well.  You are in the right of it; it is the way of
improving; endeavor to be upon that footing with every woman you converse
with; excepting where there may be a tender point of connection; a point
which I have nothing to do with; but if such a one there is, I hope she
has not 'de mauvais ni de vilains bras', which I agree with you in
thinking a very disagreeable thing.

I have sent you, by the opportunity of Pollok the courier, who was once
my servant, two little parcels of Greek and English books; and shall send
you two more by Mr. Yorke: but I accompany them with this caution, that
as you have not much time to read, you should employ it in reading what
is the most necessary, and that is, indisputably modern historical,
geographical, chronological, and political knowledge; the present
constitution, maxims, force, riches, trade, commerce, characters,
parties, and cabals of the several courts of Europe.  Many who are
reckoned good scholars, though they know pretty accurately the
governments of Athens and Rome, are totally ignorant of the constitution
of any one country now in Europe, even of their own.  Read just Latin and
Greek enough to keep up your classical learning, which will be an
ornament to you while young, and a comfort to you when old.  But the true
useful knowledge, and especially for you, is the modern knowledge above
mentioned.  It is that must qualify you both for domestic and foreign
business, and it is to that, therefore, that you should principally
direct your attention; and I know, with great pleasure, that you do so.
I would not thus commend you to yourself, if I thought commendations
would have upon you those ill effects, which they frequently have upon
weak minds.  I think you are much above being a vain coxcomb, overrating
your own merit, and insulting others with the superabundance of it.  On
the contrary, I am convinced that the consciousness of merit makes a man
of sense more modest, though more firm.  A man who displays his own merit
is a coxcomb, and a man who does not know it is a fool.  A man of sense
knows it, exerts it, avails himself of it, but never boasts of it; and
always SEEMS rather to under than over value it, though in truth, he sets
the right value upon it.  It is a very true maxim of La Bruyere's (an
author well worth your studying), 'qu'on ne vaut dans ce monde, que ce
que l'on veut valoir'.  A man who is really diffident, timid, and
bashful, be his merit what it will, never can push himself in the world;
his despondency throws him into inaction; and the forward, the bustling,
and the petulant, will always get the better of him.  The manner makes
the whole difference.  What would be impudence in one manner, is only a
proper and decent assurance in another.  A man of sense, and of knowledge
in the world, will assert his own rights, and pursue his own objects,
as steadily and intrepidly as the most impudent man living, and commonly
more so; but then he has art enough to give an outward air of modesty to
all he does.  This engages and prevails, while the very same things shock
and fail, from the overbearing or impudent manner only of doing them.
I repeat my maxim, 'Suaviter in modo, sed fortiter in re'.  Would you
know the characters, modes and manners of the latter end of the last age,
which are very like those of the present, read La Bruyere.  But would you
know man, independently of modes, read La Rochefoucault, who, I am
afraid, paints him very exactly.

Give the inclosed to Abbe Guasco, of whom you make good use, to go about
with you, and see things.  Between you and me, he has more knowledge than
parts.  'Mais un habile homme sait tirer parti de tout', and everybody is
good for something.  President Montesquieu is, in every sense, a most
useful acquaintance.  He has parts, joined to great reading and knowledge
of the world.  'Puisez dans cette source tant que vous pourrez'.

Adieu.  May the Graces attend you! for without them 'ogni fatica e vana'.
If they do not come to you willingly, ravish them, and force them to
accompany you in all you think, all you say, and all you do.




LETTER CXXXI

LONDON, February 11, O. S.  1751

MY DEAR FRIEND:  When you go to the play, which I hope you do often, for
it is a very instructive amusement, you must certainly have observed the
very different effects which the several parts have upon you, according
as they are well or ill acted.  The very best tragedy of, Corneille's,
if well spoken and acted, interests, engages, agitates, and affects your
passions.  Love, terror, and pity alternately possess you.  But, if ill
spoken and acted, it would only excite your indignation or your laughter.
Why?  It is still Corneille's; it is the same sense, the same matter,
whether well or ill acted.  It is, then, merely the manner of speaking
and acting that makes this great difference in the effects.  Apply this
to yourself, and conclude from it, that if you would either please in a
private company, or persuade in a public assembly, air, looks, gestures,
graces, enunciation, proper accents, just emphasis, and tuneful cadences,
are full as necessary as the matter itself.  Let awkward, ungraceful,
inelegant, and dull fellows say what they will in behalf of their solid
matter and strong reasonings; and let them despise all those graces and
ornaments which engage the senses and captivate the heart; they will find
(though they will possibly wonder why) that their rough, unpolished
matter, and their unadorned, coarse, but strong arguments, will neither
please nor persuade; but, on the contrary, will tire out attention, and
excite disgust.  We are so made, we love to be pleased better than to be
informed; information is, in a certain degree, mortifying, as it implies
our previous ignorance; it must be sweetened to be palatable.

To bring this directly to you: know that no man can make a figure in this
country, but by parliament.  Your fate depends upon your success there as
a speaker; and, take my word for it, that success turns much more upon
manner than matter.  Mr. Pitt and Mr. Murray the solicitor-general, uncle
to Lord Stormount, are, beyond comparison, the best speakers; why? only
because they are the best orators.  They alone can inflame or quiet the
House; they alone are so attended to, in that numerous and noisy
assembly, that you might hear a pin fall while either of them is
speaking.  Is it that their matter is better, or their arguments
stronger, than other people's?  Does the House expect extraordinary
informations from them?  Not, in the least: but the House expects
pleasure from them, and therefore attends; finds it, and therefore
approves.  Mr. Pitt, particularly, has very little parliamentary
knowledge; his matter is generally flimsy, and his arguments often weak;
but his eloquence is superior, his action graceful, his enunciation just
and harmonious; his periods are well turned, and every word he makes use
of is the very best, and the most expressive, that can be used in that
place.  This, and not his matter, made him Paymaster, in spite of both
king and ministers.  From this draw the obvious conclusion.  The same
thing holds full as true in conversation; where even trifles, elegantly
expressed, well looked, and accompanied with graceful action, will ever
please, beyond all the homespun, unadorned sense in the world.  Reflect,
on one side, how you feel within yourself, while you are forced to suffer
the tedious, muddy, and ill-turned narration of some awkward fellow, even
though the fact may be interesting; and, on the other hand, with what
pleasure you attend to the relation of a much less interesting matter,
when elegantly expressed, genteelly turned, and gracefully delivered.
By attending carefully to all these agremens in your daily conversation,
they will become habitual to you, before you come into parliament; and
you will have nothing then, to do, but to raise them a little when you
come there.  I would wish you to be so attentive to this object, that I,
would not have you speak to your footman, but in the very best words that
the subject admits of, be the language what it will.  Think of your
words, and of their arrangement, before you speak; choose the most
elegant, and place them in the best order.  Consult your own ear, to
avoid cacophony, and, what is very near as bad, monotony.  Think also of
your gesture and looks, when you are speaking even upon the most trifling
subjects.  The same things, differently expressed, looked, and delivered,
cease to be the same things.  The most passionate lover in the world
cannot make a stronger declaration of love than the 'Bourgeois
gentilhomme' does in this happy form of words, 'Mourir d'amour me font
belle Marquise vos beaux yeux'.  I defy anybody to say more; and yet I
would advise nobody to say that, and I would recommend to you rather to
smother and conceal your passion entirely than to reveal it in these
words.  Seriously, this holds in everything, as well as in that ludicrous
instance.  The French, to do them justice, attend very minutely to the
purity, the correctness, and the elegance of their style in conversation
and in their letters.  'Bien narrer' is an object of their study; and
though they sometimes carry it to affectation, they never sink into
inelegance, which is much the worst extreme of the two.  Observe them,
and form your French style upon theirs: for elegance in one language will
reproduce itself in all.  I knew a young man, who, being just elected a
member of parliament, was laughed at for being discovered, through the
keyhole of his chamber-door, speaking to himself in the glass, and
forming his looks and gestures.  I could not join in that laugh; but, on
the contrary, thought him much wiser than those who laughed at him; for
he knew the importance of those little graces in a public assembly, and
they did not.  Your little person (which I am told, by the way, is not
ill turned), whether in a laced coat or a blanket, is specifically the
same; but yet, I believe, you choose to wear the former, and you are in
the right, for the sake of pleasing more.  The worst-bred man in Europe,
if a lady let fall her fan, would certainly take it up and give it her;
the best-bred man in Europe could do no more.  The difference, however,
would be considerable; the latter would please by doing it gracefully;
the former would be laughed at for doing it awkwardly.  I repeat it, and
repeat it again, and shall never cease repeating it to you: air, manners,
graces, style, elegance, and all those ornaments, must now be the only
objects of your attention; it is now, or never, that you must acquire
them.  Postpone, therefore, all other considerations; make them now your
serious study; you have not one moment to lose.  The solid and the
ornamental united, are undoubtedly best; but were I reduced to make an
option, I should without hesitation choose the latter.

I hope you assiduously frequent Marcell --[At that time the most
celebrated dancing-master at Paris.]-- and carry graces from him; nobody
had more to spare than he had formerly.  Have you learned to carve? for
it is ridiculous not to carve well.  A man who tells you gravely that he
cannot carve, may as well tell you that he cannot blow his nose: it is
both as necessary, and as easy.

Make my compliments to Lord Huntingdon, whom I love and honor extremely,
as I dare say you do; I will write to him soon, though I believe he has
hardly time to read a letter; and my letters to those I love are, as you
know by experience, not very short ones: this is one proof of it, and
this would have been longer, if the paper had been so.  Good night then,
my dear child.




LETTER CXXXII

LONDON, February 28, O. S.  1751.

MY DEAR FRIEND:  This epigram in Martial--

               "Non amo te, Sabidi, nec possum dicere quare;
               Hoc tantum possum dicere, non amo te"-----

               [OR: "I do not love thee Dr. Fell
               The reason why I cannot tell.
               But this I know and know full well:
               I do not love thee Dr. Fell."   D.W.]

has puzzled a great many people, who cannot conceive how it is possible
not to love anybody, and yet not to know the reason why.  I think I
conceive Martial's meaning very clearly, though the nature of epigram,
which is to be short, would not allow him to explain it more fully; and I
take it to be this: O Sabidis, you are a very worthy deserving man; you
have a thousand good qualities, you have a great deal of learning; I
esteem, I respect, but for the soul of me I cannot love you, though I
cannot particularly ,say why.  You are not aimable: you have not those
engaging manners, those pleasing attentions, those graces, and that
address, which are absolutely necessary to please, though impossible to
define.  I cannot say it is this or that particular thing that hinders me
from loving you; it is the whole together; and upon the whole you are not
agreeable.

How often have I, in the course of my life, found myself in this
situation, with regard to many of my acquaintance, whom I have honored
and respected, without being able to love.  I did not know why, because,
when one is young, one does not take the trouble, nor allow one's self
the time, to analyze one's sentiments and to trace them up to their
source.  But subsequent observation and reflection have taught me why.
There is a man, whose moral character, deep learning, and superior parts,
I acknowledge, admire, and respect; but whom it is so impossible for me
to love, that I am almost in a fever whenever I am in his company.  His
figure (without being deformed) seems made to disgrace or ridicule the
common structure of the human body.  His legs and arms are never in the
position which, according to the situation of his body, they ought to be
in, but constantly employed in committing acts of hostility upon the
Graces.  He throws anywhere, but down his throat, whatever he means to
drink, and only mangles what he means to carve.  Inattentive to all the
regards of social life, he mistimes or misplaces everything.  He disputes
with heat, and indiscriminately, mindless of the rank, character, and
situation of those with whom he disputes; absolutely ignorant of the
several gradations of familiarity or respect, he is exactly the same to
his superiors, his equals, and his inferiors; and therefore, by a
necessary consequence, absurd to two of the three.  Is it possible to
love such a man?  No.  The utmost I can do for him, is to consider him as
a respectable Hottentot. --[This 'mot' was aimed at Dr.  Johnson in
retaliation for his famous letter.]

I remember, that when I came from Cambridge, I had acquired, among the
pedants of that illiberal seminary, a sauciness of literature, a turn to
satire and contempt, and a strong tendency to argumentation and
contradiction.  But I had been but a very little while in the world,
before I found that this would by no means do; and I immediately adopted
the opposite character; I concealed what learning I had; I applauded
often, without approving; and I yielded commonly without conviction.
'Suaviter in modo' was my law and my prophets; and if I pleased (between
you and me) it was much more owing to that, than to any superior
knowledge or merit of my own.  Apropos, the word PLEASING puts one always
in mind of Lady Hervey; pray tell her, that I declare her responsible to
me for your pleasing; that I consider her as a pleasing Falstaff, who not
only pleases, herself, but is the cause of pleasing in others; that I
know she can make anything of anybody; and that, as your governess, if
she does not make you please, it must be only because she will not, and
not because she cannot.  I hope you are 'dubois don't on en fait'; and if
so, she is so good a sculptor, that I am sure she can give you whatever
form she pleases.  A versatility of manners is as necessary in social, as
a versatility of parts is in political life.  One must often yield, in
order to prevail; one must humble one's self, to be exalted; one must,
like St.  Paul, become all things to all men, to gain some; and, by the
way, men are taken by the same means, 'mutatis mutandis', that women are
gained--by gentleness, insinuation, and submission: and these lines of
Mr. Dryden will hold to a minister as well as to a mistress:

               "The prostrate lover, when he lowest lies,
               But stoops to conquer, and but kneels to rise."

In the course of the world, the qualifications of the chameleon are often
necessary; nay, they must be carried a little further, and exerted a
little sooner; for you should, to a certain degree, take the hue of
either the man or the woman that you want, and wish to be upon terms
with.  'A propos', have you yet found out at Paris, any friendly and
hospitable Madame de Lursay, 'qui veut bien se charger du soin de vous
eduquer'?  And have you had any occasion of representing to her, 'qu'elle
faisoit donc des noeuds'?  But I ask your, pardon, Sir, for the
abruptness of the question, and acknowledge that I am meddling with
matters that are out of my department.  However, in matters of less
importance, I desire to be 'de vos secrets le fidele depositaire'.  Trust
me with the general turn and color of your amusements at Paris.  Is it
'le fracas du grand monde, comedies, bals, operas, cour,' etc.?  Or is it
'des petites societes, moins bruyantes, mais pas pour cela moins
agreables'?  Where are you the most 'etabli'?  Where are you 'le petit
Stanhope?  Voyez vous encore jour, a quelque arrangement honnete?  Have
you made many acquaintances among the young Frenchmen who ride at your
Academy; and who are they?  Send to me this sort of chit-chat in your
letters, which, by the bye, I wish you would honor me with somewhat
oftener.  If you frequent any of the myriads of polite Englishmen who
infest Paris, who are they?  Have you finished with Abbe Nolet, and are
you 'au fait' of all the properties and effects of air?.  Were I inclined
to quibble, I would say, that the effects of air, at least, are best to
be learned of Marcel.  If you have quite done with l'Abbes Nolet, ask my
friend l'Abbe Sallier to recommend to you some meagre philomath, to teach
you a little geometry and astronomy; not enough to absorb your attention
and puzzle your intellects, but only enough not to be grossly ignorant of
either.  I have of late been a sort of 'astronome malgre moi',
by bringing in last Monday into the House of Lords a bill for reforming
our present Calendar and taking the New Style.  Upon which occasion I was
obliged to talk some astronomical jargon, of which I did not understand
one word, but got it by heart, and spoke it by rote from a master.
I wished that I had known a little more of it myself; and so much I would
have you know.  But the great and necessary knowledge of all is, to know,
yourself and others: this knowledge requires great attention and long
experience; exert the former, and may you have the latter! Adieu!

P. S.  I have this moment received your letters of the 27th February, and
the 2d March, N. S.  The seal shall be done as soon as possible.  I am,
glad that you are employed in Lord Albemarle's bureau; it will teach you,
at least, the mechanical part of that business, such as folding,
entering, and docketing letters; for you must not imagine that you are
let into the 'fin fin' of the correspondence, nor indeed is it fit that
you should, at, your age.  However, use yourself to secrecy as to the
letters you either read or write, that in time you may be trusted with
SECRET, VERY SECRET, SEPARATE, APART, etc.  I am sorry that this business
interferes with your riding; I hope it is seldom; but I insist upon its
not interfering with your dancing-master, who is at this time the most
useful and necessary of all the masters you have or can have.




LETTER CXXXIII

MY DEAR FRIEND: I mentioned to you, some time ago a sentence which I
would most earnestly wish you always to retain in your thoughts, and
observe in your conduct.  It is 'suaviter in modo, fortiter in re'
[gentleness of manners, with firmness of mind  D.W.].  I do not know any
one rule so unexceptionably useful and necessary in every part of life.
I shall therefore take it for my text to-day, and as old men love
preaching, and I have some right to preach to you, I here present you
with my sermon upon these words.  To proceed, then, regularly and
PULPITICALLY, I will first show you, my beloved, the necessary connection
of the two members of my text 'suaviter in modo: fortiter in re'.  In the
next place, I shall set forth the advantages and utility resulting from a
strict observance of the precept contained in my text; and conclude with
an application of the whole.  The 'suaviter in modo' alone would
degenerate and sink into a mean, timid complaisance and passiveness, if
not supported and dignified by the 'fortiter in re', which would also run
into impetuosity and brutality, if not tempered and softened by the
'suaviter in modo': however, they are seldom united.

The warm, choleric man, with strong animal spirits, despises the
'suaviter in modo', and thinks to, carry all before him by the 'fortiter
in re'.  He may, possibly, by great accident, now and then succeed, when
he has only weak and timid people to deal with; but his general fate will
be, to shock offend, be hated, and fail.  On the other hand, the cunning,
crafty man thinks to gain all his ends by the 'suaviter in modo' only; HE
BECOMES ALL THINGS TO ALL MEN; he seems to have no opinion of his own,
and servilely adopts the present opinion of the present person; he
insinuates himself only into the esteem of fools, but is soon detected,
and surely despised by everybody else.  The wise man (who differs as much
from the cunning, as from the choleric man) alone joins the 'suaviter in
modo' with the 'fortiter in re'.  Now to the advantages arising from the
strict observance of this precept:

If you are in authority, and have a right to command, your commands
delivered 'suaviter in modo' will be willingly, cheerfully, and
consequently well obeyed; whereas, if given only 'fortiter', that is
brutally, they will rather, as Tacitus says, be interrupted than
executed.  For my own part, if I bid my footman bring me a glass of wine,
in a rough insulting manner, I should expect that, in obeying me, he
would contrive to spill some of it upon me: and I am sure I should
deserve it.  A cool, steady resolution should show that where you have a
right to command you will be obeyed; but at the same time, a gentleness
in the manner of enforcing that obedience should make it a cheerful one,
and soften as much as possible the mortifying consciousness of
inferiority.  If you are to ask a favor, or even to solicit your due, you
must do it 'suaviter in modo', or you will give those who have a mind to
refuse you, either a pretense to do it, by resenting the manner; but, on
the other hand, you must, by a steady perseverance and decent
tenaciousness, show the 'fortiter in re'.  The right motives are seldom
the true ones of men's actions, especially of kings, ministers, and
people in high stations; who often give to importunity and fear, what
they would refuse to justice or to merit.  By the 'suaviter in modo'
engage their hearts, if you can; at least prevent the pretense of offense
but take care to show enough of the 'fortiter in re' to extort from their
love of ease, or their fear, what you might in vain hope for from their
justice or good-nature.  People in high life are hardened to the wants
and distresses of mankind, as surgeons are to their bodily pains; they
see and hear of them all day long, and even of so many simulated ones,
that they do not know which are real, and which not.  Other sentiments
are therefore to be applied to, than those of mere justice and humanity;
their favor must be captivated by the 'suaviter in modo'; their love of
ease disturbed by unwearied importunity, or their fears wrought upon by a
decent intimation of implacable, cool resentment; this is the true
'fortiter in re'.  This precept is the only way I know in the world of
being loved without being despised, and feared without being hated.  It
constitutes the dignity of character which every wise man must endeavor
to establish.

Now to apply what has been said, and so conclude.

If you find that you have a hastiness in your temper, which unguardedly
breaks out into indiscreet sallies, or rough expressions, to either your
superiors, your equals, or your inferiors, watch it narrowly, check it
carefully, and call the 'suaviter in modo' to your assistance: at the
first impulse of passion, be silent till you can be soft.  Labor even to
get the command of your countenance so well, that those emotions may not
be read in it; a most unspeakable advantage in business!  On the other
hand, let no complaisance, no gentleness of temper, no weak desire of
pleasing on your part,--no wheedling, coaxing, nor flattery, on other
people's,--make you recede one jot from any point that reason and
prudence have bid you pursue; but return to the charge, persist,
persevere, and you will find most things attainable that are possible.
A yielding, timid meekness is always abused and insulted by the unjust
and the unfeeling,; but when sustained by the 'fortiter in re', is always
respected, commonly successful.  In your friendships and connections,
as well as in your enmities, this rule is particularly useful; let your
firmness and vigor preserve and invite attachments to you; but, at the
same time, let your manner hinder the enemies of your friends and
dependents from becoming yours; let your enemies be disarmed by the
gentleness of your manner, but let them feel, at the same time, the
steadiness of your just resentment; for there is a great difference
between bearing malice, which is always ungenerous, and a resolute self-
defense, which is always prudent and justifiable.  In negotiations with
foreign ministers, remember the 'fortiter in re'; give up no point,
accept of no expedient, till the utmost necessity reduces you to it,
and even then, dispute the ground inch by inch; but then, while you are
contending with the minister 'fortiter in re', remember to gain the man
by the 'suaviter in modo'.  If you engage his heart, you have a fair
chance for imposing upon his understanding, and determining his will.
Tell him, in a frank, gallant manner, that your ministerial wrangles do
not lessen your personal regard for his merit; but that, on the contrary,
his zeal and ability in the service of his master, increase it; and that,
of all things, you desire to make a good friend of so good a servant.
By these means you may, and will very often be a gainer: you never can be
a loser.  Some people cannot gain upon themselves to be easy and civil to
those who are either their rivals, competitors, or opposers, though,
independently of those accidental circumstances, they would like and
esteem them.  They betray a shyness and an awkwardness in company with
them, and catch at any little thing to expose them; and so, from
temporary and only occasional opponents, make them their personal
enemies.  This is exceedingly weak and detrimental, as indeed is all
humor in business; which can only be carried on successfully by,
unadulterated good policy and right reasoning.  In such situations I
would be more particularly and 'noblement', civil, easy, and frank with
the man whose designs I traversed: this is commonly called generosity and
magnanimity, but is, in truth, good sense and policy.  The manner is
often as important as the matter, sometimes more so; a favor may make an
enemy, and an injury may make a friend, according to the different manner
in which they are severally done.  The countenance, the address, the
words, the enunciation, the Graces, add great efficacy to the 'suaviter
in modo', and great dignity to the 'fortiter in re', and consequently
they deserve the utmost attention.

From what has been said, I conclude with this observation, that
gentleness of manners, with firmness of mind, is a short, but full
description of human perfection on this side of religious and moral
duties.  That you may be seriously convinced of this truth, and show it
in your life and conversation, is the most sincere and ardent wish of,
Yours.




LETTER CXXXIV

LONDON, March 11, O. S.  1751.

MY DEAR FRIEND:  I received by the last post a letter from Abbe Guasco,
in which he joins his representations to those of Lord Albemarle, against
your remaining any longer in your very bad lodgings at the Academy; and,
as I do not find that any advantage can arise to you from being 'interne'
in an academy which is full as far from the riding-house and from all
your other masters, as your lodgings will probably be, I agree to your
removing to an 'hotel garni'; the Abbe will help you to find one, as I
desire him by the inclosed, which you will give him.  I must, however,
annex one condition to your going into private lodgings, which is an
absolute exclusion of English breakfasts and suppers at them; the former
consume the whole morning, and the latter employ the evenings very ill,
in senseless toasting a l'Angloise in their infernal claret.  You will be
sure to go to the riding-house as often as possible, that is, whenever
your new business at Lord Albemarle's does not hinder you.  But, at all
events, I insist upon your never missing Marcel, who is at present of
more consequence to you than all the bureaux in Europe; for this is the
time for you to acquire 'tous ces petits riens', which, though in an
arithmetical account, added to one another 'ad infinitum', they would
amount to nothing, in the account of the world amount to a great and
important sum.  'Les agremens et les graces', without which you will
never be anything, are absolutely made up of all those 'riens', which are
more easily felt than described.  By the way, you may take your lodgings
for one whole year certain, by which means you may get them much cheaper;
for though I intend to see you here in less than a year, it will be but
for a little time, and you will return to Paris again, where I intend you
shall stay till the end of April twelvemonth, 1752, at which time,
provided you have got all 'la politesse, les manieres, les attentions, et
les graces du beau monde', I shall place you in some business suitable to
your destination.

I have received, at last, your present of the cartoon, from Dominichino,
by Planchet.  It is very finely done, it is pity that he did not take in
all the figures of the original.  I will hang it up, where it shall be
your own again some time or other.

Mr. Harte is returned in perfect health from Cornwall, and has taken
possession of his prebendal house at Windsor, which is a very pretty one.
As I dare say you will always feel, I hope you will always express, the
strongest sentiments of gratitude and friendship for him.  Write to him
frequently, and attend to the letters you receive from him.  He shall be
with us at Blackheath, alias BABIOLE, all the time that I propose you
shall be there, which I believe will be the month of August next.

Having thus mentioned to you the probable time of our meeting, I will
prepare you a little for it.  Hatred; jealousy, or envy, make, most
people attentive to discover the least defects of those they do not love;
they rejoice at every new discovery they make of that kind, and take care
to publish it.  I thank God, I do not know what those three ungenerous
passions are, having never felt them in my own breast; but love has just
the same effect upon me, except that I conceal, instead of publishing,
the defeats which my attention makes me discover in those I love.  I
curiously pry into them; I analyze them; and, wishing either to find them
perfect, or to make them so, nothing escapes me, and I soon discover
every the least gradation toward or from that perfection.  You must
therefore expect the most critical 'examen' that ever anybody underwent.
I shall discover your least, as well as your greatest defects, and I
shall very freely tell you of them, 'Non quod odio habeam sed quod amem'.
But I shall tell them you 'tete-a-tete', and as MICIO not as DEMEA; and I
will tell them to nobody else.  I think it but fair to inform you
beforehand, where I suspect that my criticisms are likely to fall; and
that is more upon the outward, than upon the inward man; I neither
suspect your heart nor your head; but to be plain with you, I have a
strange distrust of your air, your address, your manners, your
'tournure', and particularly of your ENUNCIATION and elegance of style.
These will be all put to the trial; for while you are with me, you must
do the honors of my house and table; the least inaccuracy or inelegance
will not escape me; as you will find by a LOOK at the time, and by a
remonstrance afterward when we are alone.  You will see a great deal of
company of all sorts at BABIOLE, and particularly foreigners.  Make,
therefore, in the meantime, all these exterior and ornamental
qualifications your peculiar care, and disappoint all my imaginary
schemes of criticism.  Some authors have criticised their own works
first, in hopes of hindering others from doing it afterward: but then
they do it themselves with so much tenderness and partiality for their
own production, that not only the production itself, but the preventive
criticism is criticised.  I am not one of those authors; but, on the
contrary, my severity increases with my fondness for my work; and if you
will but effectually correct all the faults I shall find, I will insure
you from all subsequent criticisms from other quarters.

Are you got a little into the interior, into the constitution of things
at Paris?  Have you seen what you have seen thoroughly?  For, by the way,
few people see what they see, or hear what they hear.  For example, if
you go to les Invalides, do you content yourself with seeing the
building, the hall where three or four hundred cripples dine, and the
galleries where they lie? or do you inform yourself of the numbers, the
conditions of their admission, their allowance, the value and nature of
the fund by which the whole is supported?  This latter I call seeing, the
former is only starting.  Many people take the opportunity of 'les
vacances', to go and see the, empty rooms where the several chambers of
the parliament did sit; which rooms are exceedingly like all other large
rooms; when you go there, let it be when they are full; see and hear what
is doing in them; learn their respective constitutions, jurisdictions,
objects, and methods of proceeding; hear some causes tried in every one
of the different chambers; 'Approfondissez les choses'.

I am glad to hear that you are so well at Marquis de St. Germain's,
--[At that time Ambassador from the King of Sardinia at the Court of
France.]-- of whom I hear a very good character.  How are you with the
other foreign ministers at Paris?  Do you frequent the Dutch Ambassador
or Ambassadress?  Have you any footing at the Nuncio's, or at the
Imperial and Spanish ambassadors?  It is useful.  Be more particular in
your letters to me, as to your manner of passing your time, and the
company you keep.  Where do you dine and sup oftenest? whose house is
most your home?  Adieu.  'Les Graces, les Graces'.




LETTER CXXXV

LONDON, March 18, O. S.  1751.

MY DEAR FRIEND: I acquainted you in a former letter, that I had brought a
bill into the House of Lords for correcting and reforming our present
calendar, which is the Julian, and for adopting the Gregorian.  I will
now give you a more particular account of that affair; from which
reflections will naturally occur to you that I hope may be useful, and
which I fear you have not made.  It was notorious, that the Julian
calendar was erroneous, and had overcharged the solar year with eleven
days.  Pope Gregory the Thirteenth corrected this error; his reformed
calendar was immediately received by all the Catholic powers of Europe,
and afterward adopted by all the Protestant ones, except Russia, Sweden,
and England.  It was not, in my opinion, very honorable for England to
remain, in a gross and avowed error, especially in such company; the
inconveniency of it was likewise felt by all those who had foreign
correspondences, whether political or mercantile.  I determined,
therefore, to attempt the reformation; I consulted the best lawyers and
the most skillful astronomers, and we cooked up a bill for that purpose.
But then my difficulty began: I was to bring in this bill, which was
necessarily composed of law jargon and astronomical calculations, to both
which I am an utter stranger.  However, it was absolutely necessary to
make the House of Lords think that I knew something of the matter; and
also to make them believe that they knew something of it themselves,
which they do not.  For my own part, I could just as soon have talked
Celtic or Sclavonian to them as astronomy, and they would have understood
me full as well: so I resolved to do better than speak to the purpose,
and to please instead of informing them.  I gave them, therefore, only an
historical account of calendars, from the Egyptian down to the Gregorian,
amusing them now and then with little episodes; but I was particularly
attentive to the choice of my words, to the harmony and roundness of my
periods, to my elocution, to my action.  This succeeded, and ever will
succeed; they thought I informed, because I pleased them; and many of
them said that I had made the whole very clear to them; when, God knows,
I had not even attempted it.  Lord Macclesfield, who had the greatest
share in forming the bill, and who is one of the greatest mathematicians
and astronomers in Europe, spoke afterward with infinite knowledge, and
all the clearness that so intricate a matter would admit of: but as his
words, his periods, and his utterance, were not near so good as mine,
the preference was most unanimously, though most unjustly, given to me.
This will ever be the case; every numerous assembly is MOB, let the
individuals who compose it be what they will.  Mere reason and good sense
is never to be talked to a mob; their passions, their sentiments, their
senses, and their seeming interests, are alone to be applied to.
Understanding they have collectively none, but they have ears and eyes,
which must be flattered and seduced; and this can only be done by
eloquence, tuneful periods, graceful action, and all the various parts of
oratory.

When you come into the House of Commons, if you imagine that speaking
plain and unadorned sense and reason will do your business, you will find
yourself most grossly mistaken.  As a speaker, you will be ranked only
according to your eloquence, and by no means according to your matter;
everybody knows the matter almost alike, but few can adorn it.  I was
early convinced of the importance and powers of eloquence; and from that
moment I applied myself to it.  I resolved not to utter one word, even in
common conversation, that should not be the most expressive and the most
elegant that the language could supply me with for that purpose; by which
means I have acquired such a certain degree of habitual eloquence, that I
must now really take some pains, if, I would express myself very
inelegantly.  I want to inculcate this known truth into you, which, you
seem by no means to be convinced of yet, that ornaments are at present
your only objects.  Your sole business now is to shine, not to weigh.
Weight without lustre is lead.  You had better talk trifles elegantly to
the most trifling woman, than coarse in elegant sense to the most solid
man; you had better, return a dropped fan genteelly, than give a thousand
pounds awkwardly; and you had better refuse a favor gracefully, than to
grant it clumsily.  Manner is all, in everything: it is by manner only
that you can please, and consequently rise.  All your Greek will never
advance you from secretary to envoy, or from envoy to ambassador; but
your address, your manner, your air, if good, very probably may.  Marcel
can be of much more use to you than Aristotle. I would, upon my word,
much rather that you had Lord Bolingbroke's style and eloquence in
speaking and writing, than all the learning of the Academy of Sciences,
the Royal Society, and the two Universities united.

Having mentioned Lord Bolingbroke's style, which is, undoubtedly,
infinitely superior to anybody's, I would have you read his works, which
you have, over and-over again, with particular attention to his style.
Transcribe, imitate, emulate it, if possible: that would be of real use
to you in the House of Commons, in negotiations, in conversation; with
that, you may justly hope to please, to persuade, to seduce, to impose;
and you will fail in those articles, in proportion as you fall short of
it.  Upon the whole, lay aside, during your year's residence at Paris,
all thoughts of all that dull fellows call solid, and exert your utmost
care to acquire what people of fashion call shining.  'Prenez l'eclat et
le brillant d'un galant homme'.

Among the commonly called little things, to which you, do not attend,
your handwriting is one, which is indeed shamefully bad and illiberal;
it is neither the hand of a man of business, nor of a gentleman, but of
a truant school-boy; as soon, therefore, as you have done with Abbe
Nolet, pray get an excellent writing-master (since you think that you
cannot teach yourself to write what hand you please), and let him teach
you to write a genteel, legible, liberal hand, and quick; not the hand of
a procureur or a writing-master, but that sort of hand in which the first
'Commis' in foreign bureaus commonly write; for I tell you truly, that
were I Lord Albemarle, nothing should remain in my bureau written in your
present hand.  From hand to arms the transition is natural; is the
carriage and motion of your arms so too?  The motion of the arms is the
most material part of a man's air, especially in dancing; the feet are
not near so material.  If a man dances well from the waist upward, wears
his hat well, and moves his head properly, he dances well.  Do the women
say that you dress well? for that is necessary too for a young fellow.
Have you 'un gout vif', or a passion for anybody?  I do not ask for whom:
an Iphigenia would both give you the desire, and teach you the means to
please.

In a fortnight or three weeks you will see Sir Charles Hotham at Paris,
in his way to Toulouse, where he is to stay a year or two.  Pray be very
civil to him, but do not carry him into company, except presenting him to
Lord Albemarle; for, as he is not to stay at Paris above a week, we do
not desire that he should taste of that dissipation: you may show him a
play and an opera.  Adieu, my dear child.




LETTER CXXXVI

LONDON, March 25, O. S. 1751.

MY DEAR FRIEND:  What a happy period of your life is this?  Pleasure is
now, and ought to be, your business.  While you were younger, dry rules,
and unconnected words, were the unpleasant objects of your labors.  When
you grow older, the anxiety, the vexations, the disappointments
inseparable from public business, will require the greatest share of your
time and attention; your pleasures may, indeed, conduce to your business,
and your business will quicken your pleasures; but still your time must,
at least, be divided: whereas now it is wholly your own, and cannot be so
well employed as in the pleasures of a gentleman.  The world is now the
only book you want, and almost the only one you ought to read: that
necessary book can only be read in company, in public places, at meals,
and in 'ruelles'.  You must be in the pleasures, in order to learn the
manners of good company. In premeditated, or in formal business, people
conceal, or at least endeavor to conceal, their characters: whereas
pleasures discover them, and the heart breaks out through the guard of
the understanding.  Those are often propitious moments for skillful
negotiators to improve.  In your destination particularly, the able
conduct of pleasures is of infinite use; to keep a good table, and to do
the honors of it gracefully, and 'sur le ton de la bonne compagnie',
is absolutely necessary for a foreign minister.  There is a certain light
table chit-chat, useful to keep off improper and too serious subjects,
which is only to be learned in the pleasures of good company.  In truth
it may be trifling; but, trifling as it is, a man of parts and experience
of the world will give an agreeable turn to it.  'L'art de badiner
agreablement' is by no means to be despised.

An engaging address, and turn to gallantry, is often of very great
service to foreign ministers.  Women have, directly or indirectly; a good
deal to say in most courts.  The late Lord Strafford governed, for a
considerable time, the Court of Berlin and made his own fortune, by being
well with Madame de Wartenberg, the first King of Prussia's mistress.
I could name many other instances of that kind.  That sort of agreeable
'caquet de femmes', the necessary fore-runners of closer conferences, is
only to be got by frequenting women of the first fashion, 'et, qui
donnent le ton'.  Let every other book then give way to this great and
necessary book, the world, of which there are so many various readings,
that it requires a great deal of time and attention to under stand it
well: contrary to all other books, you must not stay home, but go abroad
to read it; and when you seek it abroad, you will not find it in
booksellers' shops and stalls, but in courts, in hotels, at
entertainments, balls, assemblies, spectacles, etc.  Put yourself upon
the footing of an easy, domestic, but polite familiarity and intimacy in
the several French houses to which you have been introduced: Cultivate
them, frequent them, and show a desire of becoming 'enfant de la maison'.
Get acquainted as much as you can with 'les gens de cour'; and observe,
carefully, how politely they can differ, and how civilly they can hate;
how easy and idle they can seem in the multiplicity of their business;
and how they can lay hold of the proper moments to carry it on, in the
midst of their pleasures.  Courts, alone, teach versatility and
politeness; for there is no living there without them.  Lord Albermarle
has, I hear, and am very glad of it, put you into the hands of Messieurs
de Bissy.  Profit of that, and beg of them to let you attend them in all
the companies of Versailles and Paris.  One of them, at least, will
naturally carry you to Madame de la Valiores, unless he is discarded by
this time, and Gelliot --[A famous opera-singer at Paris.]-- retaken.
Tell them frankly, 'que vous cherchez a vous former, que vous etes en
mains de maitres, s'ils veulent bien s'en donner la peine'.  Your
profession has this agreeable peculiarity in it, which is, that it is
connected with, and promoted by pleasures; and it is the only one in
which a thorough knowledge of the world, polite manners, and an engaging
address, are absolutely necessary.  If a lawyer knows his law, a parson
his divinity, and a financier his calculations, each may make a figure
and a fortune in his profession, without great knowledge of the world,
and without the manners of gentlemen.  But your profession throws you
into all the intrigues and cabals, as well as pleasures, of courts: in
those windings and labyrinths, a knowledge of the world, a discernment of
characters, a suppleness and versatility of mind, and an elegance of
manners, must be your clue; you must know how to soothe and lull the
monsters that guard, and how to address and gain the fair that keep,
the golden fleece.  These are the arts and the accomplishments absolutely
necessary for a foreign minister; in which it must be owned, to our
shame, that most other nations outdo the English; and, 'caeteris
paribus', a French minister will get the better of an English one at any
third court in Europe.  The French have something more 'liant', more
insinuating and engaging in their manner, than we have.  An English
minister shall have resided seven years at a court, without having made
any one personal connection there, or without being intimate and domestic
in any one house.  He is always the English minister, and never
naturalized.  He receives his orders, demands an audience, writes an
account of it to his Court, and his business is done.  A French minister,
on the contrary, has not been six weeks at a court without having, by a
thousand little attentions, insinuated himself into some degree of favor
with the Prince, his wife, his mistress, his favorite, and his minister.
He has established himself upon a familiar and domestic footing in a
dozen of the best houses of the place, where he has accustomed the people
to be not only easy, but unguarded, before him; he makes himself at home
there, and they think him so.  By these means he knows the interior of
those courts, and can almost write prophecies to his own, from the
knowledge he has of the characters, the humors, the abilities, or the
weaknesses of the actors.  The Cardinal d'Ossat was looked upon at Rome
as an Italian, and not as a French cardinal; and Monsieur d'Avaux,
wherever he went, was never considered as a foreign minister, but as a
native, and a personal friend.  Mere plain truth, sense, and knowledge,
will by no means do alone in courts; art and ornaments must come to their
assistance.  Humors must be flattered; the 'mollia tempora' must be
studied and known: confidence acquired by seeming frankness, and profited
of by silent skill.  And, above all; you must gain and engage the heart,
to betray the understanding to you.  'Ha tibi erunt artes'.

The death of the Prince of Wales, who was more beloved for his affability
and good-nature than esteemed for his steadiness and conduct, has given
concern to many, and apprehensions to all.  The great difference of the
ages of the King and Prince George presents the prospect of a minority;
a disagreeable prospect for any nation!  But it is to be hoped, and is
most probable, that the King, who is now perfectly recovered of his late
indisposition, may live to see his grandson of age.  He is, seriously, a
most hopeful boy: gentle and good-natured, with good sound sense.  This
event has made all sorts of people here historians, as well as
politicians.  Our histories are rummaged for all the particular
circumstances of the six minorities we have had since the Conquest, viz,
those of Henry III., Edward III., Richard II., Henry VI., Edward V., and
Edward VI.; and the reasonings, the speculations, the conjectures, and
the predictions, you will easily imagine, must be innumerable and
endless, in this nation, where every porter is a consummate politician.
Dr. Swift says, very humorously, that "Every man knows that he
understands religion and politics, though he never learned them; but that
many people are conscious that they do not understand many other
sciences, from having never learned them."  Adieu.




LETTER CXXXVI1

LONDON, April 7, O. S.  1751

MY DEAR FRIEND:  Here you have, altogether, the pocketbooks, the
compasses, and the patterns.  When your three Graces have made their
option, you need only send me, in a letter small pieces of the three
mohairs they fix upon.  If I can find no way of sending them safely and
directly to Paris, I will contrive to have them left with Madame Morel,
at Calais, who, being Madame Monconseil's agent there, may find means of
furthering them to your three ladies, who all belong to your friend
Madame Monconseil.  Two of the three, I am told, are handsome; Madame
Polignac, I can swear, is not so; but, however, as the world goes, two
out of three is a very good composition.

You will also find in the packet a compass ring set round with little
diamonds, which I advise you to make a present of to Abbe Guasco, who has
been useful to you, and will continue to be so; as it is a mere bauble,
you must add to the value of it by your manner of giving it him.  Show it
him first, and, when he commends it, as probably he will, tell him that
it is at his service, 'et que comme il est toujours par vole et par
chemins, il est absolument necessaire qu'il ale une boussole'.  All those
little gallantries depend entirely upon the manner of doing them; as, in
truth, what does not?  The greatest favors may be done so awkwardly and
bunglingly as to offend; and disagreeable things may be done so agreeably
as almost to oblige.  Endeavor to acquire this great secret; it exists,
it is to be found, and is worth a great deal more than the grand secret
of the alchemists would be if it were, as it is not, to be found.  This
is only to be learned in courts, where clashing views, jarring opinions,
and cordial hatreds, are softened and kept within decent bounds by
politeness and manners.  Frequent, observe, and learn courts.  Are you
free of that of St. Cloud?  Are you often at Versailles?  Insinuate and
wriggle yourself into favor at those places.  L'Abbe de la Ville, my old
friend, will help you at the latter; your three ladies may establish you
in the former.  The good-breeding 'de la ville et de la cour' [of the
city and of the court] are different; but without deciding which is
intrinsically the best, that of the court is, without doubt, the most
necessary for you, who are to live, to grow, and to rise in courts.  In
two years' time, which will be as soon as you are fit for it, I hope to
be able to plant you in the soil of a YOUNG COURT here: where, if you
have all the address, the suppleness and versatility of a good courtier,
you will have a great chance of thriving and flourishing.  Young favor is
easily acquired if the proper means are employed; and, when acquired, it
is warm, if not durable; and the warm moments must be snatched and
improved.  'Quitte pour ce qui en pent arriver apres'.  Do not mention
this view of mine for you to any one mortal; but learn to keep your own
secrets, which, by the way, very few people can do.

If your course of experimental philosophy with Abbe Nolot is over, I
would have you apply to Abbe Sallier, for a master to give you a general
notion of astronomy and geometry; of both of which you may know as much,
as I desire you should, in six months' time.  I only desire that you
should have a clear notion of the present planetary system, and the
history of all the former systems.  Fontenelle's 'Pluralites des Mondes'
will almost teach you all you need know upon that subject.  As for
geometry, the seven first books of Euclid will be a sufficient portion of
it for you.  It is right to have a general notion of those abstruse
sciences, so as not to appear quite ignorant of them, when they happen,
as sometimes they do, to be the topics of conversation; but a deep
knowledge of them requires too much time, and engrosses the mind too
much.  I repeat it again and again to you, Let the great book of the
world be your principal study.  'Nocturna versate manu, versate diurna';
which may be rendered thus in English: Turn Over MEN BY DAY, AND WOMEN BY
NIGHT.  I mean only the best editions.

Whatever may be said at Paris of my speech upon the bill for the
reformation of the present calendar, or whatever applause it may have met
with here, the whole, I can assure you, is owing to the words and to the
delivery, but by no means to the matter; which, as I told you in a former
letter, I was not master of.  I mention this again, to show you the
importance of well-chosen words, harmonious periods, and good delivery;
for, between you and me, Lord Macclefield's speech was, in truth, worth a
thousand of mine.  It will soon be printed, and I will send it you.  It
is very instructive.  You say, that you wish to speak but half as well as
I did; you may easily speak full as well as ever I did, if you will but
give the same attention to the same objects that I did at your age, and
for many years afterward; I mean correctness, purity, and elegance of
style, harmony of periods, and gracefulness of delivery.  Read over and
over again the third book of 'Cicero de Oratore', in which he
particularly treats of the ornamental parts of oratory; they are indeed
properly oratory, for all the rest depends only upon common sense, and
some knowledge of the subject you speak upon.  But if you would please,
persuade, and prevail in speaking, it must be by the ornamental parts of
oratory.  Make them therefore habitual to you; and resolve never to say
the most common things, even to your footman, but in the best words you
can find, and with the best utterance.  This, with 'les manieres, la
tournure, et les usages du beau monde', are the only two things you want;
fortunately, they are both in your power; may you have them both!  Adieu.




LETTER CXXXVIII

LONDON, April 15, O. S.  1751

MY DEAR FRIEND:  What success with the graces, and in the
accomplishments, elegancies, and all those little nothings so
indispensably necessary to constitute an amiable man?  Do you take them,
do you make a progress in them?  The great secret is the art of pleasing;
and that art is to be attained by every man who has a good fund of common
sense.  If you are pleased with any person, examine why; do as he does;
and you will charm others by the same things which please you in him.
To be liked by women, you must be esteemed by men; and to please men, you
must be agreeable to women.  Vanity is unquestionably the ruling passion
in women; and it is much flattered by the attentions of a man who is
generally esteemed by men; when his merit has received the stamp of their
approbation, women make it current, that is to say, put him in fashion.
On the other hand, if a man has not received the last polish from women,
he may be estimable among men, but will never be amiable.  The
concurrence of the two sexes is as necessary to the perfection of our
being, as to the formation of it.  Go among women with the good qualities
of your sex, and you will acquire from them the softness and the graces
of theirs.  Men will then add affection to the esteem which they before
had for you. Women are the only refiners of the merit of men; it is true,
they cannot add weight, but they polish and give lustre to it.  'A
propos', I am assured, that Madame de Blot, although she has no great
regularity of features, is, notwithstanding, excessively pretty; and
that, for all that, she has as yet been scrupulously constant to her
husband, though she has now been married above a year.  Surely she does
not reflect, that woman wants polishing.  I would have you polish one
another reciprocally.  Force, assiduities, attentions, tender looks, and
passionate declarations, on your side will produce some irresolute
wishes, at least, on hers; and when even the slightest wishes arise, the
rest will soon follow.

As I take you to be the greatest 'juris peritus' and politician of the
whole Germanic body, I suppose you will have read the King of Prussia's
letter to the Elector of Mayence, upon the election of a King of the
Romans; and on the other side, a memorial entitled, IMPARTIAL
REPRESENTATION OF WHAT IS JUST WITH REGARD TO THE ELECTION OF A KING
OF
THE ROMANS, etc.  The first is extremely well written, but not grounded
upon the laws and customs of the empire.  The second is very ill written
(at least in French), but well grounded.  I fancy the author is some
German, who has taken into his head that he understands French.  I am,
however, persuaded that the elegance and delicacy of the King of
Prussia's letter will prevail with two-thirds of the public, in spite of
the solidity and truth contained in the other piece.  Such is the force
of an elegant and delicate style!

I wish you would be so good as to give me a more particular and
circumstantial account of the method of passing your time at Paris.
For instance, where it is that you dine every Friday, in company with
that amiable and respectable old man, Fontenelle?  Which is the house
where you think yourself at home?  For one always has such a one, where
one is better established, and more at ease than anywhere else.  Who are
the young Frenchmen with whom you are most intimately connected?  Do you
frequent the Dutch Ambassador's.  Have you penetrated yet into Count
Caunitz's house?  Has Monsieur de Pignatelli the honor of being one of
your humble servants?  And has the Pope's nuncio included you in the
jubilee?  Tell me also freely how you are with Lord Huntingdon: Do you
see him often?  Do you connect yourself with him?  Answer all these
questions circumstantially in your first letter.

I am told that Du Clos's book is not in vogue at Paris, and that it is
violently criticised: I suppose that is because one understands it; and
being intelligible is now no longer the fashion.  I have a very great
respect for fashion, but a much greater for this book; which is, all at
once, true, solid, and bright.  It contains even epigrams; what can one
wish for more?

Mr.------ will, I suppose, have left Paris by this time for his residence
at Toulouse.  I hope he will acquire manners there; I am sure he wants
them.  He is awkward, he is silent, and has nothing agreeable in his
address,--most necessary qualifications to distinguish one's self in
business, as well as in the POLITE WORLD!  In truth, these two things are
so connected, that a man cannot make a figure in business, who is not
qualified to shine in the great world; and to succeed perfectly in either
the one or the other, one must be in 'utrumque paratus'.  May you be
that, my dear friend! and so we wish you a good night.

P. S.  Lord and Lady Blessington, with their son Lord Mountjoy, will be
at Paris next week, in their way to the south of France; I send you a
little packet of books by them.  Pray go wait upon them, as soon as you
hear of their arrival, and show them all the attentions you can.




LETTER CXXXIX

LONDON, April 22, O. S.  1751

MY DEAR FRIEND: I apply to you now, as to the greatest virtuoso of this,
or perhaps any other age; one whose superior judgment and distinguishing
eye hindered the King of Poland from buying a bad picture at Venice, and
whose decisions in the realms of 'virtu' are final, and without appeal.
Now to the point.  I have had a catalogue sent me, 'd'une Trente a
l'aimable de Tableaux des plus Grands Maitres, appartenans au Sieur
Araignon Aperen, valet de chambre de la Reine, sur le quai de la
Megisserie, au coin de Arche Marion'.  There I observe two large pictures
of Titian, as described in the inclosed page of the catalogue, No. 18,
which I should be glad to purchase upon two conditions: the first is,
that they be undoubted originals of Titian, in good preservation; and the
other that they come cheap.  To ascertain the first (but without
disparaging your skill), I wish you would get some undoubted connoisseurs
to examine them carefully: and if, upon such critical examination, they
should be unanimously allowed to be undisputed originals of Titian, and
well preserved, then comes the second point, the price: I will not go
above two hundred pounds sterling for the two together; but as much less
as you can get them for.  I acknowledge that two hundred pounds seems to
be a very small sum for two undoubted Titians of that size; but, on the
other hand, as large Italian pictures are now out of fashion at Paris,
where fashion decides of everything, and as these pictures are too large
for common rooms, they may possibly come within the price above limited.
I leave the whole of this transaction (the price excepted, which I will
not exceed) to your consummate skill and prudence, with proper advice
joined to them.  Should you happen to buy them for that price, carry them
to your own lodgings, and get a frame made to the second, which I observe
has none, exactly the same with the other frame, and have the old one new
gilt; and then get them carefully packed up, and sent me by Rouen.

I hear much of your conversing with 'les beaux esprits' at Paris: I am
very glad of it; it gives a degree of reputation, especially at Paris;
and their conversation is generally instructive, though sometimes
affected.  It must be owned, that the polite conversation of the men and
women of fashion at Paris, though not always very deep, is much less
futile and frivolous than ours here.  It turns at least upon some
subject, something of taste, some point of history, criticism, and even
philosophy; which, though probably not quite so solid as Mr. Locke's,
is, however, better, and more becoming rational beings, than our
frivolous dissertations upon the weather, or upon whist.  Monsieur du
Clos observes, and I think very justly, 'qu'il y a a present en France
une fermentation universelle de la raison qui tend a se developper'.
Whereas, I am sorry to say, that here that fermentation seems to have
been over some years ago, the spirit evaporated, and only the dregs left.
Moreover, 'les beaux esprits' at Paris are commonly well-bred, which ours
very frequently are not; with the former your manners will be formed;
with the latter, wit must generally be compounded for at the expense of
manners.  Are you acquainted with Marivaux, who has certainly studied,
and is well acquainted with the heart; but who refines so much upon its
'plis et replis', and describes them so affectedly, that he often is
unintelligible to his readers, and sometimes so, I dare say, to himself?
Do you know 'Crebillon le fils'?  He is a fine painter and a pleasing
writer; his characters are admirable and his reflections just.  Frequent
these people, and be glad, but not proud of frequenting them: never boast
of it, as a proof of your own merit, nor insult, in a manner, other
companies by telling them affectedly what you, Montesquieu and Fontenelle
were talking of the other day; as I have known many people do here, with
regard to Pope and Swift, who had never been twice in company with
either; nor carry into other companies the 'ton' of those meetings of
'beaux esprits'.  Talk literature, taste, philosophy, etc., with them,
'a la bonne heure'; but then, with the same ease, and more 'enjouement',
talk 'pom-pons, moires', etc., with Madame de Blot, if she requires it.
Almost every subject in the world has its proper time and place; in which
no one is above or below discussion.  The point is, to talk well upon the
subject you talk upon; and the most trifling, frivolous subjects will
still give a man of parts an opportunity of showing them.  'L'usage du
grand monde' can alone teach that.  That was the distinguishing
characteristic of Alcibiades, and a happy one it was, that he could
occasionally, and with so much ease, adopt the most different, and even
the most opposite habits and manners, that each seemed natural to him.
Prepare yourself for the great world, as the 'athletae' used to do for
their exercises: oil (if I may use that expression) your mind and your
manners, to give them the necessary suppleness and flexibility; strength
alone will not do, as young people are too apt to think.

How do your exercises go on?  Can you manage a pretty vigorous 'sauteur'
between the pillars?  Are you got into stirrups yet?  'Faites-vous assaut
aux armes?  But, above all, what does Marcel say of you?  Is he
satisfied?  Pray be more particular in your accounts of yourself, for
though I have frequent accounts of you from others, I desire to have your
own too.  Adieu.  Yours, truly and friendly.




LETTER CXL

LONDON, May 2, O. S.  1751

DEAR FRIEND:  Two accounts, which I have very lately received of you,
from two good judges, have put me into great spirits, as they have given
me reasonable hopes that you will soon acquire all that I believe you
want: I mean the air, the address; the graces, and the manners of a man
of fashion.  As these two pictures of you are very unlike that which I
received, and sent you some months ago, I will name the two painters:
the first is an old friend and acquaintance of mine, Monsieur d'Aillon.
His picture is, I hope, like you; for it is a very good one: Monsieur
Tollot's is still a better, and so advantageous a one, that I will not
send you a copy of it, for fear of making you too vain.  So far only I
will tell you, that there was but one BUT in either of their accounts;
and it was this: I gave d'Aillon the question ordinary and extraordinary,
upon the important article of manners; and extorted this from him:
"But, since you will know it, he still wants that last beautiful varnish,
which raises the colors, and gives brilliancy to the piece.  Be persuaded
that he will acquire it: he has too much sense not to know its value;
and if I am not greatly mistaken, more persons than one are now
endeavoring to give it him.  "Monsieur Tollot says: "In order to be
exactly all that you wish him, he only wants those little nothings, those
graces in detail, and that amiable ease, which can only be acquired by
usage of the great world.  I am assured that he is, in that respect, in
good hands.  I do not know whether that does not rather imply in fine
arms."  Without entering into a nice discussion of the last question, I
congratulate you and myself upon your being so near that point at which I
so anxiously wish you to arrive.  I am sure that all your attention and
endeavors will be exerted; and, if exerted, they will succeed.  Mr.
Tollot says, that you are inclined to be fat, but I hope you will decline
it as much as you can; not by taking anything corrosive to make you lean,
but by taking as little as you can of those things that would make you
fat.  Drink no chocolate; take your coffee without cream: you cannot
possibly avoid suppers at Paris, unless you avoid company too, which I
would by no means have you do; but eat as little at supper as you can,
and make even an allowance for that little at your dinners.  Take
occasionally a double dose of riding and fencing; and now that summer is
come, walk a good deal in the Tuileries.  It is a real inconvenience to
anybody to be fat, and besides it is ungraceful for a young fellow.  'A
propos', I had like to have forgot to tell you, that I charged Tollot to
attend particularly to your utterence and diction; two points of the
utmost importance.  To the first he says: "His enunciation is not bad,
but it is to be wished that it were still better; and he expresses
himself with more fire than elegance.  Usage of good company will
instruct him likewise in that."  These, I allow, are all little things,
separately; but aggregately, they make a most important and great article
in the account of a gentleman.  In the House of Commons you can never
make a figure without elegance of style, and gracefulness of utterance;
and you can never succeed as a courtier at your own Court, or as a
minister at any other, without those innumerable 'petite riens dans les
manieres, et dans les attentions'.  Mr. Yorke is by this time at Paris;
make your court to him, but not so as to disgust, in the least, Lord
Albemarle, who may possibly dislike your considering Mr. Yorke as the man
of business, and him as only 'pour orner la scene'.  Whatever your
opinion may be upon THAT POINT, take care not to let it appear; but be
well with them both by showing no public preference to either.

Though I must necessarily fall into repetitions by treating the same
subject so often, I cannot help recommending to you again the utmost
attention to your air and address.  Apply yourself now to Marcel's
lectures, as diligently as you did formerly to Professor Mascow's; desire
him to teach you every genteel attitude that the human body can be put
into; let him make you go in and out of his room frequently, and present
yourself to him, as if he were by turns different persons; such as a
minister, a lady, a superior, an equal, and inferior, etc.  Learn to seat
genteelly in different companies; to loll genteelly, and with good
manners, in those companies where you are authorized to be free, and to
sit up respectfully where the same freedom is not allowable.  Learn even
to compose your countenance occasionally to the respectful, the cheerful,
and the insinuating.  Take particular care that the motions of your hands
and arms be easy and graceful; for the genteelness of a man consists more
in them than in anything else, especially in his dancing.  Desire some
women to tell you of any little awkwardness that they observe in your
carriage; they are the best judges of those things; and if they are
satisfied, the men will be so too.  Think now only of the decorations.
Are you acquainted with Madame Geoffrain, who has a great deal of wit;
and who, I am informed, receives only the very best company in her house?
Do you know Madame du Pin, who, I remember, had beauty, and I hear has
wit and reading?  I could wish you to converse only with those who,
either from their rank, their merit, or their beauty, require constant
attention; for a young man can never improve in company where he thinks
he may neglect himself.  A new bow must be constantly kept bent; when it
grows older, and has taken the right turn, it may now and then be
relaxed.

I have this moment paid your draft of L89 75s.; it was signed in a very
good hand; which proves that a good hand may be written without the
assistance of magic.  Nothing provokes me much more, than to hear people
indolently say that they cannot do, what is in everybody's power to do,
if it be but in their will.  Adieu.




LETTER CXLI

LONDON, May 6, O. S.  1751.

MY DEAR FRIEND:  The best authors are always the severest critics of
their own works; they revise, correct, file, and polish them, till they
think they have brought them to perfection.  Considering you as my work,
I do not look upon myself as a bad author, and am therefore a severe
critic.  I examine narrowly into the least inaccuracy or inelegance, in
order to correct, not to expose them, and that the work may be perfect at
last.  You are, I know, exceedingly improved in your air, address, and
manners, since you have been at Paris; but still there is, I believe,
room for further improvement before you come to that perfection which I
have set my heart upon seeing you arrive at; and till that moment I must
continue filing and polishing.  In a letter that I received by last post,
from a friend of yours at Paris, there was this paragraph: "I have the
honor to assure you, without flattery, that Mr. Stanhope succeeds beyond
what might be expected from a person of his age.  He goes into very good
company; and that kind of manner, which was at first thought to be too
decisive and peremptory, is now judged otherwise; because it is
acknowledged to be the effect of an ingenuous frankness, accompanied by
politeness, and by a proper deference.  He studies to please, and
succeeds.  Madame du Puisieux was the other day speaking of him with
complacency and friendship.  You will be satisfied with him in all
respects.  "This is extremely well, and I rejoice at it: one little
circumstance only may, and I hope will, be altered for the better.  Take
pains to undeceive those who thought that 'petit ton un peu delcide et un
peu brusque'; as it is not meant so, let it not appear so.  Compose your
countenance to an air of gentleness and 'douceur', use some expressions
of diffidence of your own opinion, and deference to other people's; such
as, "If I might be permitted to say--I should think--Is it not rather so?
At least I have the greatest reason to be diffident of myself."  Such
mitigating, engaging words do by no means weaken your argument; but, on
the contrary, make it more powerful by making it more pleasing.  If it is
a quick and hasty manner of speaking that people mistake 'pour decide et
brusque', prevent their mistakes for the future by speaking more
deliberately, and taking a softer tone of voice; as in this case you are
free from the guilt, be free from the suspicion, too.  Mankind, as I have
often told you, are more governed by appearances than by realities; and
with regard to opinion, one had better be really rough and hard, with the
appearance of gentleness and softness, than just the reverse.  Few people
have penetration enough to discover, attention enough to observe, or even
concern enough to examine beyond the exterior; they take their notions
from the surface, and go no deeper: they commend, as the gentlest and
best-natured man in the world, that man who has the most engaging
exterior manner, though possibly they have been but once in his company.
An air, a tone of voice, a composure of countenance to mildness and
softness, which are all easily acquired, do the business: and without
further examination, and possibly with the contrary qualities, that man
is reckoned the gentlest, the modestest, and the best-natured , man
alive.  Happy the man, who, with a certain fund of parts and knowledge,
gets acquainted with the world early enough to make it his bubble, at an
age when most people are the bubbles of the world! for that is the common
case of youth.  They grow wiser when it is too late; and, ashamed and
vexed at having been bubbles so long, too often turn knaves at last.  Do
not therefore trust to appearances and outside yourself, but pay other
people with them; because you may be sure that nine in ten of mankind do,
and ever will trust to them.  This is by no means a criminal or blamable
simulation, if not used with an ill intention.  I am by no means blamable
in desiring to have other people's good word, good-will, and affection,
if I do not mean to abuse them.  Your heart, I know, is good, your sense
is sound, and your knowledge extensive.  What then remains for you to do?
Nothing, but to adorn those fundamental qualifications, with such
engaging and captivating manners, softness, and gentleness, as will
endear you to those who are able to judge of your real merit, and which
always stand in the stead of merit with those who are not.  I do not mean
by this to recommend to you 'le fade doucereux', the insipid softness of
a gentle fool; no, assert your own opinion, oppose other people's when
wrong; but let your manner, your air, your terms, and your tone of voice,
be soft and gentle, and that easily and naturally, not affectedly.  Use
palliatives when you contradict; such as I MAY BE MISTAKEN, I AM NOT
SURE, BUT I BELIEVE, I SHOULD RATHER THINK, etc.  Finish any argument or
dispute with some little good-humored pleasantry, to show that you are
neither hurt yourself, nor meant to hurt your antagonist; for an
argument, kept up a good while, often occasions a temporary alienation on
each side.  Pray observe particularly, in those French people who are
distinguished by that character, 'cette douceur de moeurs et de
manieres', which they talk of so much, and value so justly; see in what
it consists; in mere trifles, and most easy to be acquired, where the
heart is really good.  Imitate, copy it, till it becomes habitual and
easy to you.  Without a compliment to you, I take it to be the only thing
you now want: nothing will sooner give it you than a real passion, or, at
least, 'un gout vif', for some woman of fashion; and, as I suppose that
you have either the one or the other by this time, you are consequently
in the best school.  Besides this, if you were to say to Lady Hervey,
Madame Monconseil, or such others as you look upon to be your friends, It
is said that I have a kind of manner which is rather too decisive and too
peremptory; it is not, however, my intention that it should be so; I
entreat you to correct, and even publicly to punish me whenever I am
guilty.  Do not treat me with the least indulgence, but criticise to the
utmost.  So clear-sighted a judge as you has a right to be severe; and I
promise you that the criminal will endeavor to correct himself.
Yesterday I had two of your acquaintances to dine with me, Baron B.  and
his companion Monsieur S.  I cannot say of the former, 'qu'il est paitri
de graces'; and I would rather advise him to go and settle quietly at
home, than to think of improving himself by further travels.  'Ce n'est
pas le bois don't on en fait'.  His companion is much better, though he
has a strong 'tocco di tedesco'.  They both spoke well of you, and so far
I liked them both.  How go you on with the amiable little Blot?  Does she
listen to your Battering tale?  Are you numbered among the list of her
admirers?  Is Madame------ your Madame de Lursay?  Does she sometimes
knot, and are you her Meilcour?  They say she has softness, sense, and
engaging manners; in such an apprenticeship much may be learned. --[This
whole passage, and several others, allude to Crebillon's 'Egaremens du
Coeur et de l'Esprit', a sentimental novel written about that time, and
then much in vogue at Paris.

A woman like her, who has always pleased, and often been pleased, can
best teach the art of pleasing; that art, without which, 'ogni fatica
vana'.  Marcel's lectures are no small part of that art: they are the
engaging forerunner of all other accomplishments.  Dress is also an
article not to be neglected, and I hope you do not neglect it; it helps
in the 'premier abord', which is often decisive.  By dress, I mean your
clothes being well made, fitting you, in the fashion and not above it;
your hair well done, and a general cleanliness and spruceness in your
person.  I hope you take infinite care of your teeth; the consequences of
neglecting the mouth are serious, not only to one's self, but to others.
In short, my dear child, neglect nothing; a little more will complete the
whole.  Adieu.  I have not heard from you these three weeks, which I
think a great while.




LETTER CXLII

LONDON, May 10, O. S.  1751.

MY DEAR FRIEND:  I received yesterday, at the same time, your letters of
the 4th and 11th, N. S., and being much more careful of my commissions
than you are of yours, I do not delay one moment sending you my final
instructions concerning the pictures.  The man you allow to be a Titian,
and in good preservation; the woman is an indifferent and a damaged
picture; but as I want them for furniture for a particular room,
companions are necessary; and therefore I am willing to take the woman
for better for worse, upon account of the man; and if she is not too much
damaged, I can have her tolerably repaired, as many a fine woman is, by a
skillful hand here; but then I expect that the lady should be, in a
manner, thrown into the bargain with the man; and, in this state of
affairs, the woman being worth little or nothing, I will not go above
fourscore Louis for the two together.  As for the Rembrandt you mention,
though it is very cheap, if good, I do not care for it.  I love 'la belle
nature'; Rembrandt paints caricatures.  Now for your own commissions,
which you seem to have forgotten.  You mention nothing of the patterns
which you received by Monsieur Tollot, though I told you in a former
letter, which you must have had before the date of your last, that I
should stay till I received the patterns pitched upon by your ladies;
for as to the instructions which you sent me in Madame Monconseil's hand,
I could find no mohairs in London that exactly answered that description;
I shall, therefore, wait till you send me (which you may easily do in a
letter) the patterns chosen by your three graces.

I would, by all means, have you go now and then, for two or three days,
to Marechal Coigny's, at Orli; it is but a proper civility to that
family, which has been particularly civil to you; and, moreover, I would
have you familiarize yourself with, and learn the interior and domestic
manners of, people of that rank and fashion.  I also desire that you will
frequent Versailles and St. Cloud, at both of which courts you have been
received with distinction.  Profit of that distinction, and familiarize
yourself at both.  Great courts are the seats of true good-breeding; you
are to live at courts, lose no time in learning them.  Go and stay
sometimes at Versailles for three or four days, where you will be
domestic in the best families, by means of your friend Madame de
Puisieux; and mine, l'Abbe de la Ville.  Go to the King's and the
Dauphin's levees, and distinguish yourself from the rest of your
countrymen, who, I dare say, never go there when they can help it.
Though the young Frenchmen of fashion may not be worth forming intimate
connections with, they are well worth making acquaintance of; and I do
not see how you can avoid it, frequenting so many good French houses as
you do, where, to be sure, many of them come.  Be cautious how you
contract friendships, but be desirous, and even industrious, to obtain a
universal acquaintance.  Be easy, and even forward, in making new
acquaintances; that is the only way of knowing manners and characters in
general, which is, at present, your great object.  You are 'enfant de
famille' in three ministers' houses; but I wish you had a footing, at
least, in thirteen and that, I should think, you might easily bring
about, by that common chain, which, to a certain degree, connects those
you do not with those you do know.

For instance, I suppose that neither Lord Albemarle, nor Marquis de St.
Germain, would make the least difficulty to present you to Comte Caunitz,
the Nuncio, etc.  'Il faut etre rompu du monde', which can only be done
by an extensive, various, and almost universal acquaintance.

When you have got your emaciated Philomath, I desire that his triangles,
rhomboids, etc., may not keep you one moment out of the good company you
would otherwise be in.  Swallow all your learning in the morning, but
digest it in company in the evenings.  The reading of ten new characters
is more your business now, than the reading of twenty old books; showish
and shining people always get the better of all others, though ever so
solid.  If you would be a great man in the world when you are old, shine
and be showish in it while you are young, know everybody, and endeavor to
please everybody, I mean exteriorly; for fundamentally it is impossible.
Try to engage the heart of every woman, and the affections of almost
every man you meet with.  Madame Monconseil assures me that you are most
surprisingly improved in your air, manners, and address: go on, my dear
child, and never think that you are come to a sufficient degree of
perfection; 'Nil actum reputans, si quid superesset agendum'; and in
those shining parts of the character of a gentleman, there is always
something remaining to be acquired.  Modes and manners vary in different
places, and at different times; you must keep pace with them, know them,
and adopt them, wherever you find them.  The great usage of the world,
the knowledge of characters, the brillant dun galant homme, is all that
you now.  want.  Study Marcel and the 'beau monde' with great
application, but read Homer and Horace only when you have nothing else to
do.  Pray who is 'la belle Madame de Case', whom I know you frequent?
I like the epithet given her very well: if she deserves it, she deserves
your attention too.  A man of fashion should be gallant to a fine woman,
though he does not make love to her, or may be otherwise engaged.
On 'lui doit des politesses, on fait l'eloge de ses charmes, et il n'en
est ni plus ni moins pour cela': it pleases, it flatters; you get their
good word, and you lose nothing by it.  These 'gentillesses' should be
accompanied, as indeed everything else should, with an air: 'un air, un
ton de douceur et de politesse'.  Les graces must be of the party, or it
will never do; and they are so easily had, that it is astonishing to me
that everybody has them not; they are sooner gained than any woman of
common reputation and decency.  Pursue them but with care and attention,
and you are sure to enjoy them at last: without them, I am sure, you will
never enjoy anybody else.  You observe, truly, that Mr.------ is gauche;
it is to be hoped that will mend with keeping company; and is yet
pardonable in him, as just come from school.  But reflect what you would
think of a man, who had been any time in the world, and yet should be so
awkward.  For God's sake, therefore, now think of nothing but shining,
and even distinguishing yourself in the most polite courts, by your air,
your address, your manners, your politeness, your 'douceur', your graces.
With those advantages (and not without them) take my word for it, you
will get the better of all rivals, in business as well as in 'ruelles'.
Adieu.  Send me your patterns, by the next post, and also your
instructions to Grevenkop about the seal, which you seem to have
forgotten.




LETTER CXLIII

LONDON, May 16, O. S.  1751.

MY DEAR FRIEND: In about three months from this day, we shall probably
meet.  I look upon that moment as a young woman does upon her bridal
night; I expect the greatest pleasure, and yet cannot help fearing some
little mixture of pain.  My reason bids me doubt a little, of what my
imagination makes me expect.  In some articles I am very sure that my
most sanguine wishes will not be disappointed; and those are the most
material ones.  In others, I fear something or other, which I can better
feel than describe.  However, I will attempt it.  I fear the want of that
amiable and engaging 'je ne sais quoi', which as some philosophers have,
unintelligibly enough, said of the soul, is all in all, and all in every
part; it should shed its influence over every word and action.  I fear
the want of that air, and first 'abord', which suddenly lays hold of the
heart, one does not know distinctly how or why.  I fear an inaccuracy,
or, at least, inelegance of diction, which will wrong, and lower, the
best and justest matter.  And, lastly, I fear an ungraceful, if not an
unpleasant utterance, which would disgrace and vilify the whole.  Should
these fears be at present founded, yet the objects of them are (thank
God) of such a nature, that you may, if you please, between this and our
meeting, remove everyone of them.  All these engaging and endearing
accomplishments are mechanical, and to be acquired by care and
observation, as easily as turning, or any mechanical trade.  A common
country fellow, taken from the plow, and enlisted in an old corps, soon
lays aside his shambling gait, his slouching air, his clumsy and awkward
motions: and acquires the martial air, the regular motions, and whole
exercise of the corps, and particularly of his right and left hand man.
How so?  Not from his parts; which were just the same before as after he
was enlisted; but either from a commendable ambition of being like, and
equal to those he is to live with; or else from the fear of being
punished for not being so.  If then both or either of these motives
change such a fellow, in about six months' time, to such a degree, as
that he is not to be known again, how much stronger should both these
motives be with you, to acquire, in the utmost perfection, the whole
exercise of the people of fashion, with whom you are to live all your
life?  Ambition should make you resolve to be at least their equal in
that exercise, as well as the fear of punishment; which most inevitably
will attend the want of it.  By that exercise, I mean the air, the
manners, the graces, and the style of people of fashion.  A friend of
yours, in a letter I received from him by the last post, after some other
commendations of you, says, 'It is surprising that, thinking with so much
solidity as he does, and having so true and refined a taste, he should
express himself with so little elegance and delicacy.  He even totally
neglects the choice of words and turn of phrases."

This I should not be so much surprised or concerned at, if it related
only to the English language; which hitherto you have had no opportunity
of studying, and but few of speaking, at least to those who could correct
your inaccuracies.  But if you do not express yourself elegantly and
delicately in French and German, (both which languages I know you possess
perfectly and speak eternally) it can be only from an unpardonable
inattention to what you most erroneously think a little object, though,
in truth, it is one of the most important of your life.  Solidity and
delicacy of thought must be given us: it cannot be acquired, though it
may be improved; but elegance and delicacy of expression may be acquired
by whoever will take the necessary care and pains.  I am sure you love me
so well; that you would be very sorry when we meet, that I should be
either disappointed or mortified; and I love you so well, that I assure
you I should be both, if I should find you want any of those exterior
accomplishments which are the indispensably necessary steps to that
figure and fortune, which I so earnestly wish you may one day make in the
world.

I hope you do not neglect your exercises of riding, fencing, and dancing,
but particularly the latter: for they all concur to 'degourdir', and to
give a certain air.  To ride well, is not only a proper and graceful
accomplishment for a gentleman, but may also save you many a fall
hereafter; to fence well, may possibly save your life; and to dance well,
is absolutely necessary in order to sit, stand, and walk well.  To tell
you the truth, my friend, I have some little suspicion that you now and
then neglect or omit your exercises, for more serious studies.  But now
'non est his locus', everything has its time; and this is yours for your
exercises; for when you return to Paris I only propose your continuing
your dancing; which you shall two years longer, if you happen to be where
there is a good dancing-master.  Here I will see you take some lessons
with your old master Desnoyers, who is our Marcel.

What says Madame du Pin to you?  I am told she is very handsome still;
I know she was some few years ago.  She has good parts, reading, manners,
and delicacy: such an arrangement would be both creditable and
advantageous to you.  She will expect to meet with all the good-breeding
and delicacy that she brings; and as she is past the glare and 'eclat'
of youth, may be the more willing to listen to your story, if you tell it
well.  For an attachment, I should prefer her to 'la petite Blot'; and,
for a mere gallantry, I should prefer 'la petite Blot' to her; so that
they are consistent, et 'l'un n'emplche pas l'autre'.  Adieu.  Remember
'la douceur et les graces'.




LETTER CXLIV

LONDON, May 23, O. S.  1751.

MY DEAR FRIEND: I have this moment received your letter of the 25th
N. S., and being rather something more attentive to my commissions than
you are to yours, return you this immediate answer to the question you
ask me about the two pictures: I will not give one livre more than what I
told you in my last; having no sort of occasion for them, and not knowing
very well where to put them if I had them.

I wait with impatience for your final orders about the mohairs; the
mercer persecuting me every day for three pieces which I thought pretty,
and which I have kept by me eventually, to secure them in case your
ladies should pitch upon them.

If I durst!  what should hinder you from daring?  One always dares if
there are hopes of success ; and even if there are none, one is no loser
by daring.  A man of fashion knows how, and when, to dare.  He begins his
approaches by distant attacks, by assiduities, and by attentions.  If he
is not immediately and totally repulsed, he continues to advance.  After
certain steps success is infallible; and none but very silly fellows can
then either doubt, or not attempt it.  Is it the respectable character of
Madame de la Valiere which prevents your daring, or are you intimidated
at the fierce virtue of Madame du Pin?  Does the invincible modesty of
the handsome Madame Case discourage, more than her beauty invites you?
Fie, for shame!  Be convinced that the most virtuous woman, far from
being offended at a declaration of love, is flattered by it, if it is
made in a polite and agreeable manner.  It is possible that she may not
be propitious to your vows; that is to say, if she has a liking or a
passion for another person.  But, at all events, she will not be
displeased with you for it; so that, as there is no danger, this cannot
even be called daring.  But if she attends, if she listens, and allows
you to repeat your declaration, be persuaded that if you do not dare all
the rest, she will laugh at you.  I advise you to begin rather by Madame
du Pin, who has still more than beauty enough for such a youngster as
you.  She has, besides, knowledge of the world, sense, and delicacy.  As
she is not so extremely young, the choice of her lovers cannot be
entirely at her option.  I promise you, she will not refuse the tender of
your most humble services.  Distinguish her, then, by attentions and by
tender looks.  Take favorable opportunities of whispering that you wish
esteem and friendship were the only motives of your regard for her; but
that it derives from sentiments of a much more tender nature: that you
made not this declaration without pain; but that the concealing your
passion was a still greater torment.

I am sensible, that in saying this for the first time, you will look
silly, abashed, and even express yourself very ill.  So much the better;
for, instead of attributing your confusion to the little usage you have
of the world, particularly in these sort of subjects, she will think that
excess of love is the occasion of it.  In such a case, the lover's best
friend is self-love.  Do not then be afraid; behave gallantly.  Speak
well, and you will be heard.  If you are not listened to the first time,
try a second, a third, and a fourth.  If the place is not already taken,
depend upon it, it may be conquered.

I am very glad you are going to Orli, and from thence to St. Cloud;
go to both, and to Versailles also, often.  It is that interior domestic
familiarity with people of fashion, that alone can give you 'l'usage du
monde, et les manieres aisees'.  It is only with women one loves, or men
one respects, that the desire of pleasing exerts itself; and without the
desire of pleasing no man living can please.  Let that desire be the
spring of all your words and actions.  That happy talent, the art of
pleasing, which so few do, though almost all might possess, is worth all
your learning and knowledge put together.  The latter can never raise you
high without the former; but the former may carry you, as it has carried
thousands, a great way without the latter.

I am glad that you dance so well, as to be reckoned by Marcel among his
best scholars; go on, and dance better still.  Dancing well is pleasing
'pro tanto', and makes a part of that necessary whole, which is composed
of a thousand parts, many of them of 'les infiniment petits quoi
qu'infiniment necessaires'.

I shall never have done upon this subject which is indispensably
necessary toward your making any figure or fortune in the world; both
which I have set my heart upon, and for both which you now absolutely
want no one thing but the art of pleasing; and I must not conceal from
you that you have still a good way to go before you arrive at it.  You
still want a thousand of those little attentions that imply a desire of
pleasing: you want a 'douceur' of air and expression that engages: you
want an elegance and delicacy of expression, necessary to adorn the best
sense and most solid matter: in short, you still want a great deal of the
'brillant' and the 'poli'.  Get them at any rate: sacrifice hecatombs of
books to them: seek for them in company, and renounce your closet till
you have got them.  I never received the letter you refer to, if ever you
wrote it.  Adieu, et bon soir, Monseigneur.




LETTER CXLV

GREENWICH, June 6, O. S.  1751.

MY DEAR FRIEND: Solicitous and anxious as I have ever been to form your
heart, your mind, and your manners, and to bring you as near perfection
as the imperfection of our natures will allow, I have exhausted, in the
course of our correspondence, all that my own mind could suggest, and
have borrowed from others whatever I thought could be useful to you; but
this has necessarily been interruptedly and by snatches.  It is now time,
and you are of an age to review and to weigh in your own mind all that
you have heard, and all that you have read, upon these subjects; and to
form your own character, your conduct, and your manners, for the rest of
your life; allowing for such improvements as a further knowledge of the
world will naturally give you.  In this view I would recommend to you to
read, with the greatest attention, such books as treat particularly of
those subjects; reflecting seriously upon them, and then comparing the
speculation with the practice.

For example, if you read in the morning some of La Rochefoucault's
maxims; consider them, examine them well, and compare them with the real
characters you meet with in the evening.  Read La Bruyere in the morning,
and see in the evening whether his pictures are like.  Study the heart
and the mind of man, and begin with your own.  Meditation and reflection
must lay the foundation of that knowledge: but experience and practice
must, and alone can, complete it.  Books, it is true, point out the
operations of the mind, the sentiments of the heart, the influence of the
passions; and so far they are of previous use: but without subsequent
practice, experience, and observation, they are as ineffectual, and would
even lead you into as many errors in fact, as a map would do, if you were
to take your notions of the towns and provinces from their delineations
in it.  A man would reap very little benefit by his travels, if he made
them only in his closet upon a map of the whole world.  Next to the two
books that I have already mentioned, I do not know a better for you to
read, and seriously reflect upon, than 'Avis d'une Mere d'un Fils, par la
Marquise de Lambert'.  She was a woman of a superior understanding and
knowledge of the world, had always kept the best company, was solicitous
that her son should make a figure and a fortune in the world, and knew
better than anybody how to point out the means.  It is very short, and
will take you much less time to read, than you ought to employ in
reflecting upon it, after you have read it.  Her son was in the army, she
wished he might rise there; but she well knew, that, in order to rise, he
must first please: she says to him, therefore, With regard to those upon
whom you depend, the chief merit is to please.  And, in another place, in
subaltern employments, the art of pleasing must be your support.  Masters
are like mistresses: whatever services they may be indebted to you for,
they cease to love when you cease to be agreeable.  This, I can assure
you, is at least as true in courts as in camps, and possibly more so.
If to your merit and knowledge you add the art of pleasing, you may very
probably come in time to be Secretary of State; but, take my word for it,
twice your merit and knowledge, without the art of pleasing, would, at
most, raise you to the IMPORTANT POST of Resident at Hamburgh or
Ratisbon.  I need not tell you now, for I often have, and your own
discernment must have told you, of what numberless little ingredients
that art of pleasing is compounded, and how the want of the least of them
lowers the whole; but the principal ingredient is, undoubtedly, 'la
douceur dans le manieres':  nothing will give you this more than keeping
company with your superiors.  Madame Lambert tells her son, Let your
connections be with people above you; by that means you will acquire a
habit of respect and politeness.  With one's equals, one is apt to become
negligent, and the mind grows torpid. She advises him, too, to frequent
those people, and to see their inside; In order to judge of men, one must
be intimately connected; thus you see them without, a veil, and with
their mere every-day merit.  A happy expression!  It was for this reason
that I have so often advised you to establish and domesticate yourself,
wherever you can, in good houses of people above you, that you may see
their EVERY-DAY character, manners, habits, etc.  One must see people
undressed to judge truly of their shape; when they are dressed to go
abroad, their clothes are contrived to conceal, or at least palliate the
defects of it: as full-bottomed wigs were contrived for the Duke of
Burgundy, to conceal his hump back.  Happy those who have no faults to
disguise, nor weaknesses to conceal! there are few, if any such; but
unhappy those who know little enough of the world to judge by outward
appearances.  Courts are the best keys to characters; there every passion
is busy, every art exerted, every character analyzed; jealousy, ever
watchful, not only discovers, but exposes, the mysteries of the trade, so
that even  bystanders 'y apprennent a deviner'.  There too the great art
of pleasing is practiced, taught, and learned with all its graces and
delicacies.  It is the first thing needful there:  It is the absolutely
necessary harbinger of merit and talents, let them be ever so great.
There is no advancing a step without it.  Let misanthropes and would-be
philosophers declaim as much as they please against the vices, the
simulation, and dissimulation of courts; those invectives are always the
result of ignorance, ill-humor, or envy.  Let them show me a cottage,
where there are not the same vices of which they accuse courts; with this
difference only, that in a cottage they appear in their native deformity,
and that in courts, manners and good-breeding make them less shocking,
and blunt their edge.  No, be convinced that the good-breeding, the
'tournure, la douceur dans les manieres', which alone are to be acquired
at courts, are not the showish trifles only which some people call or
think them; they are a solid good; they prevent a great deal of real
mischief; they create, adorn, and strengthen friendships; they keep
hatred within bounds; they promote good-humor and good-will in families,
where the want of good-breeding and gentleness of manners is commonly the
original cause of discord.  Get then, before it is too late, a habit of
these 'mitiores virtutes': practice them upon every, the least occasion,
that they may be easy and familiar to you upon the greatest; for they
lose a great degree of their merit if they seem labored, and only called
in upon extraordinary occasions.  I tell you truly, this is now the only
doubtful part of your character with me; and it is for that reason that I
dwell upon it so much, and inculcate it so often.  I shall soon see
whether this doubt of mine is founded; or rather I hope I shall soon see
that it is not.

This moment I receive your letter of the 9th N. S.  I am sorry to find
that you have had, though ever so slight a return of your Carniolan
disorder; and I hope your conclusion will prove a true one, and that this
will be the last.  I will send the mohairs by the first opportunity.  As
for the pictures, I am already so full, that I am resolved not to buy one
more, unless by great accident I should meet with something surprisingly
good, and as surprisingly cheap.

I should have thought that Lord -------, at his age, and with his parts
and address, need not have been reduced to keep an opera w---e, in such a
place as Paris, where so many women of fashion generously serve as
volunteers.  I am still more sorry that he is in love with her; for that
will take him out of good company, and sink him into bad; such as
fiddlers, pipers, and 'id genus omne'; most unedifying and unbecoming
company for a man of fashion!

Lady Chesterfield makes you a thousand compliments.  Adieu, my dear
child.




LETTER CXLVI

GREENWICH, June 10, O. S.  1751

MY DEAR FRIEND: Your ladies were so slow in giving their specific orders,
that the mohairs, of which you at last sent me the patterns, were all
sold.  However, to prevent further delays (for ladies are apt to be very
impatient, when at last they know their own minds), I have taken the
quantities desired of three mohairs which come nearest to the description
you sent me some time ago, in Madame Monconseil's own hand; and I will
send them to Calais by the first opportunity.  In giving 'la petite Blot'
her piece, you have a fine occasion of saying fine things, if so
inclined.

Lady Hervey, who is your puff and panegyrist, writes me word that she saw
you lately dance at a ball, and that you dance very genteelly.  I am
extremely glad to hear it; for (by the maxim, that 'omne majus continet
in se minus'), if you dance genteelly, I presume you walk, sit, and stand
genteelly too; things which are much more easy, though much more
necessary, than dancing well.  I have known many very genteel people, who
could not dance well; but I never knew anybody dance very well, who was
not genteel in other things.  You will probably often have occasion to
stand in circles, at the levees of princes and ministers, when it is very
necessary 'de payer de sa personne, et d'etre bien plante', with your
feet not too near nor too distant from each other.  More people stand and
walk, than sit genteelly.  Awkward, ill-bred people, being ashamed,
commonly sit bolt upright and stiff; others, too negligent and easy,
'se vautrent dans leur fauteuil', which is ungraceful and ill-bred,
unless where the familiarity is extreme; but a man of fashion makes
himself easy, and appears so by leaning gracefully instead of lolling
supinely; and by varying those easy attitudes instead of that stiff
immobility of a bashful booby.  You cannot conceive, nor can I express,
how advantageous a good air, genteel motions, and engaging address are,
not only among women, but among men, and even in the course of business;
they fascinate the affections, they steal a preference, they play about
the heart till they engage it.  I know a man, and so do you, who, without
a grain of merit, knowledge, or talents, has raised himself millions of
degrees above his level, simply by a good air and engaging manners;
insomuch that the very Prince who raised him so high, calls him, 'mon
aimable vaut-rien'; --[The Marichal de Richelieu.]-- but of this do not
open your lips, 'pour cause'.  I give you this secret as the strongest
proof imaginable of the efficacy of air, address, 'tournure, et tout ces
Petits riens'.

Your other puff and panegyrist, Mr. Harte, is gone to Windsor in his way
to Cornwall, in order to be back soon enough to meet you here: I really
believe he is as impatient for that moment as I am, 'et c'est tout dire':
but, however, notwithstanding my impatience, if by chance you should then
be in a situation, that leaving Paris would cost your heart too many
pangs, I allow you to put off your journey, and to tell me, as Festus did
Paul, AT A MORE CONVENIENT SEASON I WILL SPEAK TO THEE.  You see by this
that I eventually sacrifice my sentiments to yours, and this in a very
uncommon object of paternal complaisance.  Provided always, and be it
understood (as they say in acts of Parliament), that 'quae te cumque
domat Venus, non erubescendis adurit ignibus'.  If your heart will let
you come, bring with you only your valet de chambre, Christian, and your
own footman; not your valet de place, whom you may dismiss for the time,
as also your coach; but you had best keep on your lodgings, the
intermediate expense of which will be but inconsiderable, and you will
want them to leave your books and baggage in.  Bring only the clothes you
travel in, one suit of black, for the mourning for the Prince will not be
quite out by that time, and one suit of your fine clothes, two or three
of your laced shirts, and the rest plain ones; of other things, as bags,
feathers, etc., as you think proper.  Bring no books, unless two or three
for your' amusement upon the road; for we must apply simply to English,
in which you are certainly no 'puriste'; and I will supply you
sufficiently with the proper English authors.  I shall probably keep you
here till about the middle of October, and certainly not longer; it being
absolutely necessary for you to pass the next winter at Paris; so that;
should any fine eyes shed tears for your departure, you may dry them by
the promise of your return in two months.

Have you got a master for geometry?  If the weather is very hot, you may
leave your riding at the 'manege' till you return to Paris, unless you
think the exercise does you more good than the heat can do you harm; but
I desire you will not leave off Marcel for one moment; your fencing
likewise, if you have a mind, may subside for the summer; but you will do
well to resume it in the winter and to be adroit at it, but by no means
for offense, only for defense in case of necessity.  Good night.  Yours.

P. S.  I forgot to give you one commission, when you come here; which is,
not to fail bringing the GRACES along with you.




LETTER CXLVII

GREENWICH, June 13, O. S. 1751.

MY DEAR FRIEND: 'Les bienseances'--[This single word implies decorum,
good-breeding, and propriety]-- are a most necessary part of the
knowledge of the world.  They consist in the relations of persons,
things, time, and place; good sense points them out, good company
perfects them ( supposing always an attention and a desire to please),
and good policy recommends them.

Were you to converse with a king, you ought to be as easy and
unembarrassed as with your own valet de chambre; but yet, every look,
word and action, should imply the utmost respect.  What would be proper
and well-bred with others, much your superiors, would be absurd and ill-
bred with one so very much so.  You must wait till you are spoken to; you
must receive, not give, the subject of conversation; and you must even
take care that the given subject of such conversation do not lead you
into any impropriety.  The art would be to carry it, if possible, to some
indirect flattery; such as commending those virtues in some other person,
in which that prince either thinks he does, or at least would be thought
by others to excel.  Almost the same precautions are necessary to be used
with ministers, generals, etc., who expect to be treated with very near
the same respect as their masters, and commonly deserve it better.  There
is, however, this difference, that one may begin the conversation with
them, if on their side it should happen to drop, provided one does not
carry it to any subject upon which it is improper either for them to
speak, or be spoken to.  In these two cases, certain attitudes and
actions would be extremely absurd, because too easy, and consequently
disrespectful.  As, for instance, if you were to put your arms across in
your bosom, twirl your snuff-box, trample with your feet, scratch your
head, etc., it would be shockingly ill-bred in that company; and, indeed,
not extremely well-bred in any other.  The great difficulty in those
cases, though a very surmountable one by attention and custom, is to join
perfect inward ease with perfect outward respect.

In mixed companies with your equals (for in mixed companies all people
are to a certain degree equal), greater ease and liberty are allowed; but
they too have their bounds within 'bienseance'.  There is a social
respect necessary: you may start your own subject of conversation with
modesty, taking great care, however, 'de ne jamais parler de cordes.
dans la maison d'un pendu. --[Never to mention a rope in the family of a
man who has been hanged]-- Your words, gestures, and attitudes, have a
greater degree of latitude, though by no means an unbounded one.  You may
have your hands in your pockets, take snuff, sit, stand, or occasionally
walk, as you like; but I believe you would not think it very 'bienseant'
to whistle, put on your hat, loosen your garters or your buckles, lie
down upon a couch, or go to bed, and welter in an easychair.  These are
negligences and freedoms which one can only take when quite alone; they
are injurious to superiors, shocking and offensive to equals, brutal and
insulting to inferiors.  That easiness of carriage and behavior, which is
exceedingly engaging, widely differs from negligence and inattention, and
by no means implies that one may do whatever one pleases; it only means
that one is not to be stiff, formal, embarrassed, disconcerted, and
ashamed, like country bumpkins, and, people who have never been in good
company; but it requires great attention to, and a scrupulous observation
of 'les bienseances': whatever one ought to do, is to be done with ease
and unconcern; whatever is improper must not be done at all.  In mixed
companies also, different ages and sexes are to be differently addressed.
You would not talk of your pleasures to men of a certain age, gravity,
and dignity; they justly expect from young people a degree of deference
and regard.  You should be full as easy with them as with people of your
own years: but your manner must be different; more respect must be
implied; and it is not amiss to insinuate that from them you expect to
learn.  It flatters and comforts age for not being able to take a part in
the joy and titter of youth.  To women you should always address yourself
with great outward respect and attention, whatever you feel inwardly;
their sex is by long prescription entitled to it; and it is among the
duties of 'bienseance'; at the same time that respect is very properly
and very agreeably mixed with a degree of 'enjouement', if you have it;
but then, that badinage must either directly or indirectly tend to their
praise, and even not be liable to a malicious construction to their
disadvantage.  But here, too, great attention must be had to the
difference of age, rank, and situation.  A 'marechale' of fifty must not
be played with like a young coquette of fifteen; respect and serious
'enjouement', if I may couple those two words, must be used with the
former, and mere 'badinage, zeste meme d'un peu de polissonerie', is
pardonable with the latter.

Another important point of 'les bienseances', seldom enough attended to,
is, not to run your own present humor and disposition indiscriminately
against everybody, but to observe, conform to, and adopt them.  For
example, if you happened to be in high good humor and a flow of spirits,
would you go and sing a 'pont neuf', --[a ballad]-- or cut a caper, to la
Marechale de Coigny, the Pope's nuncio, or Abbe Sallier, or to any person
of natural gravity and melancholy, or who at that time should be in
grief?  I believe not; as, on the other hand, I suppose, that if you were
in low spirits or real grief, you would not choose to bewail your
situation with 'la petite Blot'.  If you cannot command your present
humor and disposition, single out those to converse with, who happen to
be in the humor the nearest to your own.

Loud laughter is extremely inconsistent with 'les bienseances', as it is
only the illiberal and noisy testimony of the joy of the mob at some very
silly thing.  A gentleman is often seen, but very seldom heard to laugh.
Nothing is more contrary to 'les bienseances' than horse-play, or 'jeux
de main' of any kind whatever, and has often very serious, sometimes very
fatal consequences.  Romping, struggling, throwing things at one
another's head, are the becoming pleasantries of the mob, but degrade a
gentleman: 'giuoco di mano, giuoco di villano', is a very true saying,
among the few true sayings of the Italians.

Peremptoriness and decision in young people is 'contraire aux
bienseances', and they should seldom seem to assert, and always use some
softening mitigating expression; such as, 's'il m'est permis de le dire,
je croirais plutot, si j'ose m'expliquer', which soften the manner,
without giving up or even weakening the thing.  People of more age and
experience expect, and are entitled to, that degree of deference.

There is a 'bienseance' also with regard to people of the lowest degree:
a gentleman observes it with his footman--even with the beggar in the
street.  He considers them as objects of compassion, not of insult; he
speaks to neither 'd'un ton brusque', but corrects the one coolly, and
refuses the other with humanity.  There is one occasion in the world in
which 'le ton brusque' is becoming a gentleman.  In short, 'les
bienseances' are another word for MANNERS, and extend to every part of
life.  They are propriety; the Graces should attend, in order to complete
them; the Graces enable us to do, genteelly and pleasingly, what 'les
bienseances' require to be done at all.  The latter are an obligation
upon every man; the former are an infinite advantage and ornament to any
man.  May you unite both!

Though you dance well, do not think that you dance well enough, and
consequently not endeavor to dance still better.  And though you should
be told that you are genteel, still aim at being genteeler.  If Marcel
should, do not you be satisfied.  Go on, court the Graces all your
lifetime; you will find no better friends at court: they will speak in
your favor, to the hearts of princes, ministers, and mistresses.

Now that all tumultuous passions and quick sensations have subsided with
me, and that I have no tormenting cares nor boisterous pleasures to
agitate me, my greatest joy is to consider the fair prospect you have
before you, and to hope and believe you will enjoy it.  You are already
in the world, at an age when others have hardly heard of it.  Your
character is hitherto not only unblemished in its mortal part, but even
unsullied by any low, dirty, and ungentleman-like vice; and will, I hope,
continue so.  Your knowledge is sound, extensive and avowed, especially
in everything relative to your destination.  With such materials to begin
with, what then is wanting!  Not fortune, as you have found by
experience.  You have had, and shall have, fortune sufficient to assist
your merit and your industry; and if I can help it, you never shall have
enough to make you negligent of either.  You have, too, 'mens sana in
corpore sano', the greatest blessing of all.  All, therefore, that you
want is as much in your power to acquire, as to eat your breakfast when
set before you; it is only that knowledge of the world, that elegance of
manners, that universal politeness, and those graces which keeping good
company, and seeing variety of places and characters, must inevitably,
with the least attention on your part, give you.  Your foreign
destination leads to the greatest things, and your parliamentary
situation will facilitate your progress.  Consider, then, this pleasing
prospect as attentively for yourself as I consider it for you.  Labor on
your part to realize it, as I will on mine to assist, and enable you to
do it.  'Nullum numen abest, si sit prudentia'.

Adieu, my dear child!  I count the days till I have the pleasure of
seeing you; I shall soon count the hours, and at last the minutes, with
increasing impatience.

P.  S.  The mohairs are this day gone from hence for Calais, recommended
to the care of Madame Morel, and directed, as desired, to the
Comptroller-general.  The three pieces come to six hundred and eighty
French livres.




LETTER CXLVIII

GREENWICH, June 20, O. S.  1751

MY DEAR FRIEND: So very few people, especially young travelers, see what
they see, or hear what they hear, that though I really believe it may be
unnecessary with you, yet there can be no harm in reminding you, from
time to time, to see what you see, and to hear what you hear; that is,
to see and hear as you should do.  Frivolous, futile people, who make at
least three parts in four of mankind, only desire to see and hear what
their frivolous and futile precursors have seen and heard: as St.
Peter's, the Pope, and High Mass, at Rome; Notre Dame, Versailles, the
French King, and the French Comedy, in France.  A man of parts sees and
hears very differently from these gentlemen, and a great deal more.
He examines and informs himself thoroughly of everything he sees or
hears; and, more particularly, as it is relative to his own profession or
destination.  Your destination is political; the object, therefore, of
your inquiries and observations should be the political interior of
things; the forms of government, laws, regulations, customs, trade,
manufactures, etc., of the several nations of Europe.  This knowledge is
much better acquired by conversation with sensible and well-informed
people, than by books, the best of which upon these subjects are always
imperfect.  For example, there are "Present States" of France, as there
are of England; but they are always defective, being published by people
uninformed, who only copy one another; they are, however, worth looking
into because they point out objects for inquiry, which otherwise might
possibly never have occurred to one's mind; but an hour's conversation
with a sensible president or 'conseiller' will let you more into the true
state of the parliament of Paris, than all the books in France.  In the
same manner, the 'Almanack Militaire' is worth your having; but two or
three conversations with officers will inform you much better of their
military regulations.  People have, commonly, a partiality for their own
professions, love to talk of them,, and are even flattered by being
consulted upon the subject; when, therefore, you are with any of those
military gentlemen (and you can hardly be in any company without some),
ask them military questions, inquire into their methods of discipline,
quartering, and clothing their men; inform yourself of their pay, their
perquisites, 'lours montres, lours etapes', etc.  Do the same as to the
marine, and make yourself particularly master of that detail; which has,
and always will have, a great relation to the affairs of England; and, in
proportion as you get good informations, take minutes of them in writing.

The regulations of trade and commerce in France are excellent, as appears
but too plainly for us, by the great increase of both, within these
thirty years; for not to mention their extensive commerce in both the
East and West Indies, they have got the whole trade of the Levant from
us; and now supply all the foreign markets with their sugars, to the ruin
almost of our sugar colonies, as Jamaica, Barbadoes, and the Leeward
Islands.  Get, therefore, what informations you can of these matters
also.

Inquire too into their church matters; for which the present disputes
between the court and the clergy give you fair and frequent
opportunities.  Know the particular rights of the Gallican church, in
opposition to the pretensions of the See of Rome.  I need not recommend
ecclesiastical history to you, since I hear that you study 'Du Pin' very
assiduously.

You cannot imagine how much this solid and useful knowledge of other
countries will distinguish you in your own (where, to say the truth, it
is very little known or cultivated), besides the great use it is of in
all foreign negotiations; not to mention that it enables a man to shine
in all companies.  When kings and princes have any knowledge, it is of
this sort, and more particularly; and therefore it is the usual topic of
their levee conversations, in which it will qualify you to bear a
considerable part; it brings you more acquainted with them; and they are
pleased to have people talk to them on a subject in which they think to
shine.

There is a sort of chit-chat, or SMALL TALK, which is the general run of
conversation at courts, and in most mixed companies.  It is a sort of
middling conversation, neither silly nor edifying; but, however, very
necessary for you to become master of.  It turns upon the public events
of Europe, and then is at its best; very often upon the number, the
goodness or badness, the discipline, or the clothing of the troops of
different princes; sometimes upon the families, the marriages, the
relations of princes, and considerable people; and sometimes 'sur le bon
chere', the magnificence of public entertainments, balls, masquerades,
etc.  I would wish you to be able to talk upon all these things better,
and with more knowledge than other people; insomuch that upon those
occasions, you should be applied to, and that people should say, I DARE
SAY MR. STANHOPE CAN TELL US.

Second-rate knowledge and middling talents carry a man further at courts,
and in the busy part of the world, than superior knowledge and shining
parts.  Tacitus very justly accounts for a man's having always kept in
favor and enjoyed the best employments under the tyrannical reigns of
three or four of the very worst emperors, by saying that it was not
'propter aliquam eximiam artem, sed quia par negotiis neque supra erat'.
Discretion is the great article; all these things are to be learned, and
only learned by keeping a great deal of the best company.  Frequent those
good houses where you have already a footing, and wriggle yourself
somehow or other into every other.  Haunt the courts particularly in
order to get that ROUTINE.

This moment I receive yours of the 18th N. S.  You will have had some
time ago my final answers concerning the pictures; and, by my last, an
account that the mohairs were gone to Madame Morel, at Calais, with the
proper directions.

I am sorry that your two sons-in-law [??  D.W.], the Princes B----, are
such boobies; however, as they have the honor of being so nearly related
to you, I will show them what civilities I can.

I confess you have not time for long absences from Paris, at present,
because of your various masters, all which I would have you apply to
closely while you are now in that capital; but when you return thither,
after the visit you intend me the honor of, I do not propose your having
any master at all, except Marcel, once or twice a week.  And then the
courts will, I hope, be no longer strange countries to you; for I would
have you run down frequently to Versailles and St. Cloud, for three or
four days at a time.  You know the Abbe de la Ville, who will present you
to others, so that you will soon be 'faufile' with the rest of the court.
Court is the soil in which you are to grow and flourish; you ought to be
well acquainted with the nature of it; like all other soil, it is in some
places deeper, in others lighter, but always capable of great improvement
by cultivation and experience.

You say that you want some hints for a letter to Lady Chesterfield; more
use and knowledge of the world will teach you occasionally to write and
talk genteelly, 'sup des riens', which I can tell you is a very useful
part upon worldly knowledge; for in some companies, it would be imprudent
to talk of anything else; and with very many people it is impossible to
talk of anything else; they would not understand you.  Adieu.




LETTER CXLIX

LONDON, June 24, O. S.  1751

MY DEAR FRIEND:  Air, address, manners, and graces are of such infinite
advantage to whoever has them, and so peculiarly and essentially
necessary for you, that now, as the time of our meeting draws near,
I tremble for fear I should not find you possessed of them; and, to tell
you the truth, I doubt you are not yet sufficiently convinced for their
importance.  There is, for instance, your intimate friend, Mr. H-----,
who with great merit, deep knowledge, and a thousand good qualities,
will never make a figure in the world while he lives.  Why?  Merely for
want of those external and showish accomplishments, which he began the
world too late to acquire; and which, with his studious and philosophical
turn, I believe he thinks are not worth his attention.  He may, very
probably, make a figure in the republic of letters, but he had ten
thousand times better make a figure as a man of the world and of business
in the republic of the United Provinces, which, take my word for it, he
never will.

As I open myself, without the least reserve, whenever I think that my
doing so can be of any use to you, I will give you a short account of
myself.  When I first came into the world, which was at the age you are
of now, so that, by the way, you have got the start of me in that
important article by two or three years at least,--at nineteen I left the
University of Cambridge, where I was an absolute pedant; when I talked my
best, I quoted Horace; when I aimed at being facetious, I quoted Martial;
and when I had a mind to be a fine gentleman, I talked Ovid.  I was
convinced that none but the ancients had common sense; that the classics
contained everything that was either necessary, useful, or ornamental to
men; and I was not without thoughts of wearing the 'toga virilis' of the
Romans, instead of the vulgar and illiberal dress of the moderns.  With
these excellent notions I went first to The Hague, where, by the help of
several letters of recommendation, I was soon introduced into all the
best company; and where I very soon discovered that I was totally
mistaken in almost every one notion I had entertained.  Fortunately, I
had a strong desire to please (the mixed result of good-nature and a
vanity by no means blamable), and was sensible that I had nothing but the
desire.  I therefore resolved, if possible, to acquire the means, too.  I
studied attentively and minutely the dress, the air, the manner, the
address, and the turn of conversation of all those whom I found to be the
people in fashion, and most generally allowed to please.  I imitated them
as well as I could; if I heard that one man was reckoned remarkably
genteel, I carefully watched his dress, motions and attitudes, and formed
my own upon them.  When I heard of another, whose conversation was
agreeable and engaging, I listened and attended to the turn of it.  I
addressed myself, though 'de tres mauvaise grace', to all the most
fashionable fine ladies; confessed, and laughed with them at my own
awkwardness and rawness, recommending myself as an object for them to try
their skill in forming.  By these means, and with a passionate desire of
pleasing everybody, I came by degrees to please some; and, I can assure
you, that what little figure I have made in the world, has been much more
owing to that passionate desire of pleasing universally than to any
intrinsic merit or sound knowledge I might ever have been master of.  My
passion for pleasing was so strong (and I am very glad it was so), that I
own to you fairly, I wished to make every woman I saw in love with me,
and every man I met with admire me.  Without this passion for the object,
I should never have been so attentive to the means; and I own I cannot
conceive how it is possible for any man of good-nature and good sense to
be without this passion.  Does not good-nature incline us to please all
those we converse with, of whatever rank or station they may be?  And
does not good sense and common observation, show of what infinite use it
is to please?  Oh! but one may please by the good qualities of the heart,
and the knowledge of the head, without that fashionable air, address and
manner, which is mere tinsel.  I deny it.  A man may be esteemed and
respected, but I defy him to please without them.  Moreover, at your age,
I would not have contented myself with barely pleasing; I wanted to shine
and to distinguish myself in the world as a man of fashion and gallantry,
as well as business.  And that ambition or vanity, call it what you
please, was a right one; it hurt nobody, and made me exert whatever
talents I had.  It is the spring of a thousand right and good things.

I was talking you over the other day with one very much your friend, and
who had often been with you, both at Paris and in Italy.  Among the
innumerable questions which you may be sure I asked him concerning you, I
happened to mention your dress (for, to say the truth, it was the only
thing of which I thought him a competent judge) upon which he said that
you dressed tolerably well at Paris; but that in Italy you dressed so
ill, that he used to joke with you upon it, and even to tear your
clothes.  Now, I must tell you, that at your age it is as ridiculous not
to be very well dressed, as at my age it would be if I were to wear a
white feather and red-heeled shoes.  Dress is one of various ingredients
that contribute to the art of pleasing; it pleases the eyes at least, and
more especially of women.  Address yourself to the senses, if you would
please; dazzle the eyes, soothe and flatter the ears of mankind; engage
their hearts, and let their reason do its worst against you.  'Suaviter
in modo' is the great secret.  Whenever you find yourself engaged
insensibly, in favor of anybody of no superior merit nor distinguished
talents, examine, and see what it is that has made those impressions upon
you: and you will find it to be that 'douceur', that gentleness of
manners, that air and address, which I have so often recommended to you;
and from thence draw this obvious conclusion, that what pleases you in
them, will please others in you; for we are all made of the same clay,
though some of the lumps are a little finer, and some a little coarser;
but in general, the surest way to judge of others, is to examine and
analyze one's self thoroughly.  When we meet I will assist you in that
analysis, in which every man wants some assistance against his own
self-love.  Adieu.




LETTER CL

GREENWICH, June 3o, O. S.  1751.

MY DEAR FRIEND: Pray give the inclosed to our friend the Abbe; it is to
congratulate him upon his 'Canonicat', which I am really very glad of,
and I hope it will fatten him up to Boileau's 'Chanoine'; at present he
is as meagre as an apostle or a prophet.  By the way, has he ever
introduced you to la Duchesse d'Aiguillon?  If he has not, make him
present you; and if he has, frequent her, and make her many compliments
from me.  She has uncommon, sense and knowledge for a woman, and her
house is the resort of one set of 'les beaux esprits.  It is a
satisfaction and a sort of credit to be acquainted with those gentlemen;
and it puts a young fellow in fashion.  'A propos des beaux esprits', you
have 'les entries' at Lady Sandwich's; who, old as she was, when I saw
her last, had the strongest parts of any woman I ever knew in my life?
If you are not acquainted with her, either the Duchesse d'Aiguillon or
Lady Hervey can, and I dare say will; introduce you.  I can assure you,
it is very well worth your while, both upon her own account, and for the
sake of the people of wit and learning who frequent her.  In such
companies there is always something to be learned as well as manners; the
conversation turns upon something above trifles; some point of
literature, criticism, history, etc., is discussed with ingenuity and
good manners; for I must do the French people of learning justice; they
are not bears, as most of ours are: they are gentlemen.

Our Abbe writes me word that you were gone to Compiegne: I am very glad
of it; other courts must form you for your own.  He tells me too, that
you have left off riding at the 'manege'; I have no objection to that, it
takes up a great deal of the morning; and if you have got a genteel and
firm seat on horseback, it is enough for you, now that tilts and
tournaments are laid aside.  I suppose you have hunted at Compiegne.  The
King's hunting there, I am told, is a fine sight.  The French manner of
hunting is gentlemanlike; ours is only for bumpkins and boobies.  The
poor beasts are here pursued and run down by much greater beasts than
themselves, and the true British fox-hunter is most undoubtedly a species
appropriated and peculiar to this country, which no other part of the
globe produces.

I hope you apply the time you have saved from the riding-house to useful
more than to learned purposes; for I can assure you they are very
different things.  I would have you allow but one hour a-day for Greek;
and that more to keep what you have than to increase it: by Greek, I mean
useful Greek books, such as Demosthenes, Thucydides, etc., and not the
poets, with whom you are already enough acquainted.  Your Latin will take
care of itself.  Whatever more time you may have for reading, pray bestow
it upon those books which are immediately relative to your destination;
such as modern history, in the modern languages, memoirs, anecdotes,
letters, negotiations, etc.  Collect also, if you can, authentically, the
present state of all the courts and countries in Europe, the characters
of the kings and princes, their wives, their ministers, and their w----s;
their several views, connections, and interests; the state of their
FINANCES, their military force, their trade, manufactures, and commerce.
That is the useful, the necessary knowledge for you, and indeed for every
gentleman.  But with all this, remember, that living books are much
better than dead ones; and throw away no time (for it is thrown away)
with the latter, which you can employ well with the former; for books
must now be your only amusement, but, by no means your business.  I had
much rather that you were passionately in love with some determined
coquette of condition (who would lead you a dance, fashion, supple, and
polish you), than that you knew all Plato and Aristotle by heart: an hour
at Versailles, Compiegne, or St. Cloud, is now worth more to you than
three hours in your closet, with the best books that ever were written.

I hear the dispute between the court and the clergy is made up amicably,
both parties have yielded something; the king being afraid of losing more
of his soul, and the clergy more of their revenue.  Those gentlemen are
very skillful in making the most of the vices and the weaknesses of the
laity.  I hope you have read and informed yourself fully of everything
relative to that affair; it is a very important question, in which the
priesthood of every country in Europe is highly concerned.  If you would
be thoroughly convinced that their tithes are of divine institution, and
their property the property of God himself, not to be touched by any
power on earth, read Fra Paolo De Beneficiis, an excellent and short
book; for which, and some other treaties against the court of Rome, he
was stilettoed; which made him say afterward, upon seeing an anonymous
book written against him by order of the Pope, 'Conosco bene to stile
Romano'.

The parliament of Paris, and the states of Languedoc, will, I believe,
hardly scramble off; having only reason and justice, but no terrors on
their side.  Those are political and constitutional questions that well
deserve your attention and inquiries.  I hope you are thoroughly master
of them.  It is also worth your while to collect and keep all the pieces
written upon those subjects.

I hope you have been thanked by your ladies, at least, if not paid in
money, for the mohairs, which I sent by a courier to Paris, some time
ago, instead of sending them to Madame Morel, at Calais, as I told you I
should.  Do they like them; and do they like you the better for getting
them?  'Le petite Blot devroit au moins payer de sa personne'.  As for
Madame de Polignac, I believe you will very willingly hold her excused
from personal payment.

Before you return to England, pray go again to Orli, for two or three
days, and also to St. Cloud, in order to secure a good reception there at
your return.  Ask the Marquis de Matignon too, if he has any orders for
you in England, or any letters or packets for Lord Bolingbroke.  Adieu!
Go on and prosper.




LETTER CLI

GREENWICH, July 8, O. S.  1751.

MY DEAR FRIEND:  The last mail brought me your letter of the 3d July,
N. S.  I am glad that you are so well with Colonel Yorke, as to be let
into secret correspondences.  Lord Albemarle's reserve to you is, I
believe, more owing to his secretary than to himself; for you seem to be
much in favor with him; and possibly too HE HAS NO VERY SECRET LETTERS to
communicate. However, take care not to discover the least dissatisfaction
upon this score: make the proper acknowledgments to Colonel Yorke, for
what he does show you; but let neither Lord Albemarle nor his people
perceive the least coldness on your part, upon account of what they do
not show you. It is very often necessary, not to manifest all one feels.
Make your court to, and connect yourself as much as possible with Colonel
Yorke; he may be of great use to you hereafter; and when you take leave,
not only offer to bring over any letters or packets, by way of security;
but even ask, as a favor, to be the carrier of a letter from him to his
father, the Chancellor.  'A propos' of your coming here; I confess that I
am weakly impatient for it, and think a few days worth getting; I would,
therefore, instead of the 25th of next month, N. S., which was the day
that I some time ago appointed for your leaving Paris, have you set out
on Friday the 20th of August, N. S.; in consequence of which you will be
at Calais some time on the Sunday following, and probably at Dover within
four-and-twenty hours afterward.  If you land in the morning, you may, in
a postchaise, get to Sittingborne that day; if you come on shore in the
evening, you can only get to Canterbury, where you will be better lodged
than at Dover.  I will not have you travel in the night, nor fatigue and
overheat yourself by running on fourscore miles the moment you land.
You will come straight to Blackheath, where I shall be ready to meet you,
and which is directly upon the Dover road to London; and we will go to
town together, after you have rested yourself a day or two here.  All the
other directions, which I gave you in my former letter, hold still the
same.  But, notwithstanding this regulation, should you have any
particular reasons for leaving Paris two or three days sooner or later,
than the above mentioned, 'vous etes maitre'.  Make all your arrangements
at Paris for about a six weeks stay in England at farthest.

I had a letter the other day from Lord Huntingdon, of which one-half at
least was your panegyric; it was extremely welcome to me from so good a
hand.  Cultivate that friendship; it will do you honor and give you
strength.  Connections, in our mixed parliamentary government, are of
great use.

I send you here inclosed the particular price of each of the mohairs;
but I do not suppose that you will receive a shilling for anyone of them.
However, if any of your ladies should take an odd fancy to pay, the
shortest way, in the course of business, is for you to keep the money,
and to take so much less from Sir John Lambert in your next draught upon
him.

I am very sorry to hear that Lady Hervey is ill.  Paris does not seem to
agree with her; she used to have great health here.  'A propos' of her;
remember, when you are with me, not to mention her but when you and I are
quite alone, for reasons which I will tell you when we meet: but this is
only between you and me; and I desire that you will not so much as hint
it to her, or to anybody else.

If old Kurzay goes to the valley of Jehoshaphat, I cannot help it; it
will be an ease to our friend Madame Montconseil, who I believe maintains
her, and a little will not satisfy her in any way.

Remember to bring your mother some little presents; they need not be of
value, but only marks of your affection and duty for one who has always
been tenderly fond of you.  You may bring Lady Chesterfield a little
Martin snuffbox of about five Louis ; and you need bring over no other
presents; you and I not wanting 'les petits presens pour entretenir
l'amitee'.

Since I wrote what goes before, I have talked you over minutely with Lord
Albemarle, who told me, that he could very sincerely commend you upon
every article but one; but upon that one you were often joked, both by
him and others.  I desired to know what that was; he laughed and told me
it was the article of dress, in which you were exceedingly negligent.
Though he laughed, I can assure you that it is no laughing matter for
you; and you will possibly be surprised when I assert (but, upon my word,
it is literally true), that to be very well dressed is of much more
importance to you, than all the Greek you know will, be of these thirty
years.  Remember that the world is now your only business; and that you
must adopt its customs and manners, be they silly or be they not.  To
neglect your dress, is an affront to all the women you keep company with;
as it implies that you do not think them worth that attention which
everybody else doth; they mind dress, and you will never please them if
you neglect yours; and if you do not please the women, you will not
please half the men you otherwise might.  It is the women who put a young
fellow in fashion even with the men.  A young fellow ought to have a
certain fund of coquetry; which should make him try all the means of
pleasing, as much as any coquette in Europe can do.  Old as I am, and
little thinking of women, God knows, I am very far from being negligent
of my dress; and why?  From conformity to custom, and out of decency to
men, who expect that degree of complaisance.  I do not, indeed, wear
feathers and red heels, which would ill suit my age; but I take care to
have my clothes well made, my wig well combed and powdered, my linen and
person extremely clean.  I even allow my footman forty shillings a year
extraordinary, that they may be spruce and neat.  Your figure especially,
which from its stature cannot be very majestic and interesting, should be
the more attended to in point of dress as it cannot be 'imposante', it
should be 'gentile, aimable, bien mise'.  It will not admit of negligence
and carelessness.

I believe Mr. Hayes thinks that you have slighted him a little of late,
since you have got into so much other company.  I do not by any means
blame you for not frequenting his house so much as you did at first,
before you had got into so many other houses more entertaining and more
instructing than his; on the contrary, you do very well; but, however,
as he was extremely civil to you, take care to be so to him, and make up
in manner what you omit in matter.  See him, dine with him before you
come away, and ask his commands for England.

Your triangular seal is done, and I have given it to an English
gentleman, who sets out in a week for Paris, and who will deliver it to
Sir John Lambert for you.

I cannot conclude this letter without returning again to the showish, the
ornamental, the shining parts of your character; which, if you neglect,
upon my word you will render the solid ones absolutely useless; nay, such
is the present turn of the world, that some valuable qualities are even
ridiculous, if not accompanied by the genteeler accomplishments.
Plainness, simplicity, and quakerism, either in dress or manners, will by
no means do; they must both be laced and embroidered; speaking, or
writing sense, without elegance and turn, will be very little persuasive;
and the best figure in the world, without air and address, will be very
ineffectual.  Some pedants may have told you that sound sense and
learning stand in, need of no ornaments; and, to support that assertion,
elegantly quote the vulgar proverb, that GOOD WINE NEEDS NO BUSH; but
surely the little experience you have already had of the world must have
convinced you that the contrary of that assertion is true.  All those
accomplishments are now in your power; think of them, and of them only.
I hope you frequent La Foire St. Laurent, which I see is now open; you
will improve more by going there with your mistress, than by staying at
home and reading Euclid with your geometry master.  Adieu.  'Divertissez-
vous, il n'y a rien de tel'.




LETTER CLII

GREENWICH, July 15, O. S.  1751

MY DEAR FRIEND:  As this is the last, or last letter but one, that I
think I shall write before I have the pleasure of seeing you here, it may
not be amiss to prepare you a little for our interview, and for the time
we shall pass together.  Before kings and princes meet, ministers on each
side adjust the important points of precedence, arm chairs, right hand
and left, etc., so that they know previously what they are to expect,
what they have to trust to; and it is right they should; for they
commonly envy or hate, but most certainly distrust each other.  We shall
meet upon very different terms; we want no such preliminaries: you know
my tenderness, I know your affection.  My only object, therefore, is to
make your short stay with me as useful as I can to you; and yours, I
hope, is to co-operate with me.  Whether, by making it wholesome, I shall
make it pleasant to you, I am not sure.  Emetics and cathartics I shall
not administer, because I am sure you do not want them; but for
alteratives you must expect a great many; and I can tell you that I have
a number of NOSTRUMS, which I shall communicate to nobody but yourself.
To speak without a metaphor, I shall endeavor to assist your youth with
all the experience that I have purchased, at the price of seven and fifty
years.  In order to this, frequent reproofs, corrections, and admonitions
will be necessary; but then, I promise you, that they shall be in a
gentle, friendly, and secret manner; they shall not put you out of
countenance in company, nor out of humor when we are alone.  I do not
expect that, at nineteen, you should have that knowledge of the world,
those manners, that dexterity, which few people have at nine-and-twenty.
But I will endeavor to give them you; and I am sure you will endeavor to
learn them, as far as your youth, my experience, and the time we shall
pass together, will allow.  You may have many inaccuracies (and to be
sure you have, for who has not at your age?) which few people will tell
you of, and some nobody can tell you of but myself.  You may possibly
have others, too, which eyes less interested, and less vigilant than
mine, do not discover; all those you shall hear of from one whose
tenderness for you will excite his curiosity and sharpen his penetration.
The smallest inattention or error in manners, the minutest inelegance of
diction, the least awkwardness in your dress and carriage, will not
escape my observation, nor pass without amicable correction.  Two, the
most intimate friends in the world, can freely tell each other their
faults, and even their crimes, but cannot possibly tell each other of
certain little weaknesses; awkwardnesses, and blindnesses of self-love;
to authorize that unreserved freedom, the relation between us is
absolutely necessary.  For example, I had a very worthy friend, with whom
I was intimate enough to tell him his faults; he had but few; I told him
of them; he took it kindly of me, and corrected them.  But then, he had
some weaknesses that I could never tell him of directly, and which he was
so little sensible of himself, that hints of them were lost upon him.
He had a scrag neck, of about a yard long; notwithstanding which, bags
being in fashion, truly he would wear one to his wig, and did so ; but
never behind him, for, upon every motion of his head, his bag came
forward over one shoulder or the other.  He took it into his head too,
that he must occasionally dance minuets, because other people did; and he
did so, not only extremely ill, but so awkward, so disjointed, slim, so
meagre, was his figure, that had he danced as well as ever Marcel did, it
would have been ridiculous in him to have danced at all.  I hinted these
things to him as plainly as friendship would allow, and to no purpose;
but to have told him the whole, so as to cure him, I must have been his
father, which, thank God, I am not.  As fathers commonly go, it is seldom
a misfortune to be fatherless; and, considering the general run of sons,
as seldom a misfortune to be childless.  You and I form, I believe, an
exception to that rule; for, I am persuaded that we would neither of us
change our relation, were it in our power.  You will, I both hope and
believe, be not only the comfort, but the pride of my age; and, I am
sure, I will be the support, the friend, the guide of your youth.  Trust
me without reserve; I will advise you without private interest, or secret
envy.  Mr. Harte will do so too; but still there may be some little
things proper for you to know, and necessary for you to correct, which
even his friendship would not let him tell you of so freely as I should;
and some, of which he may not possibly be so good a judge of as I am, not
having lived so much in the great world.

One principal topic of our conversation will be, not only the purity but
the elegance of the English language; in both which you are very
deficient.  Another will be the constitution of this country, of which,
I believe, you know less than of most other countries in Europe.
Manners, attentions, and address, will also be the frequent subjects of
our lectures; and whatever I know of that important and necessary art,
the art of pleasing.  I will unreservedly communicate to you.  Dress too
(which, as things are, I can logically prove, requires some attention)
will not always escape our notice.  Thus, my lectures will be more
various, and in some respects more useful than Professor Mascow's, and
therefore, I can tell you, that I expect to be paid for them; but, as
possibly you would not care to part with your ready money, and as I do
not think that it would be quite handsome in me to accept it, I will
compound for the payment, and take it in attention and practice.

Pray remember to part with all your friends, acquaintances, and
mistresses, if you have any at Paris, in such a manner as may make them
not only willing but impatient to see you there again.  Assure them of
your desire of returning to them; and do it in a manner that they may
think you in earnest, that is 'avec onction et une espece
d'attendrissement'.  All people say, pretty near the same things upon
those occasions; it is the manner only that makes the difference; and
that difference is great.  Avoid, however, as much as you can, charging
yourself with commissions, in your return from hence to Paris; I know, by
experience, that they are exceedingly troublesome, commonly expensive,
and very seldom satisfactory at last, to the persons who gave them; some
you cannot refuse, to people to whom you are obliged, and would oblige in
your turn; but as to common fiddle-faddle commissions, you may excuse
yourself from them with truth, by saying that you are to return to Paris
through Flanders, and see all those great towns; which I intend you shall
do, and stay a week or ten days at Brussels.  Adieu!  A good journey to
you, if this is my last; if not, I can repeat again what I shall wish
constantly.




LETTER CLIII

LONDON, December 19, O.  S.  1751 --[Note the date, which indicates that
the sojourn with the author has ended.]

MY DEAR FRIEND: You are now entered upon a scene of business, where I
hope you will one day make a figure.  Use does a great deal, but care and
attention must be joined to it.  The first thing necessary in writing
letters of business, is extreme clearness and perspicuity; every
paragraph should be so clear and unambiguous, that the dullest fellow in
the world may not be able to mistake it, nor obliged to read it twice in
order to understand it.  This necessary clearness implies a correctness,
without excluding an elegance of style.  Tropes, figures, antitheses,
epigrams, etc., would be as misplaced and as impertinent in letters of
business, as they are sometimes (if judiciously used) proper and pleasing
in familiar letters, upon common and trite subjects.  In business, an
elegant simplicity, the result of care, not of labor, is required.
Business must be well, not affectedly dressed; but by no means
negligently.  Let your first attention be to clearness, and read every
paragraph after you have written it, in the critical view of discovering
whether it is possible that any one man can mistake the true sense of it:
and correct it accordingly.

Our pronouns and relatives often create obscurity or ambiguity; be
therefore exceedingly attentive to them, and take care to mark out with
precision their particular relations.  For example, Mr. Johnson
acquainted me that he had seen Mr. Smith, who had promised him to speak
to Mr. Clarke, to return him (Mr. Johnson) those papers, which he (Mr.
Smith) had left some time ago with him (Mr. Clarke): it is better to
repeat a name, though unnecessarily, ten times, than to have the person
mistaken once.  WHO, you know, is singly relative to persons, and cannot
be applied to things; WHICH and THAT are chiefly relative to things, but
not absolutely exclusive of persons; for one may say, the man THAT robbed
or killed such-a-one; but it is better to say, the man WHO robbed or
killed.  One never says, the man or the woman WHICH.  WHICH and THAT,
though chiefly relative to things, cannot be always used indifferently as
to things, and the 'euoovca' must sometimes determine their, place.  For
instance, the letter WHICH I received from you, WHICH you referred to in
your last, WHICH came by Lord Albemarle's messenger WHICH I showed to
such-a-one; I would change it thus--The letter THAT I received from you;
WHICH you referred to in your last, THAT came by Lord Albemarle's
messenger, and WHICH I showed to such-a-one.

Business does not exclude (as possibly you wish it did) the usual terms
of politeness and good-breeding; but, on the contrary, strictly requires
them: such as, I HAVE THE HONOR TO ACQUAINT YOUR LORDSHIP; PERMIT ME TO
ASSURE YOU; IF I MAY BE ALLOWED TO GIVE MY OPINION, etc.  For the
minister abroad, who writes to the minister at home, writes to his
superior; possibly to his patron, or at least to one who he desires
should be so.

Letters of business will not only admit of, but be the better for CERTAIN
GRACES--but then, they must be scattered with a sparing and skillful
hand; they must fit their place exactly.  They must decently adorn
without encumbering, and modestly shine without glaring.  But as this is
the, utmost degree of perfection in letters of business, I would not
advise you to attempt those embellishments, till you have first laid your
foundation well.

Cardinal d'Ossat's letters are the true letters of business; those of
Monsieur d'Avaux are excellent; Sir William Temple's are very pleasing,
but, I fear, too affected.  Carefully avoid all Greek or Latin
quotations; and bring no precedents from the VIRTUOUS SPARTANS, THE
POLITE ATHENIANS, AND THE BRAVE ROMANS.  Leave all that to futile
pedants.  No flourishes, no declamation.  But (I repeat it again) there
is an elegant simplicity and dignity of style absolutely necessary for
good letters of business; attend to that carefully.  Let your periods be
harmonious, without seeming to be labored; and let them not be too long,
for that always occasions a degree of obscurity.  I should not mention
correct orthography, but that you very often fail in that particular,
which will bring ridicule upon you; for no man is allowed to spell ill.
I wish too that your handwriting were much better; and I cannot conceive
why it is not, since every man may certainly write whatever hand he
pleases.  Neatness in folding up, sealing, and directing your packets, is
by no means to be neglected; though, I dare say, you think it is.  But
there is something in the exterior, even of a packet, that may please or
displease; and consequently worth some attention.

You say that your time is very well employed; and so it is, though as yet
only in the outlines, and first ROUTINE of business.  They are previously
necessary to be known; they smooth the way for parts and dexterity.
Business requires no conjuration nor supernatural talents, as people
unacquainted with it are apt to think.  Method, diligence, and
discretion, will carry a man, of good strong common sense, much higher
than the finest parts, without them, can do.  'Par negotiis, neque
supra', is the true character of a man of business; but then it implies
ready attention and no ABSENCES, and a flexibility and versatility of
attention from one object to another, without being engrossed by anyone.

Be upon your guard against the pedantry and affectation of business which
young people are apt to fall into, from the pride of being concerned in
it young.  They look thoughtful, complain of the weight of business,
throw out mysterious hints, and seem big with secrets which they do not
know.  Do you, on the contrary, never talk of business but to those with
whom you are to transact it; and learn to seem vacuus and idle, when you
have the most business.  Of all things, the 'volte sciollo', and the
'pensieri stretti', are necessary.  Adieu.




LETTER CLIV

LONDON, December 30, O. S.  1751

MY DEAR FRIEND: The parliaments are the courts of justice of France, and
are what our courts of justice in Westminster-Hall are here.  They used
anciently to follow the court, and administer justice in presence of the
King.  Philip le Bel first fixed it at Paris, by an edict of 1302.  It
consisted then of but one chambre, which was called 'la Chambre des
Prelats', most of the members being ecclesiastics; but the multiplicity
of business made it by degrees necessary to create several other
chambres.  It consists now of seven chambres:

'La Grande Chambre', which is the highest court of justice, and to which
appeals lie from the others.

'Les cinq Chambres des Enquetes', which are like our Common Pleas, and
Court of Exchequer.

'La Tournelle', which is the court for criminal justice, and answers to
our Old Bailey and King's Bench.

There are in all twelve parliaments in France:
1.  Paris
2.  Toulouse
3.  Grenoble
4.  Bourdeaux
5.  Dijon
6.  Rouen
7.  Aix en Provence
8.  Rennes en Bretagne
9.  Pau en Navarre
10.  Metz
11.  Dole en Franche Comte
12.  Douay

There are three 'Conseils Souverains', which may almost be called
parliaments; they are those of:

Perpignan      Arras     Alsace

For further particulars of the French parliaments, read 'Bernard de la
Rochefavin des Parlemens de France', and other authors, who have treated
that subject constitutionally.  But what will be still better, converse
upon it with people of sense and knowledge, who will inform you of the
particular objects of the several chambres, and the businesses of the
respective members, as, 'les Presidens, les Presidens a Mortier' (these
last so called from their black velvet caps laced with gold), 'les
Maitres tres des Requetes, les Greffiers, le Procureur General, les
Avocats Generaux, les Conseillers', etc.  The great point in dispute is
concerning the powers of the parliament of Paris in matters of state, and
relatively to the Crown.  They pretend to the powers of the States-
General of France when they used to be assembled (which, I think, they
have not been since the reign of Lewis the Thirteenth, in the year 1615).
The Crown denies those pretensions, and considers them only as courts of
justice.  Mezeray seems to be on the side of the parliament in this
question, which is very well worth your inquiry.  But, be that as it
will, the parliament of Paris is certainly a very respectable body, and
much regarded by the whole kingdom.  The edicts of the Crown, especially
those for levying money on the subjects, ought to be registered in
parliament; I do not say to have their effect, for the Crown would take
good care of that; but to have a decent appearance, and to procure a
willing acquiescence in the nation.  And the Crown itself, absolute as it
is, does not love that strong opposition, and those admirable
remonstrances, which it sometimes meets with from the parliaments.
Many of those detached pieces are very well worth your collecting;
and I remember, a year or two ago, a remonstrance of the parliament of
Douay, upon the subject, as I think, of the 'Vingtieme', which was in my
mind one of the finest and most moving compositions I ever read.
They owned themselves, indeed, to be slaves, and showed their chains:
but humbly begged of his Majesty to make them a little lighter, and less
galling.

THE STATES OF FRANCE were general assemblies of the three states or
orders of the kingdom; the Clergy, the Nobility, and the 'Tiers Etat',
that is, the people.  They used to be called together by the King, upon
the most important affairs of state, like our Lords and Commons in
parliament, and our Clergy in convocation.  Our parliament is our states,
and the French parliaments are only their courts of justice.
The Nobility consisted of all those of noble extraction, whether
belonging to the SWORD or to the ROBE, excepting such as were chosen
(which sometimes happened) by the Tiers Etat as their deputies to the
States-General.  The Tiers Etat was exactly our House of Commons, that
is, the people, represented by deputies of their own choosing.  Those who
had the most considerable places, 'dans la robe', assisted at those
assemblies, as commissioners on the part of the Crown.  The States met,
for the first time that I can find (I mean by the name of 'les etats'),
in the reign of Pharamond, 424, when they confirmed the Salic law.  From
that time they have been very frequently assembled, sometimes upon
important occasions, as making war and peace, reforming abuses, etc.; at
other times, upon seemingly trifling ones, as coronations, marriages,
etc.  Francis the First assembled them, in 1526, to declare null and void
his famous treaty of Madrid, signed and sworn to by him during his
captivity there.  They grew troublesome to the kings and to their
ministers, and were but seldom called after the power of the Crown grew
strong; and they have never been heard of since the year 1615.  Richelieu
came and shackled the nation, and Mazarin and Lewis the Fourteenth
riveted the shackles.

There still subsist in some provinces in France, which are called 'pais
d etats', an humble local imitation, or rather mimicry, of the great
'etats', as in Languedoc, Bretagne, etc.  They meet, they speak, they
grumble, and finally submit to whatever the King orders.

Independently of the intrinsic utility of this kind of knowledge to every
man of business, it is a shame for any man to be ignorant of it,
especially relatively to any country he has been long in.  Adieu.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

A favor may make an enemy, and an injury may make a friend . . . . . . .
Affectation of business. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Applauded often, without approving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
At the first impulse of passion, be silent till you can be soft. . . . .
Avoid cacophony, and, what is very near as bad, monotony . . . . . . . .
Be silent till you can be soft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Being intelligible is now no longer the fashion. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Better refuse a favor gracefully, than to grant it clumsily. . . . . . .
Bolingbroke. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bruyere. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Business must be well, not affectedly dressed. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Business now is to shine, not to weigh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
But stoops to conquer, and but kneels to rise. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cease to love when you cease to be agreeable . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chit-chat, useful to keep off improper and too serious subjects. . . . .
Committing acts of hostility upon the Graces . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Concealed what learning I had. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Consciousness of merit makes a man of sense more modest. . . . . . . . .
Disagreeable things may be done so agreeably as almost to oblige . . . .
Disputes with heat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dr. Fell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Easy without negligence. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Elegance in one language will reproduce itself in all. . . . . . . . . .
Every man knows that he understands religion and politics. . . . . . . .
Every numerous assembly is MOB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Everybody is good for something. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Expresses himself with more fire than elegance . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Frank without indiscretion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Full-bottomed wigs were contrived for his humpback . . . . . . . . . . .
Gentleness of manners, with firmness of mind . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
German, who has taken into his head that he understands French . . . . .
Grow wiser when it is too late . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Habitual eloquence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Hand of a school-boy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Hardened to the wants and distresses of mankind. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Have you learned to carve? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
If free from the guilt, be free from the suspicion, too. . . . . . . . .
Inclined to be fat, but I hope you will decline it . . . . . . . . . . .
Indolently say that they cannot do . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Information implies our previous ignorance; it must be sweetened . . . .
Information is, in a certain degree, mortifying. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Insinuates himself only into the esteem of fools . . . . . . . . . . . .
It is a real inconvenience to anybody to be fat. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Know, yourself and others. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Knowing how much you have, and how little you want . . . . . . . . . . .
Last beautiful varnish, which raises the colors. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Learn to keep your own secrets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Loved without being despised, and feared without being hated . . . . . .
Man of sense may be in haste, but can never be in a hurry. . . . . . . .
Mangles what he means to carve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mazarin and Lewis the Fourteenth riveted the shackles. . . . . . . . . .
Meditation and reflection. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mere reason and good sense is never to be talked to a mob. . . . . . . .
Mistimes or misplaces everything . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mitigating, engaging words do by no means weaken your argument . . . . .
MOB: Understanding they have collectively none . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Often necessary, not to manifest all one feels . . . . . . . . . . . . .
One must often yield, in order to prevail. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Only because she will not, and not because she cannot. . . . . . . . . .
Our frivolous dissertations upon the weather, or upon whist. . . . . . .
Outward air of modesty to all he does. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Richelieu came and shackled the nation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rochefoucault. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rochefoucault, who, I am afraid, paints man very exactly . . . . . . . .
See what you see, and to hear what you hear. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Seems to have no opinion of his own. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Seldom a misfortune to be childless. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
She has uncommon, sense and knowledge for a woman. . . . . . . . . . . .
Speaking to himself in the glass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Style is the dress of thoughts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Success turns much more upon manner than matter. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Swift. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tacitus. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Take characters, as they do most things, upon trust. . . . . . . . . . .
They thought I informed, because I pleased them. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Unaffected silence upon that subject is the only true medium . . . . . .
Unintelligible to his readers, and sometimes to himself. . . . . . . . .
Use palliatives when you contradict. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
We love to be pleased better than to be informed . . . . . . . . . . . .
Woman like her, who has always pleased, and often been pleased . . . . .
Women are the only refiners of the merit of men. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Yielded commonly without conviction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .




End of this Project Gutenberg Etext of Letters to His Son, 1751
by The Earl of Chesterfield






LETTER CLV

LONDON, January 2, O. S. 1752.

MY DEAR FRIEND: Laziness of mind, or inattention, are as great enemies to
knowledge as incapacity; for, in truth, what difference is there between
a man who will not, and a man who cannot be informed?  This difference
only, that the former is justly to be blamed, the latter to be pitied.
And yet how many there are, very capable of receiving knowledge, who from
laziness, inattention, and incuriousness, will not so much as ask for it,
much less take the least pains to acquire it!

Our young English travelers generally distinguish themselves by a
voluntary privation of all that useful knowledge for which they are sent
abroad; and yet, at that age, the most useful knowledge is the most easy
to be acquired; conversation being the book, and the best book in which
it is contained.  The drudgery of dry grammatical learning is over, and
the fruits of it are mixed with, and adorned by, the flowers of
conversation.  How many of our young men have been a year at Rome, and as
long at Paris, without knowing the meaning and institution of the
Conclave in the former, and of the parliament in the latter? and this
merely for want of asking the first people they met with in those several
places, who could at least have given them some general notions of those
matters.

You will, I hope, be wiser, and omit no opportunity (for opportunities
present themselves every hour of the day) of acquainting yourself with
all those political and constitutional particulars of the kingdom and
government of France.  For instance, when you hear people mention le
Chancelier, or 'le Garde de Sceaux', is it any great trouble for you to
ask, or for others to tell you, what is the nature, the powers, the
objects, and the profits of those two employments, either when joined
together, as they often are, or when separate, as they are at present?
When you hear of a gouverneur, a lieutenant du Roi, a commandant, and an
intendant of the same province, is, it not natural, is it not becoming,
is it not necessary, for a stranger to inquire into their respective
rights and privileges?  And yet, I dare say, there are very few
Englishmen who know the difference between the civil department of the
Intendant, and the military powers of the others.  When you hear (as I am
persuaded you must) every day of the 'Vingtieme', which is one in twenty,
and consequently five per cent., inquire upon what that tax is laid,
whether upon lands, money, merchandise, or upon all three; how levied,
and what it is supposed to produce.  When you find in books: (as you will
sometimes) allusion to particular laws and customs, do not rest till you
have traced them up to their source.  To give you two examples: you will
meet in some French comedies, 'Cri', or 'Clameur de Haro'; ask what it
means, and you will be told that it is a term of the law in Normandy, and
means citing, arresting, or obliging any person to appear in the courts
of justice, either upon a civil or a criminal account; and that it is
derived from 'a Raoul', which Raoul was anciently Duke of Normandy, and a
prince eminent for his justice; insomuch, that when any injustice was
committed, the cry immediately was, 'Venez, a Raoul, a Raoul', which
words are now corrupted and jumbled into 'haro'.  Another, 'Le vol du
Chapon, that is, a certain district of ground immediately contiguous to
the mansion-seat of a family, and answers to what we call in English
DEMESNES.  It is in France computed at about 1,600 feet round the house,
that being supposed to be the extent of the capon's flight from 'la basse
cour'.  This little district must go along with the mansion-seat, however
the rest of the estate may be divided.

I do not mean that you should be a French lawyer; but I would not have
you unacquainted with the general principles of their law, in matters
that occur every day:  Such is the nature of their descents, that is, the
inheritance of lands:  Do they all go to the eldest son, or are they
equally divided among the children of the deceased?  In England, all
lands unsettled descend to the eldest son, as heir-at-law, unless
otherwise disposed of by the father's will, except in the county of Kent,
where a particular custom prevails, called Gavelkind; by which, if the
father dies intestate, all his children divide his lands equally among
them.  In Germany, as you know, all lands that, are not fiefs are equally
divided among all the children, which ruins those families; but all male
fiefs of the empire descend unalienably to the next male heir, which
preserves those families.  In France, I believe, descents vary in
different provinces.

The nature of marriage contracts deserves inquiry.  In England, the
general practice is, the husband takes all the wife's fortune; and in
consideration of it settles upon her a proper pin-money, as it is called;
that is, an, annuity during his life, and a jointure after his death.  In
France it is not so, particularly at Paris; where 'la communaute des
biens' is established.  Any married woman at Paris (IF YOU ARE ACQUAINTED
WITH ONE can inform you of all these particulars.

These and other things of the same nature, are the useful and rational
objects of the curiosity of a man of sense and business.  Could they only
be attained by laborious researches in folio-books, and wormeaten
manuscripts, I should not wonder at a young fellow's being ignorant of
them; but as they are the frequent topics of conversation, and to be
known by a very little degree of curiosity, inquiry and attention, it is
unpardonable not to know them.

Thus I have given you some hints only for your inquiries; 'l'Etat de la
France, l'Almanach Royal', and twenty other such superficial books, will
furnish you with a thousand more.  'Approfondissez.'

How often, and how justly, have I since regretted negligences of this
kind in my youth!  And how often have I since been at great trouble to
learn many things which I could then have learned without any!  Save
yourself now, then, I beg of you, that regret and trouble hereafter.  Ask
questions, and many questions; and leave nothing till you are thoroughly
informed of it.  Such pertinent questions are far from being illbred or
troublesome to those of whom you ask them; on the contrary, they are a
tacit compliment to their knowledge; and people have a better opinion of
a young man, when they see him desirous to be informed.

I have by last post received your two letters of the 1st and 5th of
January, N. S.  I am very glad that you have been at all the shows at
Versailles: frequent the courts.  I can conceive the murmurs of the
French at the poorness of the fireworks, by which they thought their king
of their country degraded; and, in truth, were things always as they
should be, when kings give shows they ought to be magnificent.

I thank you for the 'These de la Sorbonne', which you intend to send me,
and which I am impatient to receive.  But pray read it carefully yourself
first; and inform yourself what the Sorbonne is by whom founded, and for
what puraoses.

Since you have time, you have done very well to take an Italian and a
German master; but pray take care to leave yourelf time enough for
company; for it is in company only that you can learn what will be much
more useful to you than either Italian or German; I mean 'la politesse,
les manieres et les graces, without which, as I told you long ago, and I
told you true, 'ogni fatica a vana'.  Adieu.

Pray make my compliments to Lady Brown.




LETTER CLVI

LONDON, January 6, O. S.  1752.

MY DEAR FRIEND

I recommended to you, in my last, some inquiries into the constitution of
that famous society the Sorbonne; but as I cannot wholly trust to the
diligence of those inquiries, I will give you here the outlines of that
establishment; which may possibly excite you to inform yourself of
particulars, which you are more 'a portee' to know than I am.

It was founded by Robert de Sorbon, in the year 1256 for sixteen poor
scholars in divinity; four of each nation, of the university of which it
made a part; since that it hath been much extended and enriched,
especially by the liberality and pride of Cardinal Richelieu; who made it
a magnificent building for six-and-thirty doctors of that society to live
in; besides which, there are six professors and schools for divinity.
This society has long been famous for theological knowledge and
exercitations.  There unintelligible points are debated with passion,
though they can never be determined by reason.  Logical subtilties set
common sense at defiance; and mystical refinements disfigure and disguise
the native beauty and simplicity of true natural religion; wild
imaginations form systems, which weak minds adopt implicitly, and which
sense and reason oppose in vain; their voice is not strong enough to be
heard in schools of divinity.  Political views are by no means neglected
in those sacred places; and questions are agitated and decided, according
to the degree of regard, or rather submission, which the Sovereign is
pleased to show the Church.  Is the King a slave to the Church, though a
tyrant to the laity?  The least resistance to his will shall be declared
damnable.  But if he will not acknowledge the superiority of their
spiritual over his temporal, nor even admit their 'imperium in imperio',
which is the least they will compound for, it becomes meritorious not
only to resist, but to depose him.  And I suppose that the bold
propositions in the thesis you mention, are a return for the valuation of
'les biens du Clerge'.

I would advise you, by all means, to attend to two or three of their
public disputations, in order to be informed both of the manner and the
substance of those scholastic exercises.  Pray remember to go to all
those kind of things.  Do not put it off, as one is too apt to do those
things which one knows can be done every day, or any day; for one
afterward repents extremely, when too late, the not having done them.

But there is another (so-called) religious society, of which the minutest
circumstance deserves attention, and furnishes great matter for useful
reflections.  You easily guess that I mean the society of 'les R. R. P.
P. Jesuites', established but in the year 1540, by a Bull of Pope Paul
III.  Its progress, and I may say its victories, were more rapid than
those of the Romans ; for within the same century it governed all Europe;
and, in the next, it extended its influence over the whole world.  Its
founder was an abandoned profligate Spanish officer, Ignatius Loyola;
who, in the year 1521, being wounded in the leg at the 'siege of
Pampeluna, went mad from the smart of his wound, the reproaches of his
conscience, and his confinement, during which he read the lives of the
Saints.  Consciousness of guilt, a fiery temper, and a wild imagination,
the common ingredients of enthusiasm, made this madman devote himself to
the particular service of the Virgin Mary; whose knight-errant he
declared himself, in the very same form in which the old knight-errants
in romances used to declare themselves the knights and champions of
certain beautiful and incomparable princesses, whom sometimes they had,
but oftener had not, seen.  For Dulcinea del Toboso was by no means the
first princess whom her faithful and valorous knight had never seen in
his life.  The enthusiast went to the Holy Land, from whence he returned
to Spain, where he began to learn Latin and philosophy at three-and-
thirty years old, so that no doubt but he made great progress in both.
The better to carry on his mad and wicked designs, he chose four
disciples, or rather apostles, all Spaniards, viz, Laynes, Salmeron,
Bobadilla, and Rodriguez.  He then composed the rules and constitutions
of his order; which, in the year 1547, was called the order of Jesuits,
from the church of Jesus in Rome, which was given them.  Ignatius died in
1556, aged sixty-five, thirty-five years after his conversion, and
sixteen years after the establishment of his society.  He was canonized
in the year 1609, and is doubtless now a saint in heaven.

If the religious and moral principles of this society are to be detested,
as they justly are, the wisdom of their political principles is as justly
to be admired.  Suspected, collectively as an order, of the greatest
crimes, and convicted of many, they have either escaped punishment, or
triumphed after it; as in France, in the reign of Henry IV.  They have,
directly or indirectly, governed the consciences and the councils of all
the Catholic princes in Europe; they almost governed China in the reign
of Cangghi; and they are now actually in possession of the Paraguay in
America, pretending, but paying no obedience to the Crown of Spain.
As a collective body they are detested, even by all the Catholics, not
excepting the clergy, both secular and regular, and yet, as individuals,
they are loved, respected, and they govern wherever they are.

Two things, I believe, contribute to their success.  The first, that
passive, implicit, unlimited obedience to their General (who always
resides at Rome), and to the superiors of their several houses, appointed
by him.  This obedience is observed by them all to a most astonishing
degree; and, I believe, there is no one society in the world, of which so
many individuals sacrifice their private interest to the general one of
the society itself.  The second is the education of youth, which they
have in a manner engrossed; there they give the first, and the first are
the lasting impressions; those impressions are always calculated to be
favorable to the society.  I have known many Catholics, educated by the
Jesuits, who, though they detested the society, from reason and
knowledge, have always remained attached to it, from habit and prejudice.
The, Jesuits know, better than any set of people in the world, the
importance of the art of pleasing, and study it more; they become all
things to all men in order to gain, not a few, but many.  In Asia,
Africa, and America they become more than half pagans, in order to
convert the pagans to be less than half Christians.  In private families
they begin by insinuating themselves as friends, they grow to be
favorites, and they end DIRECTORS.  Their manners are not like those of
any other regulars in the world, but gentle, polite, and engaging.  They
are all carefully bred up to that particular destination, to which they
seem to have a natural turn; for which reason one sees most Jesuits excel
in some particular thing.  They even breed up some for martyrdom in case
of need; as the superior of a Jesuit seminary at Rome told Lord
Bolingbroke.  'E abbiamo anche martiri per il martirio, se bisogna'.

Inform yourself minutely of everything concerning this extraordinary
establishment; go into their houses, get acquainted with individuals,
hear some of them preach.  The finest preacher I ever heard in my life is
le Pere Neufville, who, I believe, preaches still at Paris, and is so
much in the best company, that you may easily get personally acquainted
with him.

If you would know their 'morale' read Pascal's 'Lettres Provinciales', in
which it is very truly displayed from their own writings.

Upon the whole, this is certain, that a society of which so little good
is said, and so much ill believed, and that still not only subsists, but
flourishes, must be a very able one.  It is always mentioned as a proof
of the superior abilities of the Cardinal Richelieu, that, though hated
by all the nation, and still more by his master, he kept his power in
spite of both.

I would earnestly wish you to do everything now, which I wish, that I had
done at your age, and did not do.  Every country has its peculiarities,
which one can be much better informed of during one's residence there,
than by reading all the books in the world afterward.  While you are in
Catholic countries, inform yourself of all the forms and ceremonies of
that tawdry church; see their converts both of men and women, know their
several rules and orders, attend their most remarkable ceremonies; have
their terms of art explained to you, their 'tierce, sexte, nones,
matines; vepres, complies'; their 'breviares, rosaires, heures,
chapelets, agnus', etc., things that many people talk of from habit,
though few people know the true meaning of anyone of them.  Converse
with, and study the characters of some of those incarcerated enthusiasts.
Frequent some 'parloirs', and see the air and manners of those Recluse,
who are a distinct nation themselves, and like no other.

I dined yesterday with Mrs. F----d, her mother and husband.  He is an
athletic Hibernian, handsome in his person, but excessively awkward and
vulgar in his air and manner.  She inquired much after you, and, I
thought, with interest.  I answered her as a 'Mezzano' should do: 'Et je
pronai votre tendresse, vos soins, et vos soupirs'.

When you meet with any British returning to their own country, pray send
me by them any little 'brochures, factums, theses', etc., 'qui font du
bruit ou du plaisir a Paris'.  Adieu, child.




LETTER CLVII

LONDON, January 23, O. S.  1752.

MY DEAR FRIEND: Have you seen the new tragedy of Varon,--[Written by the
Vicomte de Grave; and at that time the general topic of conversation at
Paris.]-- and what do you think of it?  Let me know, for I am determined
to form my taste upon yours.  I hear that the situations and incidents
are well brought on, and the catastrophe unexpected and surprising, but
the verses bad.  I suppose it is the subject of all conversations at
Paris, where both women and men are judges and critics of all such
performances; such conversations, that both form and improve the taste,
and whet the judgment; are surely preferable to the conversations of our
mixed companies here; which, if they happen to rise above bragg and
whist, infallibly stop short of everything either pleasing or
instructive.

I take the reason of this to be, that (as women generally give the 'ton'
to the conversation) our English women are not near so well informed and
cultivated as the French; besides that they are naturally more serious
and silent.

I could wish there were a treaty made between the French and English
theatres, in which both parties should make considerable concessions.
The English ought to give up their notorious violations of all the
unities; and all their massacres, racks, dead bodies, and mangled
carcasses, which they so frequently exhibit upon their stage.  The French
should engage to have more action and less declamation; and not to cram
and crowd things together, to almost a degree of impossibility, from a
too scrupulous adherence to the unities.  The English should restrain the
licentiousness of their poets, and the French enlarge the liberty of
theirs; their poets are the greatest slaves in their country, and that is
a bold word; ours are the most tumultuous subjects in England, and that
is saying a good deal.  Under such regulations one might hope to see a
play in which one should not be lulled to sleep by the length of a
monotonical declamation, nor frightened and shocked by the barbarity of
the action.  The unity of time extended occasionally to three or four
days, and the unity of place broke into, as far as the same street, or
sometimes the same town; both which, I will affirm, are as probable as
four-and-twenty hours, and the same room.

More indulgence too, in my mind, should be shown, than the French are
willing to allow, to bright thoughts, and to shining images; for though,
I confess, it is not very natural for a hero or a princess to say fine
things in all the violence of grief, love, rage, etc., yet, I can as well
suppose that, as I can that they should talk to themselves for half an
hour; which they must necessarily do, or no tragedy could be carried on,
unless they had recourse to a much greater absurdity, the choruses of the
ancients.  Tragedy is of a nature, that one must see it with a degree of
self-deception; we must lend ourselves a little to the delusion; and I am
very willing to carry that complaisance a little farther than the French
do.

Tragedy must be something bigger than life, or it would not affect us.
In nature the most violent passions are silent; in tragedy they must
speak, and speak with dignity too.  Hence the necessity of their being
written in verse, and unfortunately for the French, from the weakness of
their language, in rhymes.  And for the same reason, Cato the Stoic,
expiring at Utica, rhymes masculine and feminine at Paris; and fetches
his last breath at London, in most harmmonious and correct blank verse.

It is quite otherwise with Comedy, which should be mere common life, and
not one jot bigger.  Every character should speak upon the stage, not
only what it would utter in the situation there represented, but in the
same manner in which it would express it.  For which reason I cannot
allow rhymes in comedy, unless they were put into the mouth, and came out
of the mouth of a mad poet.  But it is impossible to deceive one's self
enough (nor is it the least necessary in comedy) to suppose a dull rogue
of an usurer cheating, or 'gross Jean' blundering in the finest rhymes in
the world.

As for Operas, they are essentially too absurd and extravagant to
mention; I look upon them as a magic scene, contrived to please the eyes
and the ears, at the expense of the understanding; and I consider
singing, rhyming, and chiming heroes, and princesses, and philosophers,
as I do the hills, the trees, the birds, and the beasts, who amicably
joined in one common country dance, to the irresistible turn of Orpheus's
lyre.  Whenever I go to an opera, I leave my sense and reason at the door
with my half guinea, and deliver myself up to my eyes and my ears.

Thus I have made you my poetical confession; in which I have acknowledged
as many sins against the established taste in both countries, as a frank
heretic could have owned against the established church in either, but I
am now privileged by my age to taste and think for myself, and not to
care what other people think of me in those respects; an advantage which
youth, among its many advantages, hath not.  It must occasionally and
outwardly conform, to a certain degree, to establish tastes, fashions,
and decisions.  A young man may, with a becoming modesty, dissent, in
private companies, from public opinions and prejudices: but he must not
attack them with warmth, nor magisterially set up his own sentiments
against them.  Endeavor to hear, and know all opinions; receive them with
complaisance; form your own with coolness, and give it with modesty.

I have received a letter from Sir John Lambert, in which he requests me
to use my interest to procure him the remittance of Mr. Spencer's money,
when he goes abroad and also desires to know to whose account he is to
place the postage of my letters.  I do not trouble him with a letter in
answer, since you can execute the commission.  Pray make my compliments
to him, and assure him that I will do all I can to procure him Mr.
Spencer's business; but that his most effectual way will be by Messrs.
Hoare, who are Mr. Spencer's cashiers, and who will undoubtedly have
their choice upon whom they will give him his credit.  As for the postage
of the letters, your purse and mine being pretty near the same, do you
pay it, over and above your next draught.

Your relations, the Princes B-----, will soon be with you at Paris; for
they leave London this week: whenever you converse with them, I desire it
may be in Italian; that language not being yet familiar enough to you.

By our printed papers, there seems to be a sort of compromise between the
King and the parliament, with regard to the affairs of the hospitals, by
taking them out of the hands of the Archbishop of Paris, and placing them
in Monsieur d'Argenson's: if this be true, that compromise, as it is
called, is clearly a victory on the side of the court, and a defeat on
the part of the parliament; for if the parliament had a right, they had
it as much to the exclusion of Monsieur d'Argenson as of the Archbishop.
Adieu.




LETTER CLVIII

LONDON, February 6, O. S.  1752.

MY DEAR FRIEND: Your criticism of Varon is strictly just; but, in truth,
severe.  You French critics seek for a fault as eagerly as I do for a
beauty: you consider things in the worst light, to show your skill, at
the expense of your pleasure; I view them in the best, that I may have
more pleasure, though at the expense of my judgment.  A 'trompeur
trompeur et demi' is prettily said; and, if you please, you may call
'Varon, un Normand', and 'Sostrate, un Manceau, qui vaut un Normand et
demi'; and, considering the 'denouement' in the light of trick upon
trick, it would undoubtedly be below the dignity of the buskin, and
fitter for the sock.

But let us see if we cannot bring off the author.  The great question
upon which all turns, is to discover and ascertain who Cleonice really
is.  There are doubts concerning her 'etat'; how shall they be cleared?
Had the truth been extorted from Varon (who alone knew) by the rack, it
would have been a true tragical 'denouement'.  But that would probably
not have done with Varon, who is represented as a bold, determined,
wicked, and at that time desperate fellow; for he was in the hands of an
enemy who he knew could not forgive him, with common prudence or safety.
The rack would, therefore, have extorted no truth from him; but he would
have died enjoying the doubts of his enemies, and the confusion that must
necessarily attend those doubts.  A stratagem is therefore thought of to
discover what force and terror could not, and the stratagem such as no
king or minister would disdain, to get at an important discovery.  If you
call that stratagem a TRICK, you vilify it, and make it comical; but call
that trick a STRATAGEM, or a MEASURE, and you dignify it up to tragedy:
so frequently do ridicule or dignity turn upon one single word.  It is
commonly said, and more particularly by Lord Shaftesbury, that ridicule
is the best test of truth; for that it will not stick where it is not
just.  I deny it.  A truth learned in a certain light, and attacked in
certain words, by men of wit and humor, may, and often doth, become
ridiculous, at least so far that the truth is only remembered and
repeated for the sake of the ridicule.  The overturn of Mary of Medicis
into a river, where she was half-drowned, would never have been
remembered if Madame de Vernuel, who saw it, had not said 'la Reine
boit'.  Pleasure or malignity often gives ridicule a weight which it does
not deserve.  The versification, I must confess, is too much neglected
and too often bad: but, upon the whole, I read the play with pleasure.

If there is but a great deal of wit and character in your new comedy, I
will readily compound for its having little or no plot.  I chiefly mind
dialogue and character in comedies.  Let dull critics feed upon the
carcasses of plays; give me the taste and the dressing.

I am very glad you went to Versailles to see the ceremony of creating the
Prince de Conde 'Chevalier de l' Ordre'; and I do not doubt but that upon
this occasion you informed yourself thoroughly of the institution and
rules of that order.  If you did, you were certainly told it was
instituted by Henry III. immediately after his return, or rather his
flight from Poland; he took the hint of it at Venice, where he had seen
the original manuscript of an order of the 'St. Esprit, ou droit desir',
which had been instituted in 1352, by Louis d'Anjou, King of Jerusalem
and Sicily, and husband to Jane, Queen of Naples, Countess of Provence.
This Order was under the protection of St. Nicholas de Bari, whose image
hung to the collar.  Henry III. found the Order of St. Michael
prostituted and degraded, during the civil wars; he therefore joined it
to his new Order of the St. Esprit, and gave them both together; for
which reason every knight of the St. Esprit is now called Chevalier des
Ordres du Roi.  The number of the knights hath been different, but is now
fixed to ONE HUNDRED, exclusive of the sovereign.  There, are many
officers who wear the riband of this Order, like the other knights; and
what is very singular is, that these officers frequently sell their
employments, but obtain leave to wear the blue riband still, though the
purchasers of those offices wear it also.

As you will have been a great while in France, people will expect that
you should be 'au fait' of all these sort of things relative to that
country.  But the history of all the Orders of all countries is well
worth your knowledge; the subject occurs often, and one should not be
ignorant of it, for fear of some such accident as happened to a solid
Dane at Paris, who, upon seeing 'L'Ordre du St. Esprit', said, 'Notre St.
Esprit chez nous c'est un Elephant'.  Almost all the princes in Germany
have their Orders too; not dated, indeed, from any important events, or
directed to any great object, but because they will have orders, to show
that they may; as some of them, who have the 'jus cudendae monetae',
borrow ten shillings worth of gold to coin a ducat.  However, wherever
you meet with them, inform yourself, and minute down a short account of
them; they take in all the colors of Sir Isaac Newton's prisms.  N. B:
When you inquire about them, do not seem to laugh.

I thank you for le Mandement de Monseigneur l'Archeveyue; it is very well
drawn, and becoming an archbishop.  But pray do not lose sight of a much
more important object, I mean the political disputes between the King and
the parliament, and the King and the clergy; they seem both to be
patching up; but, however, get the whole clue to them, as far as they
have gone.

I received a letter yesterday from Madame Monconseil, who assures me you
have gained ground 'du cote des maniires', and that she looks upon you to
be 'plus qu'a moitie chemin'.  I am very glad to hear this, because, if
you are got above half way of your journey, surely you will finish it,
and not faint in the course.  Why do you think I have this affair so
extremely at heart, and why do I repeat it so often?  Is it for your
sake, or for mine?  You can immediately answer yourself that question;
you certainly have--I cannot possibly have any interest in it.  If then
you will allow me, as I believe you may, to be a judge of what is useful
and necessary to you, you must, in consequence, be convinced of the
infinite importance of a point which I take so much pains to inculcate.

I hear that the new Duke of Orleans 'a remercie Monsieur de Melfort, and
I believe, 'pas sans raison', having had obligations to him; 'mais il ne
l'a pas remercie en mari poli', but rather roughly.  Il faut que ce soit
un bourru'.  I am told, too, that people get bits of his father's rags,
by way of relies; I wish them joy, they will do them a great deal of
good.  See from hence what weaknesses human nature is capable of, and
make allowances for such in all your plans and reasonings.  Study the
characters of the people you have to do with, and know what they are,
instead of thinking them what they should be; address yourself generally
to the senses, to the heart, and to the weaknesses of mankind, but very
rarely to their reason.

Good-night or good-morrow to you, according to the time you shall receive
this letter from, Yours.




LETTER CLIX

LONDON, February 14, O. S.  1752.

MY DEAR FRIEND: In a month's time, I believe I shall have the pleasure of
sending you, and you will have the pleasure of reading, a work of Lord
Bolingbroke's, in two volumes octavo, "Upon the Use of History," in
several letters to Lord Hyde, then Lord Cornbury.  It is now put into the
press.  It is hard to determine whether this work will instruct or please
most: the most material historical facts, from the great era of the
treaty of Munster, are touched upon, accompanied by the most solid
reflections, and adorned by all that elegance of style which was peculiar
to himself, and in which, if Cicero equals, he certainly does not exceed
him; but every other writer falls short of him.  I would advise you
almost to get this book by heart.  I think you have a turn to history,
you love it, and have a memory to retain it: this book will teach you the
proper use of it.  Some people load their memories indiscriminately with
historical facts, as others do their stomachs with food; and bring out
the one, and bring up the other, entirely crude and undigested. You will
find in Lord Bolingbroke's book an infallible specific against that
epidemical complaint. --[It is important to remember that at this time
Lord Bolingbroke's philosophical works had not appeared; which accounts
for Lord Chesterfield's recommending to his son, in this, as well as in
some foregoing passages, the study of Lord Bolingbroke's writings.]

I remember a gentleman who had read history in this thoughtless and
undistinguishing manner, and who, having traveled, had gone through the
Valtelline.  He told me that it was a miserable poor country, and
therefore it was, surely, a great error in Cardinal Richelieu to make
such a rout, and put France to so much expense about it.  Had my friend
read history as he ought to have done, he would have known that the great
object of that great minister was to reduce the power of the House of
Austria; and in order to that, to cut off as much as he could the
communication between the several parts of their then extensive
dominions; which reflections would have justified the Cardinal to him,
in the affair of the Valtelline.  But it was easier to him to remember
facts, than to combine and reflect.

One observation I hope you will make in reading history; for it is an
obvious and a true one.  It is, that more people have made great figures
and great fortunes in courts by their exterior accomplishments, than by
their interior qualifications.  Their engaging address, the politeness of
their manners, their air, their turn, hath almost always paved the way
for their superior abilities, if they have such, to exert themselves.
They have been favorites before they have been ministers.  In courts, an
universal gentleness and 'douceur dans les manieres' is most absolutely
necessary: an offended fool, or a slighted valet de chambre, may very
possibly do you more hurt at court, than ten men of merit can do you
good.  Fools, and low people, are always jealous of their dignity, and
never forget nor forgive what they reckon a slight: on the other hand,
they take civility and a little attention as a favor; remember, and
acknowledge it: this, in my mind, is buying them cheap; and therefore
they are worth buying.  The prince himself, who is rarely the shining
genius of his court, esteems you only by hearsay but likes you by his
senses; that is, from your air, your politeness, and your manner of
addressing him, of which alone he is a judge.  There is a court garment,
as well as a wedding garment, without which you will not be received.
That garment is the 'volto sciolto'; an imposing air, an elegant
politeness, easy and engaging manners, universal attention, an
insinuating gentleness, and all those 'je ne sais quoi' that compose the
GRACES.

I am this moment disagreeably interrupted by a letter; not from you, as I
expected, but from a friend of yours at Paris, who informs me that you
have a fever which confines you at home.  Since you have a fever, I am
glad you have prudence enough in it to stay at home, and take care of
yourself; a little more prudence might probably have prevented it.  Your
blood is young, and consequently hot; and you naturally make a great deal
by your good stomach and good digestion; you should, therefore,
necessarily attenuate and cool it, from time to time, by gentle purges,
or by a very low diet, for two or three days together, if you would avoid
fevers.  Lord Bacon, who was a very great physician in both senses of the
word, hath this aphorism in his "Essay upon Health," 'Nihil magis ad
Sanitatem tribuit quam crebrae et domesticae purgationes'.  By
'domesticae', he means those simple uncompounded purgatives which
everybody can administer to themselves; such as senna-tea, stewed prunes
and senria, chewing a little rhubarb, or dissolving an ounce and a half
of manna in fair water, with the juice of a lemon to make it palatable.
Such gentle and unconfining evacuations would certainly prevent those
feverish attacks to which everybody at your age is subject.

By the way, I do desire, and insist, that whenever, from any
indisposition, you are not able to write to me upon the fixed days, that
Christian shall; and give me a TRUE account how you are.  I do not expect
from him the Ciceronian epistolary style; but I will content myself with
the Swiss simplicity and truth.

I hope you extend your acquaintance at Paris, and frequent variety of
companies; the only way of knowing the world; every set of company
differs in some particulars from another; and a man of business must, in
the course of his life, have to do with all sorts.  It is a very great
advantage to know the languages of the several countries one travels in;
and different companies may, in some degree, be considered as different
countries; each hath its distinctive language, customs, and manners: know
them all, and you will wonder at none.

Adieu, child.  Take care of your health; there are no pleasures without
it.




LETTER CLX

LONDON, February 20, O. S.  1752.

MY DEAR FRIEND: In all systems whatsoever, whether of religion,
government, morals, etc., perfection is the object always proposed,
though possibly unattainable; hitherto, at least, certainly unattained.
However, those who aim carefully at the mark itself, will unquestionably
come nearer it, than those who from despair, negligence, or indolence,
leave to chance the work of skill.  This maxim holds equally true in
common life; those who aim at perfection will come infinitely nearer it
than those desponding or indolent spirits, who foolishly say to
themselves: Nobody is perfect; perfection is unattainable; to attempt it
is chimerical; I shall do as well as others; why then should I give
myself trouble to be what I never can, and what, according to the common
course of things, I need not be, PERFECT?

I am very sure that I need not point out to you the weakness and the
folly of this reasoning, if it deserves the name of reasoning.  It would
discourage and put a stop to the exertion of any one of our faculties.
On the contrary, a man of sense and spirit says to himself:  Though the
point of perfection may (considering the imperfection of our nature) be
unattainable, my care, my endeavors, my attention, shall not be wanting
to get as near it as I can.  I will approach it every day, possibly, I
may arrive at it at last; at least, what I ,am sure is in my own power,
I will not be distanced.  Many fools (speaking of you) say to me: What!
would you have him perfect?  I answer: Why not?  What hurt would it do
him or me?  O, but that is impossible, say they; I reply, I am not sure
of that: perfection in the abstract, I admit to be unattainable, but what
is commonly called perfection in a character I maintain to be attainable,
and not only that, but in every man's power.  He hath, continue they, a
good head, a good heart, a good fund of knowledge, which would increase
daily: What would you have more?  Why, I would have everything more that
can adorn and complete a character.  Will it do his head, his heart, or
his knowledge any harm, to have the utmost delicacy of manners, the most
shining advantages of air and address, the most endearing attentions, and
the most engaging graces?  But as he is, say they, he is loved wherever
he is known.  I am very glad of it, say I ; but I would have him be liked
before he is known, and loved afterward.  I would have him, by his first
abord and address, make people wish to know him, and inclined to love
him: he will save a great deal of time by it.  Indeed, reply they, you
are too nice, too exact, and lay too much stress upon things that are of
very little consequence.  Indeed, rejoin I, you know very little of the
nature of mankind, if you take those things to be of little consequence:
one cannot be too attentive to them; it is they that always engage the
heart, of which the understanding is commonly the bubble.  And I would
much rather that he erred in a point of grammar, of history, of
philosophy, etc., than in point of manners and address.  But consider,
he is very young; all this will come in time.  I hope so; but that time
must be when he is young, or it will never be at all; the right 'pli'
must be taken young, or it will never be easy or seem natural.  Come,
come, say they (substituting, as is frequently done, assertion instead of
argument), depend upon it he will do very well: and you have a great deal
of reason to be satisfied with him.  I hope and believe he will do well,
but I would have him do better than well.  I am very well pleased with
him, but I would be more, I would be proud of him.  I would have him have
lustre as well as weight.  Did you ever know anybody that reunited all
these talents?  Yes, I did; Lord Bolingbroke joined all the politeness,
the manners, and the graces of a courtier, to the solidity of a
statesman, and to the learning of a pedant.  He was 'omnis homo'; and
pray what should hinder my boy from being so too, if he 'hath, as I think
he hath, all the other qualifications that you allow him?  Nothing can
hinder him, but neglect of or inattention to, those objects which his own
good sense must tell him are, of infinite consequence to him, and which
therefore I will not suppose him capable of either neglecting or
despising.

This (to tell you the whole truth) is the result of a controversy that
passed yesterday, between Lady Hervey and myself, upon your subject, and
almost in the very words.  I submit the decision of it to yourself; let
your own good sense determine it, and make you act in consequence of that
determination.  The receipt to make this composition is short and
infallible; here I give it to you:

Take variety of the best company, wherever you are; be minutely attentive
to every word and action; imitate respectively those whom you observe to
be distinguished and considered for any one accomplishment; then mix all
those several accomplishments together, and serve them up yourself to
others.

I hope your fair, or rather your brown AMERICAN is well.  I hear that she
makes very handsome presents, if she is not so herself.  I am told there
are people at Paris who expect, from this secret connection, to see in
time a volume of letters, superior to Madame de Graffiny's Peruvian ones;
I lay in my claim to one of the first copies.

Francis's Genie -[Francis's "Eugenia."]-- hath been acted twice, with
most universal applause; to-night is his third night, and I am going to
it.  I did not think it would have succeeded so well, considering how
long our British audiences have been accustomed to murder, racks, and
poison, in every tragedy; but it affected the heart so much, that it
triumphed over habit and prejudice.  All the women cried, and all the men
were moved.  The prologue, which is a very good one, was made entirely by
Garrick.  The epilogue is old Cibber's ; but corrected, though not
enough, by Francis.  He will get a great deal of, money by it; and,
consequently, be better able to lend you sixpence, upon any emergency.

The parliament of Paris, I find by the newspapers, has not carried its
point concerning the hospitals, and, though the King hath given up the
Archbishop, yet as he has put them under the management and direction
'du Grand Conseil', the parliament is equally out of the question.  This
will naturally put you upon inquiring into the constitution of the 'Grand
Conseil'.  You will, doubtless, inform yourself who it is composed of,
what things are 'de son ressort', whether or not there lies an appeal
from thence to any other place; and of all other particulars, that may
give you a clear notion of this assembly.  There are also three or four
other Conseils in France, of which you ought to know the constitution and
the objects; I dare say you do know them already; but if you do not, lose
no time in informing yourself.  These things, as I have often told you,
are best learned in various French companies: but in no English ones, for
none of our countrymen trouble their heads about them.  To use a very
trite image, collect, like the bee, your store from every quarter.  In
some companies ('parmi les fermiers generaux nommement') you may, by
proper inquiries, get a general knowledge, at least, of 'les affaires des
finances'.  When you are with 'des gens de robe', suck them with regard
to the constitution, and civil government, and 'sic de caeteris'.  This
shows you the advantage of keeping a great deal of different French
company; an advantage much superior to any that you can possibly receive
from loitering and sauntering away evenings in any English company at
Paris, not even excepting Lord A------.  Love of ease, and fear of
restraint (to both which I doubt you are, for a young fellow, too much
addicted) may invite you among your countrymen: but pray withstand those
mean temptations, 'et prenez sur vous', for the sake of being in those
assemblies, which alone can inform your mind and improve your manners.
You have not now many months to continue at Paris; make the most of them;
get into every house there, if you can; extend acquaintance, know
everything and everybody there; that when you leave it for other places,
you may be 'au fait', and even able to explain whatever you may hear
mentioned concerning it.  Adieu.




LETTER CLXI

LONDON, March 2, O. S.  1752.

MY DEAR FRIEND: Whereabouts are you in Ariosto?  Or have you gone through
that most ingenious contexture of truth and lies, of serious and
extravagant, of knights-errant, magicians, and all that various matter
which he announces in the beginning of his poem:

               Le Donne, I Cavalier, l'arme, gli amori,
               Le cortesie, l'audaci impreso io canto.

I am by no means sure that Homer had superior invention, or excelled more
in description than Ariosto.  What can be more seducing and voluptuous,
than the description of Alcina's person and palace?  What more
ingeniously extravagant, than the search made in the moon for Orlando's
lost wits, and the account of other people's that were found there?  The
whole is worth your attention, not only as an ingenious poem, but as the
source of all modern tales, novels, fables, and romances; as Ovid's
"Metamorphoses;" was of the ancient ones; besides, that when you have
read this work, nothing will be difficult to you in the Italian language.
You will read Tasso's 'Gierusalemme', and the 'Decamerone di Boccacio',
with great facility afterward; and when you have read those three
authors, you will, in my opinion, have read all the works of invention
that are worth reading in that language; though the Italians would be
very angry at me for saying so.

A gentleman should know those which I call classical works, in every
language; such as Boileau, Corneille, Racine, Moliere, etc., in French;
Milton, Dryden, Pope, Swift, etc., in English; and the three authors
above mentioned in Italian; whether you have any such in German I am not
quite sure, nor, indeed, am I inquisitive.  These sort of books adorn the
mind, improve the fancy, are frequently alluded to by, and are often the
subjects of conversations of the best companies.  As you have languages
to read, and memory to retain them, the knowledge of them is very well
worth the little pains it will cost you, and will enable you to shine in
company.  It is not pedantic to quote and allude to them, which it would
be with regard to the ancients.

Among the many advantages which you have had in your education, I do not
consider your knowledge of several languages as the least.  You need not
trust to translations; you can go to the source; you can both converse
and negotiate with people of all nations, upon equal terms; which is by
no means the case of a man, who converses or negotiates in a language
which those with whom he hath to do know much better than himself.  In
business, a great deal may depend upon the force and extent of one word;
and, in conversation, a moderate thought may gain, or a good one lose, by
the propriety or impropriety, the elegance or inelegance of one single
word.  As therefore you now know four modern languages well, I would have
you study (and, by the way, it will be very little trouble to you) to
know them correctly, accurately, and delicately.  Read some little books
that treat of them, and ask questions concerning their delicacies, of
those who are able to answer you.  As, for instance, should I say in
French, 'la lettre que je vous ai ECRIT', or, 'la lettre que je vous ai
ECRITE'?  in which, I think, the French differ among themselves.  There
is a short French grammar by the Port Royal, and another by Pere Bufiier,
both which are worth your reading; as is also a little book called 'Les
Synonymes Francois.  There are books of that kind upon the Italian
language, into some of which I would advise you to dip; possibly the
German language may have something of the same sort, and since you
already speak it, the more properly you speak it the better; one would,
I think, as far as possible, do all one does correctly and elegantly.
It is extremely engaging to people of every nation, to meet with a
foreigner who hath taken pains enough to speak their language correctly;
it flatters that local and national pride and prejudice of which
everybody hath some share.

Francis's "Eugenia," which I will send you, pleased most people of good
taste here; the boxes were crowded till the sixth night, when the pit and
gallery were totally deserted, and it was dropped.  Distress, without
death, was not sufficient to affect a true British audience, so long
accustomed to daggers, racks, and bowls of poison: contrary to Horace's
rule, they desire to see Medea murder her children upon the stage.  The
sentiments were too delicate to move them; and their hearts are to be
taken by storm, not by parley.

Have you got the things, which were taken from you at Calais, restored?
and, among them, the little packet which my sister gave you for Sir
Charles Hotham?  In this case, have you forwarded it to him?  If you have
not had an opportunity, you will have one soon; which I desire you will
not omit; it is by Monsieur d'Aillion, whom you will see in a few days at
Paris, in his way to Geneva, where Sir Charles now is, and will remain
some time.  Adieu:




LETTER CLXII

LONDON, March 5, O. S.  1752

MY DEAR FRIEND: As I have received no letter from you by the usual post,
I am uneasy upon account of your health; for, had you been well, I am
sure you would have written, according to your engagement and my
requisition.  You have not the least notion of any care of your health;
but though I would not have you be a valetudinarian, I must tell you that
the best and most robust health requires some degree of attention to
preserve.  Young fellows, thinking they have so much health and time
before them, are very apt to neglect or lavish both, and beggar
themselves before they are aware: whereas a prudent economy in both would
make them rich indeed; and so far from breaking in upon their pleasures,
would improve, and almost perpetuate them.  Be you wiser, and, before it
is too late, manage both with care and frugality; and lay out neither,
but upon good interest and security.

I will now confine myself to the employment of your time, which, though I
have often touched upon formerly, is a subject that, from its importance,
will bear repetition.  You have it is true, a great deal of time before
you; but, in this period of your life, one hour usefully employed may be
worth more than four-and-twenty hereafter; a minute is precious to you
now, whole days may possibly not be so forty years hence.  Whatever time
you allow, or can snatch for serious reading (I say snatch, because
company and the knowledge of the world is now your chief object), employ
it in the reading of some one book, and that a good one, till you have
finished it: and do not distract your mind with various matters at the
same time.  In this light I would recommend to you to read 'tout de
suite' Grotius 'de Jure Belli et Pacis', translated by Barbeyrac, and
Puffendorff's 'Jus Gentium', translated by the same hand.  For accidental
quarters of hours, read works of invention, wit and humor, of the best,
and not of trivial authors, either ancient or modern.

Whatever business you have, do it the first moment you can; never by
halves, but finish it without interruption, if possible.  Business must
not be sauntered and trifled with; and you must not say to it, as Felix
did to Paul, "At a more convenient season I will speak to thee."
The most convenient season for business is the first; but study and
business in some measure point out their own times to a man of sense;
time is much oftener squandered away in the wrong choice and improper
methods of amusement and pleasures.

Many people think that they are in pleasures, provided they are neither
in study nor in business.  Nothing like it; they are doing nothing, and
might just as well be asleep.  They contract habitudes from laziness, and
they) only frequent those places where they are free from all restraints
and attentions.  Be upon your guard against this idle profusion of time;
and let every place you go to be either the scene of quick and lively
pleasures, or the school of your own improvements; let every company you
go into either gratify your senses, extend your knowledge, or refine your
manners.  Have some decent object of gallantry in view at some places;
frequent others, where people of wit and taste assemble; get into others,
where people of superior rank and dignity command respect and attention
from the rest of the company; but pray frequent no neutral places, from
mere idleness and indolence.  Nothing forms a young man so much as being
used to keep respectable and superior company, where a constant regard
and attention is necessary.  It is true, this is at first a disagreeable
state of restraint; but it soon grows habitual, and consequently easy;
and you are amply paid for it, by the improvement you make, and the
credit it gives you.  What you said some time ago was very true,
concerning 'le Palais Royal'; to one of your age the situation is
disagreeable enough: you cannot expect to be much taken notice of;
but all that time you can take notice of others; observe their manners,
decipher their characters, and insensibly you will become one of the
company.

All this I went through myself, when I was of your age.  I have sat hours
in company without being taken the least notice of; but then I took
notice of them, and learned in their company how to behave myself better
in the next, till by degrees I became part of the best companies myself.
But I took great care not to lavish away my time in those companies where
there were neither quick pleasures nor useful improvements to be
expected.

Sloth, indolence, and 'mollesse' are pernicious and unbecoming a young
fellow; let them be your 'ressource' forty years hence at soonest.
Determine, at all events, and however disagreeable it may to you in some
respects, and for some time, to keep the most distinguished and
fashionable company of the place you are at, either for their rank, or
for their learning, or 'le bel esprit et le gout'.  This gives you
credentials to the best companies, wherever you go afterward.  Pray,
therefore, no indolence, no laziness; but employ every minute in your
life in active pleasures, or useful employments.  Address yourself to
some woman of fashion and beauty, wherever you are, and try how far that
will go.  If the place be not secured beforehand, and garrisoned, nine
times in ten you will take it.  By attentions and respect you may always
get into the highest company: and by some admiration and applause,
whether merited or not, you may be sure of being welcome among 'les
savans et les beaux esprits'.  There are but these three sorts of company
for a young fellow; there being neither pleasure nor profit in any other.

My uneasiness with regard to your health is this moment removed by your
letter of the 8th N. S., which, by what accident I do not know, I did not
receive before.

I long to read Voltaire's 'Rome Sauvee', which, by the very faults that
your SEVERE critics find with it, I am sure I shall like; for I will at
an any time give up a good deal of regularity for a great deal of
brillant; and for the brillant surely nobody is equal to Voltaire.
Catiline's conspiracy is an unhappy subject for a tragedy; it is too
single, and gives no opportunity to the poet to excite any of the tender
passions; the whole is one intended act of horror, Crebillon was sensible
of this defect, and to create another interest, most absurdly made
Catiline in love with Cicero's daughter, and her with him.

I am very glad that you went to Versailles, and dined with Monsieur de
St. Contest.  That is company to learn 'les bonnes manieres' in; and it
seems you had 'les bonnes morceaux' into the bargain.  Though you were no
part of the King of France's conversation with the foreign ministers, and
probably not much entertained with it, do you think that it is not very
useful to you to hear it, and to observe the turn and manners of people
of that sort?  It is extremely useful to know it well.  The same in the
next rank of people, such as ministers of state, etc., in whose company,
though you cannot yet, at your age, bear a part, and consequently be
diverted, you will observe and learn, what hereafter it may be necessary
for you to act.

Tell Sir John Lambert that I have this day fixed Mr. Spencer's having his
credit upon him; Mr. Hoare had also recommended him.  I believe Mr.
Spencer will set out next month for some place in France, but not Paris.
I am sure he wants a great deal of France, for at present he is most
entirely English: and you know very well what I think of that.  And so we
bid you heartily good-night.




LETTER CLXIII

LONDON, March 16, O. S.  1752

MY DEAR FRIEND: How do you go on with the most useful and most necessary
of all studies, the study of the world?  Do you find that you gain
knowledge?  And does your daily experience at once extend and demonstrate
your improvement?  You will possibly ask me how you can judge of that
yourself.  I will tell you a sure way of knowing.  Examine yourself, and
see whether your notions of the world are changed, by experience, from
what they were two years ago in theory; for that alone is one favorable
symptom of improvement.  At that age (I remember it in myself) every
notion that one forms is erroneous; one hath seen few models, and those
none of the best, to form one's self upon.  One thinks that everything is
to be carried by spirit and vigor; that art is meanness, and that
versatility and complaisance are the refuge of pusilanimity and weakness.
This most mistaken opinion gives an indelicacy, a 'brusquerie', and a
roughness to the manners.  Fools, who can never be undeceived, retain
them as long as they live: reflection, with a little experience, makes
men of sense shake them off soon.  When they come to be a little better
acquainted with themselves,and with their own species, they discover that
plain right reason is, nine times in ten, the fettered and shackled
attendant of the triumph of the heart and the passions; and,
consequently, they address themselves nine times in ten to the conqueror,
not to the conquered: and conquerors, you know, must be applied to in the
gentlest, the most engaging, and the most insinuating manner.  Have you
found out that every woman is infallibly to be gained by every sort of
flattery, and every man by one sort or other?  Have you discovered what
variety of little things affect the heart, and how surely they
collectively gain it?  If you have, you have made some progress.  I would
try a man's knowledge of the world, as I would a schoolboy's knowledge of
Horace: not by making him construe 'Maecenas atavis edite regibus', which
he could do in the first form; but by examining him as to the delicacy
and 'curiosa felicitas' of that poet.  A man requires very little
knowledge and experience of the world, to understand glaring, high-
colored, and decided characters; they are but few, and they strike at
first: but to distinguish the almost imperceptible shades, and the nice
gradations of virtue and vice, sense and folly, strength and weakness (of
which characters are commonly composed), demands some experience, great
observation, and minute attention.  In the same cases, most people do the
same things, but with this material difference, upon which the success
commonly turns: A man who hath studied the world knows when to time, and
where to place them; he hath analyzed the characters he applies to, and
adapted his address and his arguments to them: but a man, of what is
called plain good sense, who hath only reasoned by himself, and not acted
with mankind, mistimes, misplaces, runs precipitately and bluntly at the
mark, and falls upon his nose in the way.  In the common manners of
social life, every man of common sense hath the rudiments, the A B C of
civility; he means not to offend, and even wishes to please: and, if he
hath any real merit, will be received and tolerated in good company.
But that is far from being enough; for, though he may be received, he
will never be desired; though he does not offend, he will never be loved;
but, like some little, insignificant, neutral power, surrounded by great
ones, he will neither be feared nor courted by any; but, by turns,
invaded by all, whenever it is their interest.  A most contemptible
situation!  Whereas, a man who hath carefully attended to, and
experienced, the various workings of the heart, and the artifices of the
head; and who, by one shade, can trace the progression of the whole
color; who can, at the proper times, employ all the several means of
persuading the understanding, and engaging the heart, may and will have
enemies; but will and must have friends: he may be opposed, but he will
be supported too; his talents may excite the jealousy of some, but his
engaging arts will make him beloved by many more; he will be
considerable; he will be considered.  Many different qualifications must
conspire to form such a man, and to make him at once respectable and
amiable; the least must be joined to the greatest; the latter would be
unavailing without the former; and the former would be futile and
frivolous, without the latter.  Learning is acquired by reading books;
but the much more necessary learning, the knowledge of the world, is only
to be acquired by reading men, and studying all the various editions of
them.  Many words in every language are generally thought to be
synonymous; but those who study the language attentively will find, that
there is no such thing; they will discover some little difference, some
distinction between all those words that are vulgarly called synonymous;
one hath always more energy, extent, or delicacy, than another.  It is
the same with men; all are in general, and yet no two in particular,
exactly alike.  Those who have not accurately studied, perpetually
mistake them; they do not discern the shades and gradations that
distinguish characters seemingly alike.  Company, various company, is the
only school for this knowledge.  You ought to be, by this time, at least
in the third form of that school, from whence the rise to the uppermost
is easy and quick; but then you must have application and vivacity; and
you must not only bear with, but even seek restraint in most companies,
instead of stagnating in one or two only, where indolence and love of
ease may be indulged.

In the plan which I gave you in my last,--[That letter is missing.]--
for your future motions, I forgot to tell you; that, if a king of the
Romans should be chosen this year, you shall certainly be at that
election; and as, upon those occasions, all strangers are excluded from
the place of the election, except such as belong to some ambassador,
I have already eventually secured you a place in the suite of the King's
Electoral Ambassador, who will be sent upon that account to Frankfort,
or wherever else the election may be.  This will not only secure you a
sight of the show, but a knowledge of the whole thing; which is likely to
be a contested one, from the opposition of some of the electors, and the
protests of some of the princes of the empire.  That election, if there
is one, will, in my opinion, be a memorable era in the history of the
empire; pens at least, if not swords, will be drawn; and ink, if not
blood, will be plentifully shed by the contending parties in that
dispute.  During the fray, you may securely plunder, and add to your
present stock of knowledge of the 'jus publicum imperii'.  The court of
France hath, I am told, appointed le President Ogier, a man of great
abilities, to go immediately to Ratisbon, 'pour y souffler la discorde'.
It must be owned that France hath always profited skillfully of its
having guaranteed the treaty of Munster; which hath given it a constant
pretense to thrust itself into the affairs of the empire.  When France
got Alsace yielded by treaty, it was very willing to have held it as a
fief of the empire; but the empire was then wiser.  Every power should be
very careful not to give the least pretense to a neighboring power to
meddle with the affairs of its interior.  Sweden hath already felt the
effects of the Czarina's calling herself Guarantee of its present form of
government, in consequence of the treaty of Neustadt, confirmed afterward
by that of Abo; though, in truth, that guarantee was rather a provision
against Russia's attempting to alter the then new established form of
government in Sweden, than any right given to Russia to hinder the Swedes
from establishing what form of government they pleased.  Read them both,
if you can get them.  Adieu.




LETTER CLXIV

LONDON, April 73, O.  S.  1752

MY DEAR FRIEND: I receive this moment your letter of the 19th, N. S.,
with the inclosed pieces relative to  the present dispute between the
King and the parliament.  I shall return them by Lord Huntingdon, whom
you will soon see at Paris, and who will likewise carry you the piece,
which I forgot in making up the packet I sent you by the Spanish
Ambassador.  The representation of the parliament is very well drawn,
'suaviter in modo, fortiter in re'.  They tell the King very
respectfully, that, in a certain case, WHICH THEY SHOULD THINK IT
CRIMINAL To SUPPOSE, they would not obey him.  This hath a tendency to
what we call here revolution principles.  I do not know what the Lord's
anointed, his vicegerent upon earth, divinely appointed by him, and
accountable to none but him for his actions, will either think or do,
upon these symptoms of reason and good sense, which seem to be breaking
out all over France: but this I foresee, that, before the end of this
century, the trade of both king and priest will not be half so good a one
as it has been.  Du Clos, in his "Reflections," hath observed, and very
truly, 'qu'il y a un germe de raison qui commence a se developper en
France'; --a developpement that must prove fatal to Regal and Papal
pretensions.  Prudence may, in many cases, recommend an occasional
submission to either; but when that ignorance, upon which an implicit
faith in both could only be founded, is once removed, God's Vicegerent,
and Christ's Vicar, will only be obeyed and believed, as far as what the
one orders, and the other says, is conformable to reason and to truth.

I am very glad (to use a vulgar expression) that You MAKE AS IF YOU WERE
NOT WELL, though you really are; I am sure it is the likeliest way to
keep so.  Pray leave off entirely your greasy, heavy pastry, fat creams,
and indigestible dumplings ; and then you need not confine yourself to
white meats, which I do not take to be one jot wholesomer than beef,
mutton, and partridge.

Voltaire sent me, from Berlin, his 'History du Siecle de Louis XIV.  It
came at a very proper time; Lord Bolingbroke had just taught me how
history should be read; Voltaire shows me how it should be written.
I am sensible that it will meet with almost as many critics as readers.
Voltaire must be criticised; besides, every man's favorite is attacked:
for every prejudice is exposed, and our prejudices are our mistresses;
reason is at best our wife, very often heard indeed, but seldom minded.
It is the history of the human understanding, written by a man of parts,
for the use of men of parts.  Weak minds will not like it, even though
they do not understand it; which is commonly the measure of their
admiration.  Dull ones will want those minute and uninteresting details
with which most other histories are encumbered.  He tells me all I want
to know, and nothing more.  His reflections are short, just, and produce
others in his readers.  Free from religious, philosophical, political and
national prejudices, beyond any historian I ever met with, he relates all
those matters as truly and as impartially, as certain regards, which must
always be to some degree observed, will allow him; for one sees plainly
that he often says much less than he would say, if he might.  He hath
made me much better acquainted with the times of Lewis XIV., than the
innumerable volumes which I had read could do; and hath suggested this
reflection to me, which I have never made before--His vanity, not his
knowledge, made him encourage all, and introduce many arts and sciences
in his country.  He opened in a manner the human understanding in France,
and brought it to its utmost perfection; his age equalled in all, and
greatly exceeded in many things (pardon me, Pedants!) the Augustan.  This
was great and rapid; but still it might be done, by the encouragement,
the applause, and the rewards of a vain, liberal, and magnificent prince.
What is much more surprising is, that he stopped the operations of the
human mind just where he pleased; and seemed to say, "Thus far shalt thou
go, and no farther."  For, a bigot to his religion, and jealous of his
power, free and rational thoughts upon either, never entered into a
French head during his reign; and the greatest geniuses that ever any age
produced, never entertained a doubt of the divine right of Kings, or the
infallibility of the Church.  Poets, Orators, and Philosophers, ignorant
of their natural rights, cherished their chains; and blind, active faith
triumphed, in those great minds, over silent and passive reason.  The
reverse of this seems now to be the case in France: reason opens itself;
fancy and invention fade and decline.

I will send you a copy of this history by Lord Huntingdon, as I think it
very probable that it is not allowed to be published and sold at Paris.
Pray read it more than once, and with attention, particularly the second
volume, which contains short, but very clear accounts of many very
interesting things, which are talked of by everybody, though fairly.
understood by very few.  There are two very puerile affectations which I
wish this book had been free from; the one is, the total subversion of
all the old established French orthography; the other is, the not making
use of any one capital letter throughout the whole book, except at the
beginning of a paragraph.  It offends my eyes to see rome, paris, france,
Caesar, I henry the fourth, etc., begin with small letters; and I do not
conceive that there can be any reason for doing it, half so strong as the
reason of long usage is to the contrary.  This is an affectation below
Voltaire; who, I am not ashamed to say, that I admire and delight in, as
an author, equally in prose and in verse.

I had a letter a few days ago from Monsieur du Boccage, in which he says,
'Monsieur Stanhope s'est jete dans la politique, et je crois qu'il y
reussira': You do very well, it is your destination; but remember that,
to succeed in great things, one must first learn to please in little
ones.  Engaging manners and address must prepare the way for superior
knowledge and abilities to act with effect.  The late Duke of
Marlborough's manners and address prevailed with the first king of
Prussia, to let his troops remain in the army of the Allies, when neither
their representations, nor his own share in the common cause could do it.
The Duke of Marlborough had no new matter to urge to him; but had a
manner, which he could not, nor did not, resist.  Voltaire, among a
thousand little delicate strokes of that kind, says of the Duke de la
Feuillade, 'qu'il etoit l'homme le plus brillant et le plus aimable du
royaume; et quoique gendre du General et Ministre, il avoit pour lui la
faveur publique'.  Various little circumstances of that sort will often
make a man of great real merit be hated, if he hath not address and
manners to make him be loved.  Consider all your own circumstances
seriously; and you will find that, of all arts, the art of pleasing is
the most necessary for you to study and possess.  A silly tyrant said,
'oderint modo timeant'; a wise man would have said, 'modo ament nihil
timendum est mihi'.  Judge from your own daily experience, of the
efficacy of that pleasing 'je ne sais quoi', when you feel, as you and
everybody certainly does, that in men it is more engaging than knowledge,
in women than beauty.

I long to see Lord and Lady ------- (who are not yet arrived), because
they have lately seen you; and I always fancy, that I can fish out
something new concerning you, from those who have seen you last: not that
I shall much rely upon their accounts, because I distrust the judgment of
Lord and Lady -------, in those matters about which I am most
inquisitive.  They have ruined their own son by what they called and
thought loving him.  They have made him believe that the world was made
for him, not he for the world; and unless he stays abroad a great while,
and falls into very good company, he will expect, what he will never
find, the attentions and complaisance from others, which he has hitherto
been used to from Papa and Mamma.  This, I fear, is too much the case of
Mr.; who, I doubt, will be run through the body, and be near dying,
before he knows how to live.  However you may turn out, you can never
make me any of these reproaches.  I indulged no silly, womanish fondness
for you; instead of inflicting my tenderness upon you, I have taken all
possible methods to make you deserve it; and thank God you do; at least,
I know but one article, in which you are different from what I could wish
you; and you very well know what that is I want: That I and all the world
should like you, as well as I love you.  Adieu.
