

SECT. XV.  RULES BY WHICH TO JUDGE OF CAUSES AND EFFECTS.


According to the precedent doctrine, there are no objects which by the
mere survey, without consulting experience, we can determine to be the
causes of any other; and no objects, which we can certainly determine in
the same manner not to be the causes. Any thing may produce any thing.
Creation, annihilation, motion, reason, volition; all these may arise
from one another, or from any other object we can imagine. Nor will this
appear strange, if we compare two principles explained above, THAT THE
CONSTANT CONJUNCTION OF OBJECTS DETERMINES THEIR CAUSATION, AND
[Part I. Sect. 5.] THAT, PROPERTY SPEAKING, NO OBJECTS ARE CONTRARY TO
EACH OTHER BUT EXISTENCE AND NON-EXISTENCE. Where objects are not
contrary, nothing hinders them from having that constant conjunction, on
which the relation of cause and effect totally depends.

Since therefore it is possible for all objects to become causes or effects
to each other, it may be proper to fix some general rules, by which we
may know when they really are so.

(1) The cause and effect must be contiguous in space and time.

(2) The cause must be prior to the effect.

(3) There must be a constant union betwixt the cause and effect. It is
chiefly this quality, that constitutes the relation.

(4) The same cause always produces the same effect, and the same effect
never arises but from the same cause. This principle we derive from
experience, and is the source of most of our philosophical reasonings.
For when by any clear experiment we have discovered the causes or effects
of any phaenomenon, we immediately extend our observation to every
phenomenon of the same kind, without waiting for that constant
repetition, from which the first idea of this relation is derived.

(5) There is another principle, which hangs upon this, viz. that where
several different objects produce the same effect, it must be by means of
some quality, which we discover to be common amongst them. For as like
effects imply like causes, we must always ascribe the causation to the
circumstance, wherein we discover the resemblance.

(6) The following principle is founded on the same reason. The difference
in the effects of two resembling objects must proceed from that
particular, in which they differ. For as like causes always produce like
effects, when in any instance we find our expectation to be disappointed,
we must conclude that this irregularity proceeds from some difference in
the causes.

(7) When any object encreases or diminishes with the encrease or
diminution of its cause, it is to be regarded as a compounded effect,
derived from the union of the several different effects, which arise from
the several different parts of the cause. The absence or presence of one
part of the cause is here supposed to be always attended with the absence
or presence of a proportionable part of the effect. This constant
conjunction sufficiently proves, that the one part is the cause of the
other. We must, however, beware not to draw such a conclusion from a few
experiments. A certain degree of heat gives pleasure; if you diminish
that heat, the pleasure diminishes; but it does not follow, that if you
augment it beyond a certain degree, the pleasure will likewise augment;
for we find that it degenerates into pain.

(8) The eighth and last rule I shall take notice of is, that an object,
which exists for any time in its full perfection without any effect, is
not the sole cause of that effect, but requires to be assisted by some
other principle, which may forward its influence and operation. For as
like effects necessarily follow from like causes, and in a contiguous
time and place, their separation for a moment shews, that these causes
are not compleat ones.

Here is all the LOGIC I think proper to employ in my reasoning; and
perhaps even this was not very necessary, but might have been supplyd by
the natural principles of our understanding. Our scholastic head-pieces
and logicians shew no such superiority above the mere vulgar in their
reason and ability, as to give us any inclination to imitate them in
delivering a long system of rules and precepts to direct our judgment, in
philosophy. All the rules of this nature are very easy in their
invention, but extremely difficult in their application; and even
experimental philosophy, which seems the most natural and simple of any,
requires the utmost stretch of human judgment. There is no phaenomenon in
nature, but what is compounded and modifyd by so many different
circumstances, that in order to arrive at the decisive point, we must
carefully separate whatever is superfluous, and enquire by new
experiments, if every particular circumstance of the first experiment was
essential to it. These new experiments are liable to a discussion of the
same kind; so that the utmost constancy is requird to make us persevere
in our enquiry, and the utmost sagacity to choose the right way among so
many that present themselves. If this be the case even in natural
philosophy, how much more in moral, where there is a much greater
complication of circumstances, and where those views and sentiments,
which are essential to any action of the mind, are so implicit and
obscure, that they often escape our strictest attention, and are not only
unaccountable in their causes, but even unknown in their existence? I am
much afraid lest the small success I meet with in my enquiries will make
this observation bear the air of an apology rather than of boasting.

If any thing can give me security in this particular, it will be the
enlarging of the sphere of my experiments as much as possible; for which
reason it may be proper in this place to examine the reasoning faculty of
brutes, as well as that of human creatures.



SECT. XVI  OF THE REASON OF ANIMALS


Next to the ridicule of denying an evident truth, is that of taking much
pains to defend it; and no truth appears to me more evident, than that
beasts are endowd with thought and reason as well as men. The arguments
are in this case so obvious, that they never escape the most stupid and
ignorant.

We are conscious, that we ourselves, in adapting means to ends, are
guided by reason and design, and that it is not ignorantly nor casually we
perform those actions, which tend to self-preservation, to the obtaining
pleasure, and avoiding pain. When therefore we see other creatures, in
millions of instances, perform like actions, and direct them to the ends,
all our principles of reason and probability carry us with an invincible
force to believe the existence of a like cause. It is needless in my
opinion to illustrate this argument by the enumeration of particulars.
The smallest attention will supply us with more than are requisite. The
resemblance betwixt the actions of animals and those of men is so entire
in this respect, that the very first action of the first animal we shall
please to pitch on, will afford us an incontestable argument for the
present doctrine.

This doctrine is as useful as it is obvious, and furnishes us with a kind
of touchstone, by which we may try every system in this species of
philosophy. It is from the resemblance of the external actions of animals
to those we ourselves perform, that we judge their internal likewise to
resemble ours; and the same principle of reasoning, carryd one step
farther, will make us conclude that since our internal actions resemble
each other, the causes, from which they are derivd, must also be
resembling. When any hypothesis, therefore, is advancd to explain a
mental operation, which is common to men and beasts, we must apply the
same hypothesis to both; and as every true hypothesis will abide this
trial, so I may venture to affirm, that no false one will ever be able to
endure it. The common defect of those systems, which philosophers have
employd to account for the actions of the mind, is, that they suppose
such a subtility and refinement of thought, as not only exceeds the
capacity of mere animals, but even of children and the common people in
our own species; who are notwithstanding susceptible of the same emotions
and affections as persons of the most accomplishd genius and
understanding. Such a subtility is a dear proof of the falshood, as the
contrary simplicity of the truth, of any system.

Let us therefore put our present system concerning the nature of the
understanding to this decisive trial, and see whether it will equally
account for the reasonings of beasts as for these of the human species.

Here we must make a distinction betwixt those actions of animals, which
are of a vulgar nature, and seem to be on a level with their common
capacities, and those more extraordinary instances of sagacity, which
they sometimes discover for their own preservation, and the propagation
of their species. A dog, that avoids fire and precipices, that shuns
strangers, and caresses his master, affords us an instance of the first
kind. A bird, that chooses with such care and nicety the place and
materials of her nest, and sits upon her eggs for a due time, and in
suitable season, with all the precaution that a chymist is capable of in
the most delicate projection, furnishes us with a lively instance of the
second.

As to the former actions, I assert they proceed from a reasoning, that is
not in itself different, nor founded on different principles, from that
which appears in human nature. It is necessary in the first place, that
there be some impression immediately present to their memory or senses,
in order to be the foundation of their judgment. From the tone of voice
the dog infers his masters anger, and foresees his own punishment. From a
certain sensation affecting his smell, he judges his game not to be far
distant from him.

Secondly, The inference he draws from the present impression is built on
experience, and on his observation of the conjunction of objects in past
instances. As you vary this experience, he varies his reasoning. Make a
beating follow upon one sign or motion for some time, and afterwards upon
another; and he will successively draw different conclusions, according
to his most recent experience.

Now let any philosopher make a trial, and endeavour to explain that act
of the mind, which we call BELIEF, and give an account of the principles,
from which it is derivd, independent of the influence of custom on the
imagination. and let his hypothesis be equally applicable to beasts as to
the human species; and after he has done this, I promise to embrace his
opinion. But at the same time I demand as an equitable condition, that if
my system be the only one, which can answer to all these terms, it may be
receivd as entirely satisfactory and convincing. And that it is the only
one, is evident almost without any reasoning. Beasts certainly never
perceive any real connexion among objects. It is therefore by experience
they infer one from another. They can never by any arguments form a
general conclusion, that those objects, of which they have had no
experience, resemble those of which they have. It is therefore by means of
custom alone, that experience operates upon them. All this was
sufficiently evident with respect to man. But with respect to beasts
there cannot be the least suspicion of mistake; which must be ownd to be
a strong confirmation, or rather an invincible proof of my system.

Nothing shews more the force of habit in reconciling us to any
phaenomenoun, than this, that men are not astonished at the operations of
their own reason, at the same time, that they admire the instinct of
animals, and find a difficulty in explaining it, merely because it cannot
be reducd tothe very same principles. To consider the matter aright,
reason is nothing but a wonderful and unintelligible instinct in our
souls, which carries us along a certain train of ideas, and endows them
with particular qualities, according to their particular situations and
relations. This instinct, it is true, arises from past observation and
experience; but can any one give the ultimate reason, why past experience
and observation produces such an effect, any more than why nature alone
shoud produce it? Nature may certainly produce whatever can arise from
habit: Nay, habit is nothing but one of the principles of nature, and
derives all its force from that origin.




PART IV.  OF THE SCEPTICAL AND OTHER SYSTEMS OF PHILOSOPHY.



SECT. I.  OF SCEPTICISM WITH REGARD TO REASON.


In all demonstrative sciences the rules are certain and infallible; but
when we apply them, our fallible said uncertain faculties are very apt to
depart from them, and fall into error. We must, therefore, in every
reasoning form a new judgment, as a check or controul on our first
judgment or belief; and must enlarge our view to comprehend a kind of
history of all the instances, wherein our understanding has deceived us,
compared with those, wherein its testimony was just and true. Our reason
must be considered as a kind of cause, of which truth is the natural
effect; but such-a-one as by the irruption of other causes, and by the
inconstancy of our mental powers, may frequently be prevented. By this
means all knowledge degenerates into probability; and this probability is
greater or less, according to our experience of the veracity or
deceitfulness of our understanding, and according to the simplicity or
intricacy of the question.

There is no Algebraist nor Mathematician so expert in his science, as to
place entire confidence in any truth immediately upon his discovery of
it, or regard it as any thing, but a were probability. Every time he runs
over his proofs, his confidence encreases; but still more by the
approbation of his friends; and is raised to its utmost perfection by the
universal assent and applauses of the, learned world. Now it is evident,
that this gradual encrease of assurance is nothing but the addition of
new probabilities, and is derived from the constant union of causes and
effects, according to past experience and observation.

In accompts of any length or importance, Merchants seldom trust to the,
infallible certainty of numbers for their security; but by the artificial
structure of the accompts, produce a probability beyond what is derived
from the skill and experience of the accomptant. For that is plainly of
itself some degree of probability; though uncertain and variable,
according to the degrees of his experience and length of the accompt. Now
as none will maintain, that our assurance in a long numeration exceeds
probability, I may safely affirm, that there scarce is any proposition
concerning numbers, of which we can have a fuller security. For it is
easily possible, by gradually diminishing the numbers, to reduce the
longest series of addition to the most simple question, which can be
formed, to an addition of two single numbers; and upon this supposition
we shall find it impracticable to shew the precise limits of knowledge
and of probability, or discover that particular number, at which the one
ends and the other begins. But knowledge and probability are of such
contrary and disagreeing natures, that they cannot well run insensibly
into each other, and that because they will not divide, but must be
either entirely present, or entirely absent. Besides, if any single
addition were certain, every one would be so, and consequently the whole
or total sum; unless the whole can be different from all its parts. I had
almost said, that this was certain; but I reflect that it must reduce
itself, as well as every other reasoning, and from knowledge degenerate
into probability.

Since therefore all knowledge resolves itself into probability, and
becomes at last of the same nature with that evidence, which we employ in
common life, we must now examine this latter species of reasoning, and
see on what foundation it stands.

In every judgment, which we can form concerning probability, as well as
concerning knowledge, we ought always to correct the first judgment,
derived from the nature of the object, by another judgment, derived from
the nature of the understanding. It is certain a man of solid sense and
long experience ought to have, and usually has, a greater assurance in
his opinions, than one that is foolish and ignorant, and that our
sentiments have different degrees of authority, even with ourselves, in
proportion to the degrees of our reason and experience. In the man of the
best sense and longest experience, this authority is never entire; since
even such-a-one must be conscious of many errors in the past, and must
still dread the like for the future. Here then arises a new species of
probability to correct and regulate the first, and fix its just standard
and proportion. As demonstration is subject to the controul of
probability, so is probability liable to a new correction by a reflex act
of the mind, wherein the nature of our understanding, and our reasoning
from the first probability become our objects.

Having thus found in every probability, beside the original uncertainty
inherent in the subject, a new uncertainty derived from the weakness of
that faculty, which judges, and having adjusted these two together, we
are obliged by our reason to add a new doubt derived from the possibility
of error in the estimation we make of the truth and fidelity of our
faculties. This is a doubt, which immediately occurs to us, and of which,
if we would closely pursue our reason, we cannot avoid giving a decision.
But this decision, though it should be favourable to our preceding
judgment, being founded only on probability, must weaken still further
our first evidence, and must itself be weakened by a fourth doubt of the
same kind, and so on in infinitum: till at last there remain nothing of
the original probability, however great we may suppose it to have been,
and however small the diminution by every new uncertainty. No finite
object can subsist under a decrease repeated IN INFINITUM; and even the
vastest quantity, which can enter into human imagination, must in this
manner be reduced to nothing. Let our first belief be never so strong, it
must infallibly perish by passing through so many new examinations, of
which each diminishes somewhat of its force and vigour. When I reflect on
the natural fallibility of my judgment, I have less confidence in my
opinions, than when I only consider the objects concerning which I
reason; and when I proceed still farther, to turn the scrutiny against
every successive estimation I make of my faculties, all the rules of
logic require a continual diminution, and at last a total extinction of
belief and evidence.

Should it here be asked me, whether I sincerely assent to this argument,
which I seem to take such pains to inculcate, and whether I be really one
of those sceptics, who hold that all is uncertain, and that our judgment
is not in any thing possest of any measures of truth and falshood; I
should reply, that this question is entirely superfluous, and that
neither I, nor any other person was ever sincerely and constantly of that
opinion. Nature, by an absolute and uncontroulable necessity has
determined us to judge as well as to breathe and feel; nor can we any
more forbear viewing certain objects in a stronger and fuller light, upon
account of their customary connexion with a present impression, than we
can hinder ourselves from thinking as long, as we are awake, or seeing
the surrounding bodies, when we turn our eyes towards them in broad
sunshine. Whoever has taken the pains to refute the cavils of this total
scepticism, has really disputed without an antagonist, and endeavoured by
arguments to establish a faculty, which nature has antecedently implanted
in the mind, and rendered unavoidable.

My intention then in displaying so carefully the arguments of that
fantastic sect, is only to make the reader sensible of the truth of my
hypothesis, that all our reasonings concerning causes and effects are
derived from nothing but custom; and that belief is more properly an act
of the, sensitive, than of the cogitative part of our natures. I have
here proved, that the very same principles, which make us form a decision
upon any subject, and correct that decision by the consideration of our
genius and capacity, and of the situation of our mind, when we examined
that subject; I say, I have proved, that these same principles, when
carryed farther, and applied to every new reflex judgment, must, by
continually diminishing the original evidence, at last reduce it to
nothing, and utterly subvert all belief and opinion. If belief,
therefore, were a simple act of the thought, without any peculiar manner
of conception, or the addition of a force and vivacity, it must
infallibly destroy itself, and in every case terminate in a total
suspense of judgment. But as experience will sufficiently convince any
one, who thinks it worth while to try, that though he can find no error in
the foregoing arguments, yet he still continues to believe, and think,
and reason as usual, he may safely conclude, that his reasoning and
belief is some sensation or peculiar manner of conception, which it is
impossible for mere ideas and reflections to destroy.

But here, perhaps, it may be demanded, how it happens, even upon my
hypothesis, that these arguments above-explained produce not a total
suspense of judgment, and after what manner the mind ever retains a
degree of assurance in any subject? For as these new probabilities, which
by their repetition perpetually diminish the original evidence, are
founded on the very same principles, whether of thought or sensation, as
the primary judgment, it may seem unavoidable, that in either case they
must equally subvert it, and by the opposition, either of contrary
thoughts or sensations, reduce the mind to a total uncertainty. I
suppose, there is some question proposed to me, and that after revolving
over the impressions of my memory and senses, and carrying my thoughts
from them to such objects, as are commonly conjoined with them, I feel a
stronger and more forcible conception on the one side, than on the other.
This strong conception forms my first decision. I suppose, that
afterwards I examine my judgment itself, and observing from experience,
that it is sometimes just and sometimes erroneous, I consider it as
regulated by contrary principles or causes, of which some lead to truth,
and some to error; and in ballancing these contrary causes, I diminish by
a new probability the assurance of my first decision. This new
probability is liable to the same diminution as the foregoing, and so on,
IN INFINITUM. It is therefore demanded, how it happens, that even after
all we retain a degree of belief, which is sufficient for our purpose,
either in philosophy or common life.

I answer, that after the first and second decision; as the action of the
mind becomes forced and unnatural, and the ideas faint and obscure; though
the principles of judgment, and the ballancing of opposite causes be the
same as at the very beginning; yet their influence on the imagination,
and the vigour they add to, or diminish from the thought, is by no means
equal. Where the mind reaches not its objects with easiness and facility,
the same principles have not the same effect as in a more natural
conception of the ideas; nor does the imagination feel a sensation, which
holds any proportion with that which arises from its common judgments and
opinions. The attention is on the stretch: The posture of the mind is
uneasy; and the spirits being diverted from their natural course, are not
governed in their movements by the same laws, at least not to the same
degree, as when they flow in their usual channel.

If we desire similar instances, it will not be very difficult to find
them. The present subject of metaphysics will supply us abundantly. The
same argument, which would have been esteemed convincing in a reasoning
concerning history or politics, has little or no influence in these
abstruser subjects, even though it be perfectly comprehended; and that
because there is required a study and an effort of thought, in order to
its being comprehended: And this effort of thought disturbs the operation
of our sentiments, on which the belief depends. The case is the same in
other subjects. The straining of the imagination always hinders the
regular flowing of the passions and sentiments. A tragic poet, that would
represent his heroes as very ingenious and witty in their misfortunes,
would never touch the passions. As the emotions of the soul prevent any
subtile reasoning and reflection, so these latter actions of the mind are
equally prejudicial to the former. The mind, as well as the body, seems
to be endowed with a certain precise degree of force and activity, which
it never employs in one action, but at the expense of all the rest. This
is more evidently true, where the actions are of quite different natures;
since in that case the force of the mind is not only diverted, but even
the disposition changed, so as to render us incapable of a sudden
transition from one action to the other, and still more of performing
both at once. No wonder, then, the conviction, which arises from a
subtile reasoning, diminishes in proportion to the efforts, which the
imagination makes to enter into the reasoning, and to conceive it in all
its parts. Belief, being a lively conception, can never be entire, where
it is not founded on something natural and easy.

This I take to be the true state of the question, and cannot approve of
that expeditious way, which some take with the sceptics, to reject at
once all their arguments without enquiry or examination. If the sceptical
reasonings be strong, say they, it is a proof, that reason may have some
force and authority: if weak, they can never be sufficient to invalidate
all the conclusions of our understanding. This argument is not just;
because the sceptical reasonings, were it possible for them to exist, and
were they not destroyed by their subtility, would be successively both
strong and weak, according to the successive dispositions of the mind.
Reason first appears in possession of the throne, prescribing laws, and
imposing maxims, with an absolute sway and authority. Her enemy,
therefore, is obliged to take shelter under her protection, and by making
use of rational arguments to prove the fallaciousness and imbecility of
reason, produces, in a manner, a patent under her band and seal. This
patent has at first an authority, proportioned to the present and
immediate authority of reason, from which it is derived. But as it is
supposed to be contradictory to reason, it gradually diminishes the force
of that governing power and its own at the same time; till at last they
both vanish away into nothing, by a regulax and just diminution. The
sceptical and dogmatical reasons are of the same kind, though contrary in
their operation and tendency; so that where the latter is strong, it has
an enemy of equal force in the former to encounter; and as their forces
were at first equal, they still continue so, as long as either of them
subsists; nor does one of them lose any force in the contest, without
taking as much from its antagonist. It is happy, therefore, that nature
breaks the force of all sceptical arguments in time, and keeps them from
having any considerable influence on the understanding. Were we to trust
entirely to their self-destruction, that can never take place, until they
have first subverted all conviction, and have totally destroyed human
reason.



SECT. II.  OF SCEPTICISM WITH REGARD TO THE SENSES.


Thus the sceptic still continues to reason and believe, even though be
asserts, that he cannot defend his reason by reason; and by the same rule
he must assent to the principle concerning the existence of body, though
he cannot pretend by any arguments of philosophy to maintain its veracity.
Nature has not left this to his choice, and has doubtless, esteemed it an
affair of too great importance to be trusted to our uncertain reasonings
and speculations. We may well ask, What causes induce us to believe in
the existence of body? but it is in vain to ask, Whether there be body or
not? That is a point, which we must take for granted in all our
reasonings.

The subject, then, of our present enquiry is concerning the causes which
induce us to believe in the existence of body: And my reasonings on this
head I shall begin with a distinction, which at first sight may seem
superfluous, but which will contribute very much to the perfect
understanding of what follows. We ought to examine apart those two
questions, which are commonly confounded together, viz. Why we attribute
a continued existence to objects, even when they are not present to the
senses; and why we suppose them to have an existence DISTINCT from the
mind and perception. Under this last head I comprehend their situation as
well as relations, their external position as well as the independence of
their existence and operation. These two questions concerning the
continued and distinct existence of body are intimately connected
together. For if the objects of our senses continue to exist, even when
they are not perceived, their existence is of course independent of and
distinct from the perception: and vice versa, if their existence be
independent of the perception and distinct from it, they must continue to
exist, even though they be not perceived. But though the decision of the
one question decides the other; yet that we may the more easily discover
the principles of human nature, from whence the decision arises, we shall
carry along with us this distinction, and shall consider, whether it be
the senses, reason, or the imagination, that produces the opinion of a
continued or of a distinct existence. These are the only questions, that
are intelligible on the present subject. For as to the notion of external
existence, when taken for something specially different from our
perceptions [Part. II. Sect. 6.], we have already shewn its absurdity.

To begin with the SENSES, it is evident these faculties are incapable of
giving rise to the notion of the continued existence of their objects,
after they no longer appear to the senses. For that is a contradiction in
terms, and suppose that the senses continue to operate, even after they
have ceased all manner of operation. These faculties, therefore, if they
have any influence in the present case, must produce the opinion of a
distinct, not of a continued existence; and in order to that, must
present their impressions either as images and representations, or as
these very distinct and external existences.

That our senses offer not their impressions as the images of something
distinct, or independent, and external, is evident; because they convey
to us nothing but a single perception, and never give us the least
intimation of any thing beyond. A single perception can never produce the
idea of a double existence, but by some inference either of the reason or
imagination. When the mind looks farther than what immediately appears to
it, its conclusions can never be put to the account of the senses; and it
certainly looks farther, when from a single perception it infers a double
existence, and supposes the relations of resemblance and causation
betwixt them.

If our senses, therefore, suggest any idea of distinct existences, they
must convey the impressions as those very existences, by a kind of
fallacy and illusion. Upon this bead we may observe, that all sensations
are felt by the mind, such as they really are, and that when we doubt,
whether they present themselves as distinct objects, or as mere
impressions, the difficulty is not concerning their nature, but
concerning their relations and situation. Now if the senses presented
our impressions as external to, and independent of ourselves, both the
objects and ourselves must be obvious to our senses, otherwise they coued
not be compared by these faculties. The difficulty, then, is how fax we
are ourselves the objects of our senses.

It is certain there is no question in philosophy more abstruse than that
concerning identity, and the nature of the uniting principle, which
constitutes a person. So far from being able by our senses merely to
determine this question, we must have recourse to the most profound
metaphysics to give a satisfactory answer to it; and in common life it is
evident these ideas of self and person are never very fixed nor
determinate. It is absurd, therefore, to imagine the senses can ever
distinguish betwixt ourselves and external objects.

Add to this, that every impression, external and internal, passions,
affections, sensations, pains and pleasures, are originally on the same
footing; and that whatever other differences we may observe among them,
they appear, all of them, in their true colours, as impressions or
perceptions. And indeed, if we consider the matter aright, it is scarce
possible it should be otherwise, nor is it conceivable that our senses
should be more capable of deceiving us in the situation and relations,
than in the nature of our impressions. For since all actions and
sensations of the mind are known to us by consciousness, they must
necessarily appear in every particular what they are, and be what they
appear. Every thing that enters the mind, being in reality a perception,
it is impossible any thing should to feeling appear different. This were
to suppose, that even where we are most intimately conscious, we might be
mistaken.

But not to lose time in examining, whether it is possible for our senses
to deceive us, and represent our perceptions as distinct from ourselves,
that is as external to and independent of us; let us consider whether
they really do so, and whether this error proceeds from an immediate
sensation, or from some other causes.

To begin with the question concerning EXTERNAL existence, it may perhaps
be said, that setting aside the metaphysical question of the identity of
a thinking substance, our own body evidently belongs to us; and as
several impressions appear exterior to the body, we suppose them also
exterior to ourselves. The paper, on which I write at present, is beyond
my hand. The table is beyond the paper. The walls of the chamber beyond
the table. And in casting my eye towards the window, I perceive a great
extent of fields and buildings beyond my chamber. From all this it may be
infered, that no other faculty is required, beside the senses, to
convince us of the external existence of body. But to prevent this
inference, we need only weigh the three following considerations. First,
That, properly speaking, it is not our body we perceive, when we regard
our limbs and members, but certain impressions, which enter by the
senses; so that the ascribing a real and corporeal existence to these
impressions, or to their objects, is an act of the mind as difficult to
explain, as that which we examine at present. Secondly, Sounds, and
tastes, and smelts, though commonly regarded by the mind as continued
independent qualities, appear not to have any existence in extension, and
consequently cannot appear to the senses as situated externally to the
body. The reason, why we ascribe a, place to them, shall be: considered
afterwards. Thirdly, Even our sight informs us not of distance or outness
(so to speak) immediately and without a certain reasoning and experience,
as is acknowledged by the most rational philosophers.

As to the independency of our perceptions on ourselves, this can never be
an object of the senses; but any opinion we form concerning it, must be
derived from experience and observation: And we shall see afterwards,
that our conclusions from experience are far from being favourable to the
doctrine of the independency of our perceptions. Mean while we may
observe that when we talk of real distinct existences, we have commonly
more in our eye their independency than external situation in place, and
think an object has a sufficient reality, when its Being is
uninterrupted, and independent of the incessant revolutions, which we are
conscious of in ourselves.

Thus to resume what I have said concerning the senses; they give us no
notion of continued existence, because they cannot operate beyond the
extent, in which they really operate. They as little produce the opinion
of a distinct existence, because they neither can offer it to the mind as
represented, nor as original. To offer it as represented, they must
present both an object and an image. To make it appear as original, they
must convey a falshood; and this falshood must lie in the relations and
situation: In order to which they must be able to compare the object with
ourselves; and even in that case they do not, nor is it possible they
should, deceive us. We may, therefore, conclude with certainty, that the
opinion of a continued and of a distinct existence never arises from the
senses.

To confirm this we may observe, that there are three different kinds of
impressions conveyed by the senses. The first are those of the figure,
bulk, motion and solidity of bodies. The second those of colours, tastes,
smells, sounds, heat and cold. The third are the pains and pleasures,
that arise from the application of objects to our bodies, as by the
cutting of our flesh with steel, and such like. Both philosophers and the
vulgar suppose the first of these to have a distinct continued existence.
The vulgar only regard the second as on the same footing. Both
philosophers and the vulgar, again, esteem the third to be merely
perceptions and consequently interrupted and dependent beings.

Now it is evident, that, whatever may be our philosophical opinion,
colours, Sounds, heat and cold, as far as appears to the senses, exist
after the same manner with motion and solidity, and that the difference
we make betwixt them in this respect, arises not from the mere
perception. So strong the prejudice for the distinct continued existence
Of the former qualities, that when the contrary opinion is advanced by
modern philosophers, people imagine they can almost refute it from their
feeling and experience, and that their very senses contradict this
philosophy. It is also evident, that colours, sounds, &c. are originally
on the same footing with the pain that arises from steel, and pleasure
that proceeds from a fire; and that the difference betwixt them is
founded neither on perception nor reason, but on the imagination. For as
they are confest to be, both of them, nothing but perceptions arising
from the particular configurations and motions of the parts of body,
wherein possibly can their difference consist? Upon the whole, then, we
may conclude, that as far as the senses are judges, all perceptions are
the same in the manner of their existence.

We may also observe in this instance of sounds and colours, that we can
attribute a distinct continued existence to objects without ever
consulting REASON, or weighing our opinions by any philosophical
principles. And indeed, whatever convincing arguments philosophers may
fancy they can produce to establish the belief of objects independent of
the mind, it is obvious these arguments are known but to very few, and
that it is not by them, that children, peasants, and the greatest part of
mankind are induced to attribute objects to some impressions, and deny
them to others. Accordingly we find, that all the conclusions, which the
vulgar form on this head, are directly contrary to those, which are
confirmed by philosophy. For philosophy informs us, that every thing,
which appears to the mind, is nothing but a perception, and is
interrupted, and dependent on the mind: whereas the vulgar confound
perceptions and objects, and attribute a distinct continued existence to
the very things they feel or see. This sentiment, then, as it is entirely
unreasonable, must proceed from some other faculty than the
understanding. To which we may add, that as long as we take our
perceptions and objects to be the same, we can never infer the existence
of the one from that of the other, nor form any argument from the
relation of cause and effect; which is the only one that earl assure us
of matter of fact. Even after we distinguish our perceptions from our
objects, it will appear presently, that we are still incapable of
reasoning from the existence of one to that of the other: So that upon
the whole our reason neither does, nor is it possible it ever should,
upon any supposition, give us an assurance of the continued and distinct
existence of body. That opinion must be entirely owing to the
IMAGINATION: which must now be the subject of our enquiry.

Since all impressions are internal and perishing existences, and appear
as such, the notion of their distinct and continued existence must arise
from a concurrence of some of their qualities with the qualities of the
imagination, and since this notion does not extend to all of them, it
must arise from certain qualities peculiar to some impressions. It will
therefore be easy for us to discover these qualities by a comparison of
the impressions, to which we attribute a distinct and continued
existence, with those, which we regard as internal and perishing.

We may observe, then, that it is neither upon account of the
involuntariness of certain impressions, as is commonly supposed, nor of
their superior force and violence, that we attribute to them a reality,
and continued existence, which we refuse to others, that are voluntary or
feeble. For it is evident our pains and pleasures, our passions and
affections, which we never suppose to have any existence beyond our
perception, operate with greater violence, and are equally involuntary,
as the impressions of figure and extension, colour and sound, which we
suppose to be permanent beings. The heat of a fire, when moderate, is
supposed to exist in the fire; but the pain, which it causes upon a near
approach, is not taken to have any being, except in the perception.

These vulgar opinions, then, being rejected, we must search for some
other hypothesis, by which we may discover those peculiar qualities in
our impressions, which makes us attribute to them a distinct and
continued existence.

After a little examination, we shall find, that all those objects, to
which we attribute a continued existence, have a peculiar constancy,
which distinguishes them from the impressions, whose existence depends
upon our perception. Those mountains, and houses, and trees, which lie at
present under my eye, have always appeared to me in the same order; and
when I lose sight of them by shutting my eyes or turning my head, I soon
after find them return upon me without the least alteration. My bed and
table, my books and papers, present themselves in the same uniform
manner, and change not upon account of any interruption in my seeing or
perceivilng them. This is the case with all the impressions, whose
objects are supposed to have an external existence; and is the case with
no other impressions, whether gentle or violent, voluntary or
involuntary.

This constancy, however, is not so perfect as not to admit of very
considerable exceptions. Bodies often change their position and
qualities, and after a little absence or interruption may become hardly
knowable. But here it is observable, that even in these changes they
preserve a coherence, and have a regular dependence on each other; which
is the foundation of a kind of reasoning from causation, and produces the
opinion of their continued existence. When I return to my chamber after
an hour's absence, I find not my fire in the same situation, in which I
left it: But then I am accustomed in other instances to see a like
alteration produced in a like time, whether I am present or absent, near
or remote. This coherence, therefore, in their changes is one of the
characteristics of external objects, as well as their constancy.

Having found that the opinion of the continued existence of body depends
on the COHERENCE, and CONSTANCY of certain impressions, I now proceed to
examine after what manner these qualities give rise to so extraordinary
an opinion. To begin with the coherence; we may observe, that though those
internal impressions, which we regard as fleeting and perishing, have
also a certain coherence or regularity in their appearances, yet it is of
somewhat a different nature, from that which we discover in bodies. Our
passions are found by experience to have a mutual connexion with and
dependence on each other; but on no occasion is it necessary to suppose,
that they have existed and operated, when they were not perceived, in
order to preserve the same dependence and connexion, of which we have had
experience. The case is not the same with relation to external objects.
Those require a continued existence, or otherwise lose, in a great
measure, the regularity of their operation. I am here seated in my
chamber with my face to the fire; and all the objects, that strike my
senses, are contained in a few yards around me. My memory, indeed,
informs me of the existence of many objects; but then this information
extends not beyond their past existence, nor do either my senses or
memory give any testimony to the continuance of their being. When
therefore I am thus seated, and revolve over these thoughts, I hear on a
sudden a noise as of a door turning upon its hinges; and a little after
see a porter, who advances towards me. This gives occasion to many new
reflections and reasonings. First, I never have observed, that this noise
coued proceed from any thing but the motion of a door; and therefore
conclude, that the present phaenomenon is a contradiction to all past
experience, unless the door, which I remember on the other side the
chamber, be still in being. Again, I have always found, that a human body
was possest of a quality, which I call gravity, and which hinders it from
mounting in the air, as this porter must have done to arrive at my
chamber, unless the stairs I remember be not annihilated by my absence.
But this is not all. I receive a letter, which upon, opening it I
perceive by the hand-writing and subscription to have come from a friend,
who says he is two hundred leagues distant. It is evident I can never
account for this phenomenon, conformable to my experience in other
instances, without spreading out in my mind the whole sea and continent
between us, and supposing the effects and continued existence of posts
and ferries, according to my Memory and observation. To consider these
phaenomena of the porter and letter in a certain light, they are
contradictions to common experience, and may be regarded as objections to
those maxims, which we form concerning the connexions of causes and
effects. I am accustomed to hear such a sound, and see such an object in
motion at the same time. I have not received in this particular instance
both these perceptions. These observations are contrary, unless I suppose
that the door still remains, and that it was opened without my perceiving
it: And this supposition, which was at first entirely arbitrary and
hypothetical, acquires a force and evidence by its being the only one,
upon which I can reconcile these contradictions. There is scarce a moment
of my life, wherein there is not a similar instance presented to me, and
I have not occasion to suppose the continued existence of objects, in
order to connect their past and present appearances, and give them such
an union with each other, as I have found by experience to be suitable to
their particular natures and circumstances. Here then I am naturally led
to regard the world, as something real and durable, and as preserving its
existence, even when it is no longer present to my perception.

But though this conclusion from the coherence of appearances may seem to
be of the same nature with our reasonings concerning causes and effects;
as being derived from custom, and regulated by past experience; we shall
find upon examination, that they are at the bottom considerably different
from each other, and that this inference arises from the understanding,
and from custom in an indirect and oblique manner. For it will readily be
allowed, that since nothing is ever really present to the mind, besides
its own perceptions, it is not only impossible, that any habit should ever
be acquired otherwise than by the regular succession of these
perceptions, but also that any habit should ever exceed that degree of
regularity. Any degree, therefore, of regularity in our perceptions, can
never be a foundation for us to infer a, greater degree of regularity in
some objects, which are not perceived; since this supposes a
contradiction, viz. a habit acquired by what was never present to the
mind. But it is evident, that whenever we infer the continued existence
of the objects of sense from their coherence, and the frequency of their
union, it is in order to bestow on the objects a greater regularity than
what is observed in our mere perceptions. We remark a connexion betwixt
two kinds of objects in their past appearance to the senses, but are not
able to observe this connexion to be perfectly constant, since the
turning about of our head or the shutting of our eyes is able to break
it. What then do we suppose in this case, but that these objects still
continue their usual connexion, notwithstanding their apparent
interruption, and that the irregular appearances are joined by something,
of which we are insensible? But as all reasoning concerning matters of
fact arises only from custom, and custom can only be the effect of
repeated perceptions, the extending of custom and reasoning beyond the
perceptions can never be the direct and natural effect of the constant
repetition and connexion, but must arise from the co-operation of some
other principles.

I have already observed [Part II, Sect. 4.], in examining the foundation
of mathematics, that the imagination, when set into any train of thinking,
is apt to continue, even when its object fails it, and like a galley put
in motion by the oars, carries on its course without any new impulse. This
I have assigned for the reason, why, after considering several loose
standards of equality, and correcting them by each other, we proceed to
imagine so correct and exact a standard of that relation, as is not liable
to the least error or variation. The same principle makes us easily
entertain this opinion of the continued existence of body. Objects have a
certain coherence even as they appear to our senses; but this coherence is
much greater and more uniform, if we suppose the object.% to have a
continued existence; and as the mind is once in the train of observing an
uniformity among objects, it naturally continues, till it renders the
uniformity as compleat as possible. The simple supposition of their
continued existence suffices for this purpose, and gives us a notion of a
much greater regularity among objects, than what they have when we look
no farther than our senses.

But whatever force we may ascribe to this principle, I am afraid it is too
weak to support alone so vast an edifice, as is that of the continued
existence of all external bodies; and that we must join the constancy of
their appearance to the coherence, in order to give a satisfactory
account of that opinion. As the explication of this will lead me into a
considerable compass of very profound reasoning; I think it proper, in
order to avoid confusion, to give a short sketch or abridgment of my
system, and afterwards draw out all its parts in their full compass. This
inference from the constancy of our perceptions, like the precedent from
their coherence, gives rise to the opinion of the continued existence of
body, which is prior to that of its distinct existence, and produces that
latter principle.

When we have been accustomed to observe a constancy in certain
impressions, and have found, that the perception of the sun or ocean, for
instance, returns upon us after an absence or annihilation with like
parts and in a like order, as at its first appearance, we are not apt to
regard these interrupted perceptions as different, (which they really
are) but on the contrary consider them as individually the same, upon
account of their resemblance. But as this interruption of their existence
is contrary to their perfect identity, and makes us regard the first
impression as annihilated, and the second as newly created, we find
ourselves somewhat at a loss, and are involved in a kind of
contradiction. In order to free ourselves from this difficulty, we
disguise, as much as possible, the interruption, or rather remove it
entirely, by supposing that these interrupted perceptions are connected
by a real existence, of which we are insensible. This supposition, or
idea of continued existence, acquires a force and vivacity from the
memory of these broken impressions, and from that propensity, which they
give us, to suppose them the same; and according to the precedent
reasoning, the very essence of belief consists in the force and vivacity
of the conception.

In order to justify this system, there are four things requisite. First,
To explain the PRINCIPIUM INDIVIDUATIONIS, or principle of identity.
Secondly, Give a reason, why the resemblance of our broken and
interrupted perceptions induces us to attribute an identity to them.
Thirdly, Account for that propensity, which this illusion gives, to
unite these broken appearances by a continued existence. Fourthly and
lastly, Explain that force and vivacity of conception, which arises from
the propensity.

First, As to the principle of individuation; we may observe, that the
view of any one object is not sufficient to convey the idea of identity.
For in that proposition, an object is the same with itself, if the idea
expressed by the word, object, were no ways distinguished from that meant
by itself; we really should mean nothing, nor would the proposition
contain a predicate and a subject, which however are implyed in this
affirmation. One single object conveys the idea of unity, not that of
identity.

On the other hand, a multiplicity of objects can never convey this idea,
however resembling they may be supposed. The mind always pronounces the
one not to be the other, and considers them as forming two, three, or any
determinate number of objects, whose existences are entirely distinct and
independent.

Since then both number and unity are incompatible with the relation of
identity, it must lie in something that is neither of them. But to tell
the truth, at first sight this seems utterly impossible. Betwixt unity
and number there can be no medium; no more than betwixt existence and
nonexistence. After one object is supposed to exist, we must either
suppose another also to exist; in which case we have the idea of number:
Or we must suppose it not to exist; in which case the first object
remains at unity.

To remove this difficulty, let us have recourse to the idea of time or
duration. I have already observd [Part II, Sect. 5.], that time, in a
strict sense, implies succession, and that when we apply its idea to any
unchangeable object, it is only by a fiction of the imagination, by which
the unchangeable object is supposd to participate of the changes of the
co-existent objects, and in particular of that of our perceptions. This
fiction of the imagination almost universally takes place; and it is by
means of it, that a single object, placd before us, and surveyd for any
time without our discovering in it any interruption or variation, is able
to give us a notion of identity. For when we consider any two points of
this time, we may place them in different lights: We may either survey
them at the very same instant; in which case they give us the idea of
number, both by themselves and by the object; which must be multiplyd, in
order to be conceivd at once, as existent in these two different points
of time: Or on the other hand, we may trace the succession of time by a
like succession of ideas, and conceiving first one moment, along with the
object then existent, imagine afterwards a change in the time without any
VARIATION or INTERRUPTION in the object; in which case it gives us the
idea of unity. Here then is an idea, which is a medium betwixt unity and.
number; or more properly speaking, is either of them, according to the
view, in which we take it: And this idea we call that of identity. We
cannot, in any propriety of speech, say, that an object is the same with
itself, unless we mean, that the object existent at one time is the same
with itself existent at another. By this means we make a difference,
betwixt the idea meant by the word, OBJECT, and that meant by ITSELF,
without going the length of number, and at the same time without
restraining ourselves to a strict and absolute unity.

Thus the principle of individuation is nothing but the INVARIABLENESS and
UNINTERRUPTEDNESS of any object, thro a supposd variation of time, by
which the mind can trace it in the different periods of its existence,
without any break of the view, and without being obligd to form the idea
of multiplicity or number.

I now proceed to explain the SECOND part of my system, and shew why the
constancy of our perceptions makes us ascribe to them a perfect numerical
identity, tho there be very long intervals betwixt their appearance, and
they have only one of the essential qualities of identity, VIZ,
INVARIABLENESS. That I may avoid all ambiguity and confusion on this
head, I shall observe, that I here account for the opinions and belief of
the vulgar with regard to the existence of body; and therefore must
entirely conform myself to their manner of thinking and of expressing
themselves. Now we have already observd, that however philosophers may
distinguish betwixt the objects and perceptions of the senses; which they
suppose co-existent and resembling; yet this is a distinction, which is
not comprehended by the generality of mankind, who as they perceive only
one being, can never assent to the opinion of a double existence and
representation. Those very sensations, which enter by the eye or ear, are
with them the true objects, nor can they readily conceive that this pen
or paper, which is immediately perceivd, represents another, which is
different from, but resembling it. In order, therefore, to accommodate
myself to their notions, I shall at first suppose; that there is only a
single existence, which I shall call indifferently OBJECT or PERCEPTION,
according as it shall seem best to suit my purpose, understanding by both
of them what any common man means by a hat, or shoe, or stone, or any
other impression, conveyd to him by his senses. I shall be sure to give
warning, when I return to a more philosophical way of speaking and
thinking.

To enter, therefore, upon the question concerning the source of the error
and deception with regard to identity, when we attribute it to our
resembling perceptions, notwithstanding their interruption; I must here
recal an observation, which I have already provd and explaind
[Part II. Sect. 5.]. Nothing is more apt to make us mistake one idea for
another, than any relation betwixt them, which associates them together in
the imagination, and makes it pass with facility from one to the other. Of
all relations, that of resemblance is in this respect the most
efficacious; and that because it not only causes an association of ideas,
but also of dispositions, and makes us conceive the one idea by an act or
operation of the mind, similar to that by which we conceive the other.
This circumstance I have observd to be of great moment; and we may
establish it for a general rule, that whatever ideas place the mind in the
same disposition or in similar ones, are very apt to be confounded. The
mind readily passes from one to the other, and perceives not the change
without a strict attention, of which, generally speaking, it is wholly
incapable.

In order to apply this general maxim, we must first examine the
disposition of the mind in viewing any object which preserves a perfect
identity, and then find some other object, that is confounded with it, by
causing a similar disposition. When we fix our thought on any object, and
suppose it to continue the same for some time; it is evident we suppose
the change to lie only in the time, and never exert ourselves to produce
any new image or idea of the object. The faculties of the mind repose
themselves in a manner, and take no more exercise, than what is necessary
to continue that idea, of which we were formerly possest, and which
subsists without variation or interruption. The passage from one moment
to another is scarce felt, and distinguishes not itself by a different
perception or idea, which may require a different direction of the
spirits, in order to its conception.

Now what other objects, beside identical ones, are capable of placing the
mind in the same disposition, when it considers them, and of causing the
same uninterrupted passage of the imagination from one idea to another?
This question is of the last importance. For if we can find any such
objects, we may certainly conclude, from the foregoing principle, that
they are very naturally confounded with identical ones, and are taken for
them in most of our reasonings. But though this question be very
important, it is not very difficult nor doubtful. For I immediately reply,
that a succession of related objects places the mind in this disposition,
and is considered with the same smooth and uninterrupted progress of the
imagination, as attends the view of the same invariable object. The very
nature and essence of relation is to connect our ideas with each other,
and upon the appearance of one, to facilitate the transition to its
correlative. The passage betwixt related ideas is, therefore, so smooth
and easy, that it produces little alteration on the mind, and seems like
the continuation of the same action; and as the continuation of the same
action is an effect of the continued view of the same object, it is for
this reason we attribute sameness to every succession of related objects.
The thought slides along the succession with equal facility, as if it
considered only one object; and therefore confounds the succession with
the identity.

We shall afterwards see many instances of this tendency of relation to
make us ascribe an identity to different objects; but shall here confine
ourselves to the present subject. We find by experience, that there is
such a constancy in almost all the impressions of the senses, that their
interruption produces no alteration on them, and hinders them not from
returning the same in appearance and in situation as at their first
existence. I survey the furniture of my chamber; I shut my eyes, and
afterwards open them; and find the new perceptions to resemble perfectly
those, which formerly struck my senses. This resemblance is observed in a
thousand instances, and naturally connects together our ideas of these
interrupted perceptions by the strongest relation. and conveys the mind
with an easy transition from one to another. An easy transition or
passage of the imagination, along the ideas of these different and
interrupted perceptions, is almost the same disposition of mind with that
in which we consider one constant and uninterrupted perception. It is
therefore very natural for us to mistake the one for the other.

[Footnote 9  This reasoning, it must be confest, is somewhat abstruse, and
difficult to be comprehended; but it is remarkable, that this very
difficulty may be converted into a proof of the reasoning. We may
observe, that there are two relations, and both of them resemblances,
which contribute to our mistaking the succession of our interrupted
perceptions for an identical object. The first is, the resemblance of the
perceptions: The second is the resemblance, which the act of the mind in
surveying a succession of resembling objects bears to that in surveying
an identical object. Now these resemblances we are apt to confound with
each other; and it is natural we shoud, according to this very reasoning.
But let us keep them distinct, and we shall find no difficulty in
conceiving the precedent argument.]

The persons, who entertain this opinion concerning the identity of our
resembling perceptions, are in general an the unthinking and
unphilosophical part of mankind, (that is, all of us, at one time or
other) and consequently such as suppose their perceptions to be their
only objects, and never think of a double existence internal and
external, representing and represented. The very image, which is present
to the senses, is with us the real body; and it is to these interrupted
images we ascribe a perfect identity. But as the interruption of the
appearance seems contrary to the identity, and naturally leads us to
regard these resembling perceptions as different from each other, we here
find ourselves at a loss how to reconcile such opposite opinions. The
smooth passage of the imagination along the ideas of the resembling
perceptions makes us ascribe to them a perfect identity. The interrupted
manner of their appearance makes us consider them as so many resembling,
but still distinct beings, which appear after certain intervals. The
perplexity arising from this contradiction produces a propension to unite
these broken appearances by the fiction of a continued existence, which
is the third part of that hypothesis I proposed to explain.

Nothing is more certain from experience, than that any contradiction
either to the sentiments or passions gives a sensible uneasiness, whether
it proceeds from without or from within; from the opposition of external
objects, or from the combat of internal principles. On the contrary,
whatever strikes in with the natural propensities, and either externally
forwards their satisfaction, or internally concurs with their movements,
is sure to give a sensible pleasure. Now there being here an opposition
betwixt the notion of the identity of resembling perceptions, and the
interruption of their appearance, the mind must be uneasy in that
situation, and will naturally seek relief from the uneasiness. Since the
uneasiness arises from the opposition of two contrary principles, it must
look for relief by sacrificing the one to the other. But as the smooth
passage of our thought along our resembling perceptions makes us ascribe
to them an identity, we can never without reluctance yield up that
opinion. We must, therefore, turn to the other side, and suppose that our
perceptions are no longer interrupted, but preserve a continued as well
as an invariable existence, and are by that means entirely the same. But
here the interruptions in the appearance of these perceptions are so long
and frequent, that it is impossible to overlook them; and as the
appearance of a perception in the mind and its existence seem at first
sight entirely the same, it may be doubted, whether we can ever assent to
so palpable a contradiction, and suppose a perception to exist without
being present to the mind. In order to clear up this matter, and learn
how the interruption in the appearance of a perception implies not
necessarily an interruption in its existence, it will be proper to touch
upon some principles, which we shall have occasion to explain more fully
afterwards. [Sect. 6.]

We may begin with observing, that the difficulty in the present case is
not concerning the matter of fact, or whether the mind forms such a
conclusion concerning the continued existence of its perceptions, but
only concerning the manner in which the conclusion is formed, and
principles from which it is derived. It is certain, that almost all
mankind, and even philosophers themselves, for the greatest part of their
lives, take their perceptions to be their only objects, and suppose, that
the very being, which is intimately present to the mind, is the real body
or material existence. It is also certain, that this very perception or
object is supposed to have a continued uninterrupted being, and neither
to be annihilated by our absence, nor to be brought into existence by our
presence. When we are absent from it, we say it still exists, but that we
do not feel, we do not see it. When we are present, we say we feel, or
see it. Here then may arise two questions; First, How we can satisfy
ourselves in supposing a perception to be absent from the mind without
being annihilated. Secondly, After what manner we conceive an object to
become present to the mind, without some new creation of a perception or
image; and what we mean by this seeing, and feeling, and perceiving.

As to the first question; we may observe, that what we. call a mind, is
nothing but a heap or collection of different perceptions, united
together by certain relations, and supposed, though falsely, to be endowed
with a perfect simplicity and identity. Now as every perception is
distinguishable from another, and may be considered as separately
existent; it evidently follows, that there is no absurdity in separating
any particular perception from the mind; that is, in breaking off all its
relations, with that connected mass of perceptions, which constitute a
thinking being.

The same reasoning affords us an answer to the second question. If the
name of perception renders not this separation from a mind absurd and
contradictory, the name of object, standing for the very same thing, can
never render their conjunction impossible. External objects are seen, and
felt, and become present to the mind; that is, they acquire such a
relation to a connected heap of perceptions, as to influence them very
considerably in augmenting their number by present reflections and
passions, and in storing the memory with ideas. The same continued and
uninterrupted Being may, therefore, be sometimes present to the mind, and
sometimes absent from it, without any real or essential change in the
Being itself. An interrupted appearance to the senses implies not
necessarily an interruption in the existence. The supposition of the
continued existence of sensible objects or perceptions involves no
contradiction. We may easily indulge our inclination to that supposition.
When the exact resemblance of our perceptions makes us ascribe to them an
identity, we may remove the seeming interruption by feigning a continued
being, which may fill those intervals, and preserve a perfect and entire
identity to our perceptions.

But as we here not only feign but believe this continued existence, the
question is, from whence arises such a belief; and this question leads us
to the fourth member of this system. It has been proved already, that
belief in general consists in nothing, but the vivacity of an idea; and
that an idea may acquire this vivacity by its relation to some present
impression. Impressions are naturally the most vivid perceptions of the
mind; and this quality is in part conveyed by the relation to every
connected idea. The relation causes a smooth passage from the impression
to the idea, and even gives a propensity to that passage. The mind falls
so easily from the one perception to the other, that it scarce perceives
the change, but retains in the second a considerable share of the
vivacity of the first. It is excited by the lively impression; and this
vivacity is conveyed to the related idea, without any great diminution in
the passage, by reason of the smooth transition and the propensity of the
imagination.

But suppose, that this propensity arises from some other principle,
besides that of relation; it is evident it must still have the same
effect, and convey the vivacity from the impression to the idea. Now this
is exactly the present case. Our memory presents us with a vast number of
instances of perceptions perfectly resembling each other, that return at
different distances of time, and after considerable interruptions. This
resemblance gives us a propension to consider these interrupted
perceptions as the same; and also a propension to connect them by a
continued existence, in order to justify this identity, and avoid the
contradiction, in which the interrupted appearance of these perceptions
seems necessarily to involve us. Here then we have a propensity to feign
the continued existence of all sensible objects; and as this propensity
arises from some lively impressions of the memory, it bestows a vivacity
on that fiction: or in other words, makes us believe the continued
existence of body. If sometimes we ascribe a continued existence to
objects, which are perfectly new to us, and of whose constancy and
coherence we have no experience, it is because the manner, in which they
present themselves to our senses, resembles that of constant and coherent
objects; and this resemblance is a source of reasoning and analogy, and
leads us to attribute the same qualities to similar objects.

I believe an intelligent reader will find less difficulty to assent to
this system, than to comprehend it fully and distinctly, and will allow,
after a little reflection, that every part carries its own proof along
with it. It is indeed evident, that as the vulgar suppose their
perceptions to be their only objects, and at the same time believe the
continued existence of matter, we must account for the origin of the
belief upon that supposition. Now upon that supposition, it is a false
opinion that any of our objects, or perceptions, are identically the same
after an interruption; and consequently the opinion of their identity can
never arise from reason, but must arise from the imagination. The
imagination is seduced into such an opinion only by means of the
resemblance of certain perceptions; since we find they are only our
resembling perceptions, which we have a propension to suppose the same.
This propension to bestow an identity on our resembling perceptions,
produces the fiction of a continued existence; since that fiction, as
well as the identity, is really false, as is acknowledged by all
philosophers, and has no other effect than to remedy the interruption of
our perceptions, which is the only circumstance that is contrary to their
identity. In the last place this propension causes belief by means of the
present impressions of the memory; since without the remembrance of
former sensations, it is plain we never should have any belief of the
continued existence of body. Thus in examining all these parts, we find
that each of them is supported by the strongest proofs: and that all of
them together form a consistent system, which is perfectly convincing. A
strong propensity or inclination alone, without any present impression,
will sometimes cause a belief or opinion. How much more when aided by
that circumstance?

But though we are led after this manner, by the natural propensity of the
imagination, to ascribe a continued existence to those sensible objects
or perceptions, which we find to resemble each other in their interrupted
appearance; yet a very little reflection and philosophy is sufficient to
make us perceive the fallacy of that opinion. I have already observed,
that there is an intimate connexion betwixt those two principles, of a
continued and of a distinct or independent existence, and that we no
sooner establish the one than the other follows, as a necessary
consequence. It is the opinion of a continued existence, which first takes
place, and without much study or reflection draws the other along with
it, wherever the mind follows its first and most natural tendency. But
when we compare experiments, and reason a little upon them, we quickly
perceive, that the doctrine of the independent existence of our sensible
perceptions is contrary to the plainest experience. This leads us
backward upon our footsteps to perceive our error in attributing a
continued existence to our perceptions, and is the origin of many very
curious opinions, which we shall here endeavour to account for.

It will first be proper to observe a few of those experiments, which
convince us, that our perceptions are not possest of any independent
existence. When we press one eye with a finger, we immediately perceive
all the objects to become double, and one half of them to be removed from
their common and natural position. But as we do not attribute to
continued existence to both these perceptions, and as they are both of
the same nature, we clearly perceive, that all our perceptions are
dependent on our organs, and the disposition of our nerves and animal
spirits. This opinion is confirmed by the seeming encrease and diminution
of objects, according to their distance; by the apparent alterations in
their figure; by the changes in their colour and other qualities from our
sickness and distempers: and by an infinite number of other experiments
of the same kind; from all which we learn, that our sensible perceptions
are not possest of any distinct or independent existence.

The natural consequence of this reasoning should be, that our perceptions
have no more a continued than an independent existence; and indeed
philosophers have so far run into this opinion, that they change their
system, and distinguish, (as we shall do for the future) betwixt
perceptions and objects, of which the former are supposed to be
interrupted, and perishing, and different at every different return; the
latter to be uninterrupted, and to preserve a continued existence and
identity. But however philosophical this new system may be esteemed, I
assert that it is only a palliative remedy, and that it contains all the
difficulties of the vulgar system, with some others, that are peculiar to
itself. There are no principles either of the understanding or fancy,
which lead us directly to embrace this opinion of the double existence of
perceptions and objects, nor can we arrive at it but by passing through
the common hypothesis of the identity and continuance of our interrupted
perceptions. Were we not first perswaded, that our perceptions are our
only objects, and continue to exist even when they no longer make their
appearance to the senses, we should never be led to think, that our
perceptions and objects are different, and that our objects alone
preserve a continued existence. The latter hypothesis has no primary
recommendation either to reason or the imagination, but acquires all its
influence on the imagination from the former. This proposition contains
two parts, which we shall endeavour to prove as distinctly and clearly,
as such abstruse subjects will permit.

As to the first part of the proposition, that this philosophical
hypothesis has no primary recommendation, either to reason, or the
imagination, we may soon satisfy ourselves with regard to reason by the
following reflections. The only existences, of which we are certain, are
perceptions, which being immediately present to us by consciousness,
command our strongest assent, and are the first foundation of all our
conclusions. The only conclusion we can draw from the existence of one
thing to that of another, is by means of the relation of cause and
effect, which shews, that there is a connexion betwixt them, and that the
existence of one is dependent on that of the other. The idea of this
relation is derived from past experience, by which we find, that two
beings are constantly conjoined together, and are always present at once
to the mind. But as no beings are ever present to the mind but
perceptions; it follows that we may observe a conjunction or a relation
of cause and effect between different perceptions, but can never observe
it between perceptions and objects. It is impossible, therefore, that from
the existence or any of the qualities of the former, we can ever form any
conclusion concerning the existence of the latter, or ever satisfy our
reason in this particular.

It is no less certain, that this philosophical system has no primary
recommendation to the imagination, and that that faculty would never, of
itself, and by its original tendency, have fallen upon such a principle.
I confess it will be somewhat difficult to prove this to the fall
satisfaction of the reader; because it implies a negative, which in many
cases will not admit of any positive proof. If any one would take the
pains to examine this question, and would invent a system, to account for
the direct origin of this opinion from the imagination, we should be
able, by the examination of that system, to pronounce a certain judgment
in the present subject. Let it be taken for granted, that our perceptions
are broken, and interrupted, and however like, are still different from
each other; and let any one upon this supposition shew why the fancy,
directly and immediately, proceeds to the belief of another existence,
resembling these perceptions in their nature, but yet continued, and
uninterrupted, and identical; and after he has done this to my
satisfaction, I promise to renounce my present opinion. Mean while I
cannot forbear concluding, from the very abstractedness and difficulty of
the first supposition, that it is an improper subject for the fancy to
work upon. Whoever would explain the origin of the common opinion
concerning the continued and distinct existence of body, must take the
mind in its common situation, and must proceed upon the supposition, that
our perceptions are our only objects, and continue to exist even when
they are not perceived. Though this opinion be false, it is the most
natural of any, and has alone any primary recommendation to the fancy.

As to the second part of the proposition, that the philosophical system
acquires all its influence on the imagination from the vulgar one; we may
observe, that this is a natural and unavoidable consequence of the
foregoing conclusion, that it has no primary recommendation to reason or
the imagination. For as the philosophical system is found by experience
to take hold of many minds, and in particular of all those, who reflect
ever so little on this subject, it must derive all its authority from the
vulgar system; since it has no original authority of its own. The manner,
in which these two systems, though directly contrary, are connected
together, may be explains, as follows.

The imagination naturally runs on in this train of thinking. Our
perceptions are our only objects: Resembling perceptions are the same,
however broken or uninterrupted in their appearance: This appealing
interruption is contrary to the identity: The interruption consequently
extends not beyond the appearance, and the perception or object really
continues to exist, even when absent from us: Our sensible perception s
have, therefore, a continued and uninterrupted existence. But as a little
reflection destroys this conclusion, that our perceptions have a
continued existence, by shewing that they have a dependent one, it would
naturally be expected, that we must altogether reject the opinion, that
there is such a thing in nature as a continued existence, which is
preserved even when it no longer appears to the senses. The case,
however, is otherwise. Philosophers are so far from rejecting the opinion
of a continued existence upon rejecting that of the independence and
continuance of our sensible perceptions, that though all sects agree in
the latter sentiment, the former, which is, in a manner, its necessary
consequence, has been peculiar to a few extravagant sceptics; who after
all maintained that opinion in words only, and were never able to bring
themselves sincerely to believe it.

There is a great difference betwixt such opinions as we form after a calm
and profound reflection, and such as we embrace by a kind of instinct or
natural impulse, on account of their suitableness and conformity to the
mind. If these opinions become contrary, it is not difficult to foresee
which of them will have the advantage. As long as our attention is bent
upon the subject, the philosophical and studyed principle may prevail;
but the moment we relax our thoughts, nature will display herself, and
draw us back to our former opinion. Nay she has sometimes such an
influence, that she can stop our progress, even in the midst of our most
profound reflections, and keep us from running on with all the
consequences of any philosophical opinion. Thus though we clearly perceive
the dependence and interruption of our perceptions, we stop short in our
career, and never upon that account reject the notion of an independent
and continued existence. That opinion has taken such deep root in the
imagination, that it is impossible ever to eradicate it, nor will any
strained metaphysical conviction of the dependence of our perceptions be
sufficient for that purpose.

But though our natural and obvious principles here prevail above our
studied reflections, it is certain there must be sonic struggle and
opposition in the case: at least so long as these rejections retain any
force or vivacity. In order to set ourselves at ease in this particular,
we contrive a new hypothesis, which seems to comprehend both these
principles of reason and imagination. This hypothesis is the
philosophical, one of the double existence of perceptions and objects;
which pleases our reason, in allowing, that our dependent perceptions are
interrupted and different; and at the same time is agreeable to the
imagination, in attributing a continued existence to something else,
which we call objects. This philosophical system, therefore, is the
monstrous offspring of two principles, which are contrary to each other,
which are both at once embraced by the mind, and which are unable
mutually to destroy each other. The imagination tells us, that our
resembling perceptions have a continued and uninterrupted existence, and
are not annihilated by their absence. Reflection tells us, that even our
resembling perceptions are interrupted in their existence, and different
from each other. The contradiction betwixt these opinions we elude by a
new fiction, which is conformable to the hypotheses both of reflection
and fancy, by ascribing these contrary qualities to different existences;
the interruption to perceptions, and the continuance to objects. Nature
is obstinate, and will not quit the field, however strongly attacked by
reason; and at the same time reason is so clear in the point, that there
is no possibility of disguising her. Not being able to reconcile these
two enemies, we endeavour to set ourselves at ease as much as possible,
by successively granting to each whatever it demands, and by feigning a
double existence, where each may find something, that has all the
conditions it desires. Were we fully convinced, that our resembling
perceptions are continued, and identical, and independent, we should
never run into this opinion of a double existence. since we should find
satisfaction in our first supposition, and would not look beyond. Again,
were we fully convinced, that our perceptions are dependent, and
interrupted, and different, we should be as little inclined to embrace
the opinion of a double existence; since in that case we should clearly
perceive the error of our first supposition of a continued existence, and
would never regard it any farther. It is therefore from the intermediate
situation of the mind, that this opinion arises, and from such an
adherence to these two contrary principles, as makes us seek some pretext
to justify our receiving both; which happily at last is found in the
system of a double existence.

Another advantage of this philosophical system is its similarity to the
vulgar one; by which means we can humour our reason for a moment, when it
becomes troublesome and sollicitous; and yet upon its least negligence or
inattention, can easily return to our vulgar and natural notions.
Accordingly we find, that philosophers neglect not this advantage; but
immediately upon leaving their closets, mingle with the rest of mankind
in those exploded opinions, that our perceptions are our only objects,
and continue identically and uninterruptedly the same in all their
interrupted appearances.

There are other particulars of this system, wherein we may remark its
dependence on the fancy, in a very conspicuous manner. Of these, I shall
observe the two following. First, We suppose external objects to resemble
internal perceptions. I have already shewn, that the relation of cause
and effect can never afford us any just conclusion from the existence or
qualities of our perceptions to the existence of external continued
objects: And I shall farther add, that even though they coued afford such
a conclusion, we should never have any reason to infer, that our objects
resemble our perceptions. That opinion, therefore, is derived from
nothing but the quality of the fancy above-explained, <that it borrows
all its ideas from some precedent perception>. We never can conceive any
thing but perceptions, and therefore must make every thing resemble them.

Secondly, As we suppose our objects in general to resemble our
perceptions, so we take it for granted, that every particular object
resembles that perception, which it causes. The relation of cause and
effect determines us to join the other of resemblance; and the ideas of
these existences being already united together in the fancy by the former
relation, we naturally add the latter to compleat the union. We have a
strong propensity to compleat every union by joining new relations to
those which we have before observed betwixt any ideas, as we shall have
occasion to observe presently. [Sect. 5.]

Having thus given an account of all the systems both popular and
philosophical, with regard to external existences, I cannot forbear
giving vent to a certain sentiment, which arises upon reviewing those
systems. I begun this subject with premising, that we ought to have an
implicit faith in our senses, and that this would be the conclusion, I
should draw from the whole of my reasoning. But to be ingenuous, I feel
myself at present of a quite contrary sentiment, and am more inclined to
repose no faith at all in my senses, or rather imagination, than to place
in it such an implicit confidence. I cannot conceive bow such trivial
qualities of the fancy, conducted by such false suppositions, can ever
lead to any solid and rational system. They are the coherence and
constancy of our perceptions, which produce the opinion of their
continued existence; though these qualities of perceptions have no
perceivable connexion with such an existence. The constancy of our
perceptions has the most considerable effect, and yet is attended with
the greatest difficulties. It is a gross illusion to suppose, that our
resembling perceptions are numerically the same; and it is this illusion,
which leads us into the opinion, that these perceptions are
uninterrupted, and are still existent, even when they are not present to
the senses. This is the case with our popular system. And as to our
philosophical one, it is liable to the same difficulties; and is
over-and-above loaded with this absurdity, that it at once denies and
establishes the vulgar supposition. Philosophers deny our resembling
perceptions to be identically the same, and uninterrupted; and yet have
so great a propensity to believe them such, that they arbitrarily invent
a new set of perceptions, to which they attribute these qualities. I say,
a new set of perceptions: For we may well suppose in general, but it is
impossible for us distinctly to conceive, objects to be in their nature
any thing but exactly the same with perceptions. What then can we look
for from this confusion of groundless and extraordinary opinions but
error and falshood? And how can we justify to ourselves any belief we
repose in them?

This sceptical doubt, both with respect to reason and the senses, is a
malady, which can never be radically cured, but must return upon us every
moment, however we may chace it away, and sometimes may seem entirely
free from it. It is impossible upon any system to defend either our
understanding or senses; and we but expose them farther when we endeavour
to justify them in that manner. As the sceptical doubt arises naturally
from a profound and intense reflection on those subjects, it always
encreases, the farther we carry our reflections, whether in opposition or
conformity to it. Carelessness and in-attention alone can afford us any
remedy. For this reason I rely entirely upon them; and take it for
granted, whatever may be the reader's opinion at this present moment,
that an hour hence he will be persuaded there is both an external and
internal world; and going upon that supposition, I intend to examine some
general systems both ancient and modern, which have been proposed of
both, before I proceed to a more particular enquiry concerning our
impressions. This will not, perhaps, in the end be found foreign to our
present purpose.



SECT. III.  OF THE ANTIENT PHILOSOPHY.


Several moralists have recommended it as an excellent method of becoming
acquainted with our own hearts, and knowing our progress in virtue, to
recollect our dreams in a morning, and examine them with the same rigour,
that we would our most serious and most deliberate actions. Our character
is the same throughout, say they, and appears best where artifice, fear,
and policy have no place, and men can neither be hypocrites with
themselves nor others. The generosity, or baseness of our temper, our
meekness or cruelty, our courage or pusilanimity, influence the fictions
of the imagination with the most unbounded liberty, and discover
themselves in the most glaring colours. In like manner, I am persuaded,
there might be several useful discoveries made from a criticism of the
fictions of the antient philosophy, concerning substances, and
substantial form, and accidents, and occult qualities; which, however
unreasonable and capricious, have a very intimate connexion with the
principles of human nature.

It is confest by the most judicious philosophers, that our ideas of bodies
are nothing but collections formed by the mind of the ideas of the
several distinct sensible qualities, of which objects are composed, and
which we find to have a constant union with each other. But however these
qualities may in themselves be entirely distinct, it is certain we
commonly regard the compound, which they form, as ONE thing, and as
continuing the SAME under very considerable alterations. The acknowledged
composition is evidently contrary to this supposed simplicity, and the
variation to the identity. It may, therefore, be worth while to consider
the causes, which make us almost universally fall into such evident
contradictions, as well as the means by which we endeavour to conceal
them.

It is evident, that as the ideas of the several distinct, successive
qualities of objects are united together by a very close relation, the
mind, in looking along the succession, must be carryed from one part of
it to another by an easy transition, and will no more perceive the
change, than if it contemplated the same unchangeable object. This easy
transition is the effect, or rather essence of relation; I and as the
imagination readily takes one idea for another, where their influence on
the mind is similar; hence it proceeds, that any such succession of
related qualities is readily considered as one continued object, existing
without any variation. The smooth and uninterrupted progress of the
thought, being alike in both cases, readily deceives the mind, and makes
us ascribe an identity to the changeable succession of connected
qualities.

But when we alter our method of considering the succession, and instead
of traceing it gradually through the successive points of time, survey at
once Any two distinct periods of its duration, and compare the different
conditions of the successive qualities; in that case the variations,
which were insensible when they arose gradually, do now appear of
consequence, and seem entirely to destroy the identity. By this means
there arises a kind of contrariety in our method of thinking, from the
different points of view, in which we survey the object, and from the
nearness or remoteness of those instants of time, which we compare
together. When we gradually follow an object in its successive changes,
the smooth progress of the thought makes us ascribe an identity to the
succession; because it is by a similar act of the mind we consider an
unchangeable object. When we compare its situation after a considerable
change the progress of the thought is. broke; and consequently we are
presented with the idea of diversity: In order to reconcile which
contradictions the imagination is apt to feign something unknown and
invisible, which it supposes to continue the same under all these
variations; and this unintelligible something it calls a substance, or
original and first matter.

We entertain a like notion with regard to the simplicity of substances,
and from like causes. Suppose an object perfectly simple and indivisible
to be presented, along with another object, whose co-existent parts are
connected together by a strong relation, it is evident the actions of the
mind, in considering these two objects, are not very different. The
imagination conceives the simple object at once, with facility, by a
single effort of thought, without change or variation. The connexion of
parts in the compound object has almost the same effect, and so unites
the object within itself, that the fancy feels not the transition in
passing from one part to another. Hence the colour, taste, figure,
solidity, and other qualities, combined in a peach or melon, are
conceived to form one thing; and that on account of their close relation,
which makes them affect the thought in the same manner, as if perfectly
uncompounded. But the mind rests not here. Whenever it views the object
in another light, it finds that all these qualities are different, and
distinguishable, and separable from each other; which view of things
being destructive of its primary and more natural notions, obliges the
imagination to feign an unknown something, or original substance and
matter, as a principle of union or cohesion among these qualities, and as
what may give the compound object a title to be called one thing,
notwithstanding its diversity and composition.

The peripatetic philosophy asserts the original matter to be perfectly
homogeneous in all bodies, and considers fire, water, earth, and air, as
of the very same substance; on account of their gradual revolutions and
changes into each other. At the same time it assigns to each of these
species of objects a distinct substantial form, which it supposes to be
the source of all those different qualities they possess, and to be a new
foundation of simplicity and identity to each particular species. All
depends on our manner of viewing the objects. When we look along the
insensible changes of bodies, we suppose all of them to be of the same
substance or essence. When we consider their sensible differences, we
attribute to each of them a substantial and essential difference. And in
order to indulge ourselves in both these ways of considering our objects,
we suppose all bodies to have at once a substance and a substantial form.

The notion of accidents is an unavoidable consequence of this method of
thinking with regard to substances and substantial forms; nor can we
forbear looking upon colours, sounds, tastes, figures, and other
properties of bodies, as existences, which cannot subsist apart, but
require a subject of inhesion to sustain and support them. For having
never discovered any of these sensible qualities, where, for the reasons
above-mentioned, we did not likewise fancy a substance to exist; the same
habit, which makes us infer a connexion betwixt cause and effect, makes
us here infer a dependence of every quality on the unknown substance. The
custom of imagining a dependence has the same effect as the custom of
observing it would have. This conceit, however, is no more reasonable
than any of the foregoing. Every quality being a distinct thing from
another, may be conceived to exist apart, and may exist apart, not only
from every other quality, but from that unintelligible chimera of a
substance.

But these philosophers carry their fictions still farther in their
sentiments concerning occult qualities, and both suppose a substance
supporting, which they do not understand, and an accident supported, of
which they have as imperfect an idea. The whole system, therefore, is
entirely incomprehensible, and yet is derived from principles as natural
as any of these above-explained.

In considering this subject we may observe a gradation of three opinions,
that rise above each other, according as the persons, who form them,
acquire new degrees of reason and knowledge. These opinions are that of
the vulgar, that of a false philosophy, and that of the true; where we
shall find upon enquiry, that the true philosophy approaches nearer to
the sentiments of the vulgar, than to those of a mistaken knowledge. It is
natural. for men, in their common and care, less way of thinking, to
imagine they perceive a connexion betwixt such objects as they have
constantly found united together; and because custom has rendered it
difficult to separate the ideas, they are apt to fancy such a separation
to be in itself impossible and absurd. But philosophers, who abstract
from the effects of custom, and compare the ideas of objects, immediately
perceive the falshood of these vulgar sentiments, and discover that there
is no known connexion among objects. Every different object appears to
them entirely distinct and separate; and they perceive, that it is not
from a view of the nature and qualities of objects we infer one from
another, but only when in several instances we observe them to have been
constantly conjoined. But these philosophers, instead of drawing a just
inference from this observation, and concluding, that we have no idea of
power or agency, separate from the mind, and belonging to causes; I say,
instead of drawing this conclusion, they frequently search for the
qualities, in which this agency consists, and are displeased with every
system, which their reason suggests to them, in order to explain it. They
have sufficient force of genius to free them from the vulgar error, that
there is a natural and perceivable connexion betwixt the several sensible
qualities and. actions of matter; but not sufficient to keep them from
ever seeking for this connexion in matter, or causes. Had they fallen
upon the just conclusion, they would have returned back to the situation
of the vulgar, and would have regarded all these disquisitions with
indolence and indifference. At present they seem to be in a very
lamentable condition, and such as the poets have given us but a faint
notion of in their descriptions of the punishment of Sisyphus and
Tantalus. For what can be imagined more tormenting, than to seek with
eagerness, what for ever flies us; and seek for it in a place, where it is
impossible it can ever exist?

But as nature seems to have observed a kind of justice and compensation
in every thing, she has not neglected philosophers more than the rest of
the creation; but has reserved them a consolation amid all their
disappointments and afflictions. This consolation principally consists in
their invention of the words: faculty and occult quality. For it being
usual, after the frequent use of terms, which are really significant and
intelligible, to omit the idea, which we would express by them, and to
preserve only the custom, by which we recal the idea at pleasure; so it
naturally happens, that after the frequent use of terms, which are wholly
insignificant and unintelligible, we fancy them to be on the same footing
with the precedent, and to have a secret meaning, which we might discover
by reflection. The resemblance of their appearance deceives the mind, as
is usual, and makes us imagine a thorough resemblance and conformity. By
this means these philosophers set themselves at ease, and arrive at last,
by an illusion, at the same indifference, which the people attain by
their stupidity, and true philosophers by their moderate scepticism. They
need only say, that any phenomenon, which puzzles them, arises from a
faculty or an occult quality, and there is an end of all dispute and
enquiry upon the matter.

But among all the instances, wherein the Peripatetics have shewn they
were guided by every trivial propensity of the imagination, no one is
more-remarkable than their sympathies, antipathies, and horrors of a
vacuum. There is a very remarkable inclination in human nature, to bestow
on external objects the same emotions, which it observes in itself; and
to find every where those ideas, which are most present to it. This
inclination, it is true, is suppressed by a little reflection, and only
takes place in children, poets, and the antient philosophers. It appears
in children, by their desire of beating the stones, which hurt them: In
poets, by their readiness to personify every thing: And in the antient
philosophers, by these fictions of sympathy and antipathy. We must pardon
children, because of their age; poets, because they profess to follow
implicitly the suggestions of their fancy: But what excuse shall we find
to justify our philosophers in so signal a weakness?



SECT. IV.  OF THE MODERN PHILOSOPHY.


But here it may be objected, that the imagination, according to my own
confession, being the ultimate judge of all systems of philosophy, I am
unjust in blaming the antient philosophers for making use of that
faculty, and allowing themselves to be entirely guided by it in their
reasonings. In order to justify myself, I must distinguish in the
imagination betwixt the principles which are permanent, irresistible, and
universal; such as the customary transition from causes to effects, and
from effects to causes: And the principles, which are changeable, weak,
and irregular; such as those I have just now taken notice of. The former
are the foundation of all our thoughts and actions, so that upon their
removal human nature must immediately perish and go to ruin. The latter
are neither unavoidable to mankind, nor necessary, or so much as useful
in the conduct of life; but on the contrary are observed only to take
place in weak minds, and being opposite to the other principles of custom
and reasoning, may easily be subverted by a due contrast and opposition.
For this reason the former are received by philosophy, and the latter
rejected. One who concludes somebody to be near him, when he hears an
articulate voice in the dark, reasons justly and naturally; though that
conclusion be derived from nothing but custom, which infixes and inlivens
the idea of a human creature, on account of his usual conjunction with
the present impression. But one, who is tormented he knows not why, with
the apprehension of spectres in the dark, may, perhaps, be said to
reason, and to reason naturally too: But then it must be in the same
sense, that a malady is said to be natural; as arising from natural
causes, though it be contrary to health, the most agreeable and most
natural situation of man.

The opinions of the antient philosophers, their fictions of substance and
accident, and their reasonings concerning substantial forms and occult
qualities, are like the spectres in the dark, and are derived from
principles, which, however common, are neither universal nor unavoidable
in human nature. The modern philosophy pretends to be entirely free from
this defect, and to arise only from the solid, permanent, and consistent
principles of the imagination. Upon what grounds this pretension is
founded must now be the subject of our enquiry.

The fundamental principle of that philosophy is the opinion concerning
colours, sounds, tastes, smells, heat and cold; which it asserts to be
nothing but impressions in the mind, derived from the operation of
external objects, and without any resemblance to the qualities of the
objects. Upon examination, I find only one of the reasons commonly
produced for this opinion to be satisfactory, viz. that derived from the
variations of those impressions, even while the external object, to all
appearance, continues the same. These variations depend upon several
circumstances. Upon the different situations of our health: A man in a
malady feels a disagreeable taste in meats, which before pleased him the
most. Upon the different complexions and constitutions of men That seems
bitter to one, which is sweet to another. Upon the difference of their
external situation and position: Colours reflected from the clouds change
according to the distance of the clouds, and according to the angle they
make with the eye and luminous body. Fire. also communicates the
sensation of pleasure at one distance, and that of pain at another.
Instances of this kind are very numerous and frequent.

The conclusion drawn from them, is likewise as satisfactory as can
possibly be imagined. It is certain, that when different impressions of
the same sense arise from any object, every one of these impressions has
not a resembling quality existent in the object. For as the same object
cannot, at the same time, be endowed with different qualities of the same
sense, and as the same quality cannot resemble impressions entirely
different; it evidently follows, that many of our impressions have no
external model or archetype. Now from like effects we presume like
causes. Many of the impressions of colour, sound, &c. are confest to be
nothing but internal existences, and to arise from causes, which no ways
resemble them. These impressions are in appearance nothing different from
the other impressions of colour, sound, &c. We conclude, therefore, that
they are, all of them, derived from a like origin.

This principle being once admitted, all the other doctrines of that
philosophy seem to follow by an easy consequence. For upon the removal of
sounds, colours, beat, cold, and other sensible qualities, from the rank
of continued independent existences, we are reduced merely to what are
called primary qualities, as the only real ones, of which we have any
adequate notion. These primary qualities are extension and solidity, with
their different mixtures and modifications; figure, motion, gravity, and
cohesion. The generation, encrease, decay, and corruption of animals and
vegetables, are nothing but changes of figure and motion; as also the
operations of all bodies on each other; of fire, of light, water, air,
earth, and of all the elements and powers of nature. One figure and
motion produces another figure and motion; nor does there remain in. the
material universe any other principle, either active or passive, of which
we can form the most distant idea.

I believe many objections might be made to this system But at present I
shall confine myself to one, which is in my opinion very decisive. I
assert, that instead of explaining the operations of external objects by
its means, we utterly annihilate all these objects, and reduce ourselves
to the opinions of the most extravagant scepticism concerning them. If
colours, sounds, tastes, and smells be merely perceptions, nothing we can
conceive is possest of a real, continued, and independent existence; not
even motion, extension and solidity, which are the primary qualities
chiefly insisted on.

To begin with the examination of motion; it is evident this is a quality
altogether inconceivable alone, and without a reference to some other
object. The idea of motion necessarily supposes that of a body moving.
Now what is our idea of the moving body, without which motion is
incomprehensible? It must resolve itself into the idea of extension or of
solidity; and consequently the reality of motion depends upon that of
these other qualities.

This opinion, which is universally acknowledged concerning motion, I have
proved to be true with regard to extension; and have shewn that it is
impossible to conceive extension, but as composed of parts, endowed with
colour or solidity. The idea of extension is a compound idea; but as it
is not compounded of an infinite number of parts or inferior ideas, it
must at last resolve itself into such as are perfectly simple and
indivisible. These simple and indivisible parts, not being ideas of
extension, must be non entities, unless conceived as coloured or solid.
Colour is excluded from any real existence. The reality, therefore, of
our idea of extension depends upon the reality of that of solidity, nor
can the former be just while the latter is chimerical. Let us, then, lend
our attention to the examination of the idea of solidity.

The idea of solidity is that of two objects, which being impelled by the
utmost force, cannot penetrate each other; but still maintain a separate
and distinct existence. Solidity, therefore, is perfectly
incomprehensible alone, and without the conception of some bodies, which
are solid, and maintain this separate and distinct existence. Now what
idea have we of these bodies? The ideas of colours, sounds, and other
secondary qualities are excluded. The idea of motion depends on that of
extension, and the idea of extension on that of solidity. It is
impossible, therefore, that the idea of solidity can depend on either of
them. For that would be to run in a circle, and make one idea depend on
another, while at the same time the latter depends on the former. Our
modern philosophy, therefore, leaves us no just nor satisfactory idea of
solidity; nor consequently of matter.

This argument will appear entirely conclusive to every one that
comprehends it; but because it may seem abstruse and intricate to the
generality of readers, I hope to be excused, if I endeavour to render it
more obvious by some variation of the expression. In order to form an
idea of solidity, we must conceive two bodies pressing on each other
without any penetration; and it is impossible to arrive at this idea, when
we confine ourselves to one object, much more without conceiving any. Two
non-entities cannot exclude each other from their places; because they
-never possess any place, nor can be endowed with any quality. Now I ask,
what idea do we form of these bodies or objects, to which we suppose
solidity to belong? To say, that we conceive them merely as solid, is to
run on in infinitum. To affirm, that we paint them out to ourselves as
extended, either resolves all into a false idea, or returns in a circle.
Extension must necessarily be considered either as coloured, which is a
false idea; I or as solid, which brings us back to the first question. We
may make the same observation concerning mobility and figure; and upon
the whole must conclude, that after the exclusion of colours, sounds,
heat and cold from the rank of external existences, there remains
nothing, which can afford us a just and constituent idea of body.

Add to this, that, properly speaking, solidity or impenetrability is
nothing, but an impossibility of annihilation, as [Part II. Sect. 4.]
has been already observed: For which reason it is the more necessary for
us to form some distinct idea of that object, whose annihilation we
suppose impossible. An impossibility of being annihilated cannot exist,
and can never be conceived to exist, by itself: but necessarily requires
some object or real existence, to which it may belong. Now the difficulty
still remains, how to form an idea of this object or existence, without
having recourse to the secondary and sensible qualities.

Nor must we omit on this occasion our accustomed method of examining
ideas by considering those impressions, from which they are derived. The
impressions, which enter by the sight and hearing, the smell and taste,
are affirmed by modern philosophy to be without any resembling objects;
and consequently the idea of solidity, which is supposed to be real, can
never be derived from any of these senses. There remains, therefore, the
feeling as the only sense, that can convey the impression, which is
original to the idea of solidity; and indeed we naturally imagine, that
we feel the solidity of bodies, and need but touch any object in order to
perceive this quality. But this method of thinking is more popular than
philosophical; as will appear from the following reflections.

First, It is easy to observe, that though bodies are felt by means of
their solidity, yet the feeling is a quite different thing from the
solidity; and that they have not the least resemblance to each other. A
man, who has the palsey in one hand, has as perfect an idea of
impenetrability, when he observes that hand to be supported by the table,
as when he feels the same table with the other hand. An object, that
presses upon any of our members, meets with resistance; and that
resistance, by the motion it gives to the nerves and animal spirits,
conveys a certain sensation to the mind; but it does not follow, that the
sensation, motion, and resistance are any ways resembling.

Secondly, The impressions of touch are simple impressions, except when
considered with regard to their extension; which makes nothing to the
present purpose: And from this simplicity I infer, that they neither
represent solidity, nor any real object. For let us put two cases, viz.
that of a man, who presses a stone, or any solid body, with his hand, and
that of two stones, which press each other; it will readily be allowed,
that these two cases are not in every respect alike, but that in the
former there is conjoined with the solidity, a feeling or sensation, of
which there is no appearance in the latter. In order, therefore, to make
these two cases alike, it is necessary to remove some part of the
impression, which the man feels by his hand, or organ of sensation; and
that being impossible in a simple impression, obliges us to remove the
whole, and proves that this whole impression has no archetype or model in
external objects. To which we may add, that solidity necessarily supposes
two bodies, along with contiguity and impulse; which being a compound
object, can never be represented by a simple impression. Not to mention,
that though solidity continues always invariably the same, the impressions
of touch change every moment upon us; which is a clear proof that the
latter are not representations of the former.

Thus there is a direct and total opposition betwixt our reason and our
senses; or more properly speaking, betwixt those conclusions we form from
cause and effect, and those that persuade us of the continued and
independent existence of body. When we reason from cause and effect, we
conclude, that neither colour, sound, taste, nor smell have a continued
and independent existence. When we exclude these sensible qualities there
remains nothing in the universe, which has such an existence.



SECT. V.  OF THE IMMATERIALITY OF THE SOUL.


Having found such contradictions and difficulties in every system
concerning external objects, and in the idea of matter, which we fancy so
clear and determinate, We shall naturally expect still greater
difficulties and contradictions in every hypothesis concerning our
internal perceptions, and the nature of the mind, which we are apt to
imagine so much more obscure, and uncertain. But in this we should
deceive ourselves. The intellectual world, though involved in infinite
obscurities, is not perplexed with any such contradictions, as those we
have discovered in the natural. What is known concerning it, agrees with
itself; and what is unknown, we must be contented to leave so.

It is true, would we hearken to certain philosophers, they promise to
diminish our ignorance; but I am afraid it is at the hazard of running us
into contradictions, from which the subject is of itself exempted. These
philosophers are the curious reasoners concerning the material or
immaterial substances, in which they suppose our perceptions to inhere.
In order to put a stop to these endless cavils on both sides, I know no
better method, than to ask these philosophers in a few words, What they
mean by substance and inhesion? And after they have answered this
question, it will then be reasonable, and not till then, to enter
seriously into the dispute.

This question we have found impossible to be answered with regard to
matter and body: But besides that in the case of the mind, it labours
under all the same difficulties, it is burthened with some additional
ones, which are peculiar to that subject. As every idea is derived from a
precedent impression, had we any idea of the substance of our minds, we
must also have an impression of it; which is very difficult, if not
impossible, to be conceived. For how can an impression represent a
substance, otherwise than by resembling it? And how can an impression
resemble a substance, since, according to this philosophy, it is not a
substance, and has none of the peculiar qualities or characteristics of a
substance?

But leaving the question of what may or may not be, for that other what
actually is, I desire those philosophers, who pretend that we have an
idea of the substance of our minds, to point out the impression that
produces it, and tell distinctly after what manner that impression
operates, and from what object it is derived. Is it an impression of
sensation or of reflection? Is it pleasant, or painful, or indifferent? I
Does it attend us at all times, or does it only return at intervals? If
at intervals, at what times principally does it return, and by what
causes is it produced?

If instead of answering these questions, any one should evade the
difficulty, by saying, that the definition of a substance is something
which may exist by itself; and that this definition ought to satisfy us:
should this be said, I should observe, that this definition agrees to
every thing, that can possibly be conceived; and never will serve to
distinguish substance from accident, or the soul from its perceptions.
For thus I reason. Whatever is clearly conceived may exist; and whatever
is clearly conceived, after any manner, may exist after the same manner.
This is one principle, which has been already acknowledged. Again, every
thing, which is different, is distinguishable, and every thing which is
distinguishable, is separable by the imagination. This is another
principle. My conclusion from both is, that since all our perceptions are
different from each other, and from every thing else in the universe,
they are also distinct and separable, and may be considered as separately
existent, and may exist separately, and have no need of any thing else to
support their existence. They are, therefore, substances, as far as this
definition explains a substance.

Thus neither by considering the first origin of ideas, nor by means of a
definition are we able to arrive at any satisfactory notion of substance;
which seems to me a sufficient reason for abandoning utterly that dispute
concerning the materiality and immateriality of the soul, and makes me
absolutely condemn even the question itself. We have no perfect idea of
any thing but of a perception. A substance is entirely different from a
perception. We have, therefore, no idea of a substance. Inhesion in
something is supposed to be requisite to support the existence of our
perceptions. Nothing appears requisite to support the existence of a
perception. We have, therefore, no idea of inhesion. What possibility
then of answering that question, Whether perceptions inhere in a material
or immaterial substance, when we do not so much as understand the meaning
of the question?

There is one argument commonly employed for the immateriality of the
soul, which seems to me remarkable. Whatever is extended consists of
parts; and whatever consists of parts is divisible, if not in reality, at
least in the imagination. But it is impossible anything divisible can be
conjoined to a thought or perception, which is a being altogether
inseparable and indivisible. For supposing such a conjunction, would the
indivisible thought exist on the left or on the right hand of this
extended divisible body? On the surface or in the middle? On the back or
fore side of it? If it be conjoined with the extension, it must exist
somewhere within its dimensions. If it exist within its dimensions, it
must either exist in one particular part; and then that particular part
is indivisible, and the perception is conjoined only with it, not with
the extension: Or if the thought exists in every part, it must also be
extended, and separable, and divisible, as well as the body; which is
utterly absurd and contradictory. For can any one conceive a passion of a
yard in length, a foot in breadth, and an inch in thickness? Thought,
therefore, and extension are qualities wholly incompatible, and never can
incorporate together into one subject.

This argument affects not the question concerning the substance of the
soul, but only that concerning its local conjunction with matter; and
therefore it may not be improper to consider in general what objects are,
or are not susceptible of a local conjunction. This is a curious
question, and may lead us to some discoveries of considerable moment.

The first notion of space and extension is derived solely from the senses
of sight and feeling; nor is there any thing, but what is coloured or
tangible, that has parts disposed after such a manner, as to convey that
idea. When we diminish or encrease a relish, it is not after the same
manner that we diminish or encrease any visible object; and when several
sounds strike our hearing at once, custom and reflection alone make us
form an idea of the degrees of the distance and contiguity of those
bodies, from which they are derived. Whatever marks the place of its
existence either must be extended, or must be a mathematical point,
without parts or composition. What is extended must have a particular
figure, as square, round, triangular; none of which will agree to a
desire, or indeed to any impression or idea, except to these two senses
above-mentioned. Neither ought a desire, though indivisible, to be
considered as a mathematical point. For in that case it would be possible,
by the addition of others, to make two, three, four desires, and these
disposed and situated in such a manner, as to have a determinate length,
breadth and thickness; which is evidently absurd.

It will not be surprising after this, if I deliver a maxim, which is
condemned by several metaphysicians, and is esteemed contrary to the most
certain principles of hum reason. This maxim is that an object may exist,
and yet be no where: and I assert, that this is not only possible, but
that the greatest part of beings do and must exist after this manner. An
object may be said to be no where, when its parts are not so situated
with respect to each other, as to form any figure or quantity; nor the
whole with respect to other bodies so as to answer to our notions of
contiguity or distance. Now this is evidently the case with all our
perceptions and objects, except those of the sight and feeling. A moral
reflection cannot be placed on the right or on the left hand of a
passion, nor can a smell or sound be either of a circular or a square
figure. These objects and perceptions, so far from requiring any
particular place, are absolutely incompatible with it, and even the
imagination cannot attribute it to them. And as to the absurdity of
supposing them to be no where, we may consider, that if the passions and
sentiments appear to the perception to have any particular place, the
idea of extension might be derived from them, as well as from the sight
and touch; contrary to what we have already established. If they APPEAR
not to have any particular place, they may possibly exist in the same
manner; since whatever we conceive is possible.

It will not now be necessary to prove, that those perceptions, which are
simple, and exist no where, are incapable of any conjunction in place
with matter or body, which is extended and divisible; since it is
impossible to found a relation but on some common quality. It may be
better worth our while to remark, that this question of the local
conjunction of objects does not only occur in metaphysical disputes
concerning the nature of the soul, but that even in common life we have
every moment occasion to examine it. Thus supposing we consider a fig at
one end of the table, and an olive at the other, it is evident, that in
forming the complex ideas of these substances, one of the most obvious is
that of their different relishes; and it is as evident, that we
incorporate and conjoin these qualities with such as are coloured and
tangible. The bitter taste of the one, and sweet of the other are
supposed to lie in the very visible body, and to be separated from each
other by the whole length of the table. This is so notable and so natural
an illusion, that it may be proper to consider the principles, from which
it is derived.

Though an extended object be incapable of a conjunction in place with
another, that exists without any place or extension, yet are they
susceptible of many other relations. Thus the taste and smell of any
fruit are inseparable from its other qualities of colour and tangibility;
and whichever of them be the cause or effect, it is certain they are
always co-existent. Nor are they only co-existent in general, but also
co-temporary in their appearance in the mind; and it is upon the
application of the extended body to our senses we perceive its particular
taste and smell. These relations, then, of causation, and contiguity in
the time of their appearance, betwixt the extended object and the
quality, which exists without any particular place, must have such an
effect on the mind, that upon the appearance of one it will immediately
turn its thought to the conception of the other. Nor is this all. We not
only turn our thought from one to the other upon account of their
relation, but likewise endeavour to give them a new relation, viz. that
of a CONJUNCTION IN PLACE, that we may render the transition more easy
and natural. For it is a quality, which I shall often have occasion to
remark in human nature, and shall explain more fully in its proper place,
that when objects are united by any relation, we have a strong propensity
to add some new relation to them, in order to compleat the union. In our
arrangement of bodies we never fail to place such as are resembling, in
contiguity to each other, or at least in correspondent points of view:
Why? but because we feel a satisfaction in joining the relation of
contiguity to that of resemblance, or the resemblance of situation to
that of qualities. The effects this propensity have been [Sect. 2, towards
the end.] already observed in that resemblance, which we so readily
suppose betwixt particular impressions and their external causes. But we
shall not find a more evident effect of it, than in the present instance,
where from the relations of causation and contiguity in time betwixt two
objects, we feign likewise that of a conjunction in place, in order to
strengthen the connexion.

But whatever confused notions we may form of an union in place betwixt an
extended body, as a fig, and its particular taste, it is certain that upon
reflection we must observe this union something altogether unintelligible
and contradictory. For should we ask ourselves one obvious question, viz.
if the taste, which we conceive to be contained in the circumference of
the body, is in every part of it or in one only, we must quickly find
ourselves at a loss, and perceive the impossibility of ever giving a
satisfactory answer. We cannot rely, that it is only in one part: For
experience convinces us, that every part has the same relish. We can as
little reply, that it exists in every part: For then we must suppose it
figured and extended; which is absurd and incomprehensible. Here then we
are influenced by two principles directly contrary to each other, viz.
that inclination of our fancy by which we are determined to incorporate
the taste with the extended object, and our reason, which shows us the
impossibility of such an union. Being divided betwixt these opposite
principles, we renounce neither one nor the other, but involve the
subject in such confusion and obscurity, that we no longer perceive the
opposition. We suppose, that the taste exists within the circumference of
the body, but in such a manner, that it fills the whole without
extension, and exists entire in every part without separation. In short,
we use in our most familiar way of thinking, that scholastic principle,
which, when crudely proposed, appears so shocking, of TOTUM IN TOTO &
TOLUM IN QUALIBET PARTE: Which is much the same, as if we should say,
that a thing is in a certain place, and yet is not there.

All this absurdity proceeds from our endeavouring to bestow a place on
what is utterly incapable of it; and that endeavour again arises from our
inclination to compleat an union, which is founded on causation, and a
contiguity of time, by attributing to the objects a conjunction in place.
But if ever reason be of sufficient force to overcome prejudice, it is
certain, that in the present case it must prevail. For we have only this
choice left, either to suppose that some beings exist without any place;
or that they are figured and extended; or that when they are incorporated
with extended objects, the whole is in the whole, and the whole in every
part. The absurdity of the two last suppositions proves sufficiently the
veracity of the first. Nor is there any fourth opinion. For as to the
supposition of their existence in the manner of mathematical points, it
resolves itself into the second opinion, and supposes, that several
passions may be placed in a circular figure, and that a certain number of
smells, conjoined with a certain number of sounds, may make a body of
twelve cubic inches; which appears ridiculous upon the bare mentioning of
it.

But though in this view of things we cannot refuse to condemn the
materialists, who conjoin all thought with extension; yet a little
reflection will show us equal reason for blaming their antagonists, who
conjoin all thought with a simple and indivisible substance. The most
vulgar philosophy informs us, that no external object can make itself
known to the mind immediately, and without the interposition of an image
or perception. That table, which just now appears to me, is only a
perception, and all its qualities are qualities of a perception. Now the
most obvious of all its qualities is extension. The perception consists
of parts. These parts are so situated, as to afford us the notion of
distance and contiguity; of length, breadth, and thickness. The
termination of these three dimensions is what we call figure. This figure
is moveable, separable, and divisible. Mobility, and separability are the
distinguishing properties of extended objects. And to cut short all
disputes, the very idea of extension is copyed from nothing but an
impression, and consequently must perfectly agree to it. To say the idea
of extension agrees to any thing, is to say it is extended.

The free-thinker may now triumph in his turn; and having found there are
impressions and ideas really extended, may ask his antagonists, how they
can incorporate a simple and indivisible subject with an extended
perception? All the arguments of Theologians may here be retorted upon
them. Is the indivisible subject, or immaterial substance, if you will,
on the left or on the right hand of the perception? Is it in this
particular part, or in that other? Is it in every part without being
extended? Or is it entire in any one part without deserting the rest?
It is impossible to give any answer to these questions, but what will both
be absurd in itself, and will account for the union of our indivisible
perceptions with an extended substance.

This gives me an occasion to take a-new into consideration the question
concerning the substance of the soul; and though I have condemned that
question as utterly unintelligible, yet I cannot forbear proposing some
farther reflections concerning it. I assert, that the doctrine of the
immateriality, simplicity, and indivisibility of a thinking substance is
a true atheism, and will serve to justify all those sentiments, for which
Spinoza is so universally infamous. From this topic, I hope at least to
reap one advantage, that my adversaries will not have any pretext to
render the present doctrine odious by their declamations, when they see
that they can be so easily retorted on them.

The fundamental principle of the atheism of Spinoza is the doctrine of
the simplicity of the universe, and the unity of that substance, in which
he supposes both thought and matter to inhere. There is only one
substance, says he, in the world; and that substance is perfectly simple
and indivisible, and exists every where, without any local presence.
Whatever we discover externally by sensation; whatever we feel internally
by reflection; all these are nothing but modifications of that one,
simple, and necessarily existent being, and are not possest of any
separate or distinct existence. Every passion of the soul; every
configuration of matter, however different and various, inhere in the
same substance, and preserve in themselves their characters of
distinction, without communicating them to that subject, in which they
inhere. The same substratum, if I may so speak, supports the most
different modifications, without any difference in itself; and varies
them, without any variation. Neither time, nor place, nor all the
diversity of nature are able to produce any composition or change in its
perfect simplicity and identity.

I believe this brief exposition of the principles of that famous atheist
will be sufficient for the present purpose, and that without entering
farther into these gloomy and obscure regions, I shall be able to shew,
that this hideous hypothesis is almost the same with that of the
immateriality of the soul, which has become so popular. To make this
evident, let us [Part II, Sect. 6.] remember, that as every idea is
derived from a preceding perception, it is impossible our idea of a
perception, and that of an object or external existence can ever represent
what are specifically different from each other. Whatever difference we
may suppose betwixt them, it is still incomprehensible to us; and we are
obliged either to conceive an external object merely as a relation
without a relative, or to make it the very same with a perception or
impression.

The consequence I shall draw from this may, at first sight, appear a mere
sophism; but upon the least examination will be found solid and
satisfactory. I say then, that since we may suppose, but never can
conceive a specific deference betwixt an object and impression; any
conclusion we form concerning the connexion and repugnance of
impressions, will not be known certainly to be applicable to objects; but
that on the other hand, whatever conclusions of this kind we form
concerning objects, will most certainly be applicable to impressions. The
reason is not difficult. As an object is supposed to be different from an
impression, we cannot be sure, that the circumstance, upon which we found
our reasoning, is common to both, supposing we form the reasoning upon
the impression. It is still possible, that the object may differ from it
in that particular. But when we first form our reasoning concerning the
object, it is beyond doubt, that the same reasoning must extend to the
impression: And that because the quality of the object, upon which the
argument is founded, must at least be conceived by the mind; and coued
not be conceived, unless it were common to an impression; since we have
no idea but what is derived from that origin. Thus we may establish it as
a certain maxim, that we can never, by any principle, but by an irregular
kind [Such as that of Sect. 2, form the coherence of our perceptions.]
of reasoning from experience, discover a connexion or repugnance
betwixt objects, which extends not to impressions; though the inverse
proposition may not be equally true, that all the discoverable relations
of impressions are common to objects.

To apply this to the present case; there are two different systems of
being presented, to which I suppose myself under .t necessity of
assigning some substance, or ground of inhesion. I observe first the
universe of objects or of body: The sun, moon and stars; the earth, seas,
plants, animals, men, ships, houses, and other productions either of art
or nature. Here Spinoza appears, and tells me, that these are only
modifications; and that the subject, in which they inhere, is simple,
incompounded, and indivisible. After this I consider the other system of
beings, viz. the universe of thought, or my impressions and ideas. There
I observe another sun, moon and stars; an earth, and seas, covered and
inhabited by plants and animals; towns, houses, mountains, rivers; and in
short every thing I can discover or conceive in the first system. Upon my
enquiring concerning these, Theologians present themselves, and tell me,
that these also are modifications, and modifications of one simple,
uncompounded, and indivisible substance. Immediately upon which I am
deafened with the noise of a hundred voices, that treat the first
hypothesis with detestation and scorn, and the second with applause and
veneration. I turn my attention to these hypotheses to see what may be
the reason of so great a partiality; and find that they have the same
fault of being unintelligible, and that as far as we can understand them,
they are so much alike, that it is impossible to discover any absurdity in
one, which is not common to both of them. We have no idea of any quality
in an object, which does not agree to, and may not represent a quality in
an impression; and that because all our ideas are derived from our
impressions. We can never, therefore, find any repugnance betwixt an
extended object as a modification, and a simple uncompounded essence, as
its substance, unless that repugnance takes place equally betwixt the
perception or impression of that extended object, and the same
uncompounded essence. Every idea of a quality in an object passes through
an impression; and therefore every perceivable relation, whether of
connexion or repugnance, must be common both to objects and impressions.

But though this argument, considered in general, seems evident beyond all
doubt and contradiction, yet to make it more clear and sensible, let us
survey it in detail; and see whether all the absurdities, which have been
found in the system of Spinoza, may not likewise be discovered in that of
Theologians. [See Bayle's dictionary, article of Spinoza.]

First, It has been said against Spinoza, according to the scholastic way
of talking, rather than thinking, that a mode, not being any distinct or
separate existence, must be the very same with its substance, and
consequently the extension of the universe, must be in a manner
identifyed with that, simple, uncompounded essence, in which the universe
is supposed to inhere. But this, it may be pretended, is utterly
impossible and inconceivable unless the indivisible substance expand
itself, so as to correspond to the extension, or the extension contract
itself, so as to answer to the indivisible substance. This argument seems
just, as far as we can understand it; and it is plain nothing is required,
but a change in the terms, to apply the same argument to our extended
perceptions, and the simple essence of the soul; the ideas of objects and
perceptions being in every respect the same, only attended with the
supposition of a difference, that is unknown and incomprehensible.

Secondly, It has been said, that we have no idea of substance, which is
not applicable to matter; nor any idea of a distinct substance, which is
not applicable to every distinct portion of matter. Matter, therefore, is
not a mode but a substance, and each part of matter is not a distinct
mode, but a distinct substance. I have already proved, that we have no
perfect idea of substance; but that taking it for something, that can
exist by itself, it is evident every perception is a substance, and every
distinct part of a perception a distinct substance: And consequently the
one hypothesis labours under the same difficulties in this respect with
the other.

Thirdly, It has been objected to the system of one simple substance in
the universe, that this substance being the support or substratum of
every thing, must at the very same instant be modifyed into forms, which
are contrary and incompatible. The round and square figures are
incompatible in the same substance at the same time. How then is it
possible, that the same substance can at once be modifyed into that
square table, and into this round one? I ask the same question concerning
the impressions of these tables; and find that the answer is no more
satisfactory in one case than in the other.

It appears, then, that to whatever side we turn, the same difficulties
follow us, and that we cannot advance one step towards the establishing
the simplicity and immateriality o the soul, without preparing the way
for a dangerous and irrecoverable atheism. It is the same case, if instead
o calling thought a modification of the soul, we should give it the more
antient, and yet more modish name of an action. By an action we mean much
the same thing, as what is commonly called an abstract mode; that is,
something, which, properly speaking, is neither distinguishable, nor
separable from its substance, and is only conceived by a distinction of
reason, or an abstraction. But nothing is gained by this change of the
term of modification, for that of action; nor do we free ourselves from
one single difficulty by its means; as will appear from the two following
reflexions.

First, I observe, that the word, action, according to this explication of
it, can never justly be applied to any perception, as derived from a mind
or thinking substance. Our perceptions are all really different, and
separable, and distinguishable from each other, and from everything else,
which we can imagine: and therefore it is impossible to conceive, how they
can be the action or abstract mode of any substance. The instance of
motion, which is commonly made use of to shew after what manner
perception depends, as an action, upon its substance, rather confounds
than instructs us. Motion to all appearance induces no real nor
essential change on the body, but only varies its relation to other
objects. But betwixt a person in the morning walking a garden with
company, agreeable to him; and a person in the afternoon inclosed in a
dungeon, and full of terror, despair, and resentment, there seems to be
a radical difference, and of quite another kind, than what is produced on
a body by the change of its situation. As we conclude from the
distinction and separability of their ideas, that external objects have a
separate existence from each other; so when we make these ideas
themselves our objects, we must draw the same conclusion concerning them,
according to the precedent reasoning. At least it must be confest, that
having idea of the substance of the soul, it is impossible for us to tell
how it can admit of such differences, and even contrarieties of
perception without any fundamental change; and consequently can never
tell in what sense perceptions are actions of that substance. The use,
therefore, of the word, action, unaccompanyed with any meaning, instead
of that of modification, makes no addition to our knowledge, nor is of
any advantage to the doctrine of the immateriality of the soul.

I add in the second place, that if it brings any advantage to that cause,
it must bring an equal to the cause of atheism. For do our Theologians
pretend to make a monopoly of the word, action, and may not the atheists
likewise take possession of it, and affirm that plants, animals, men, &c.
are nothing but particular actions of one simple universal substance,
which exerts itself from a blind and absolute necessity? This you'll say
is utterly absurd. I own it is unintelligible; but at the same time
assert, according to the principles above-explained, that it is impossible
to discover any absurdity in the supposition, that all the various
objects in nature are actions of one simple substance, which absurdity
will not be applicable to a like supposition concerning impressions and
ideas.

From these hypotheses concerning the substance and local conjunction of
our perceptions, we may pass to another, which is more intelligible than
the former, and more important than the latter, viz. concerning the cause
of our perceptions. Matter and motion, it is commonly said in the schools,
however varyed, are still matter and motion, and produce only a
difference in the position and situation of objects. Divide a body as
often as you please, it is still body. Place it in any figure, nothing
ever results but figure, or the relation of parts. Move it in any manner,
you still find motion or a change of relation. It is absurd to imagine,
that motion in a circle, for instance, should be nothing but merely
motion in a circle; while motion in another direction, as in an ellipse,
should also be a passion or moral reflection: That the shocking of two
globular particles should become a sensation of pain, and that the
meeting of two triangular ones should afford a pleasure. Now as these
different shocks, and variations, and mixtures are the only changes, of
which matter is susceptible, and as these never afford us any idea of
thought or perception, it is concluded to be impossible, that thought can
ever be caused by matter.

Few have been able to withstand the seeming evidence of this argument;
and yet nothing in the world is more easy than to refute it. We need only
reflect on what has been proved at large, that we are never sensible of
any connexion betwixt causes and effects, and that it is only by our
experience of their constant conjunction, we can arrive at any knowledge
of this relation. Now as all objects, which are not contrary, are
susceptible of a constant conjunction, and as no real objects are
contrary [Part III. Sect. 15.]; I have inferred from these principles,
that to consider the matter A PRIORI, any thing may produce any thing,
and that we shall never discover a reason, why any object may or may not
be the cause of any other, however great, or however little the
resemblance may be betwixt them. This evidently destroys the precedent
reasoning concerning the cause of thought or perception. For though there
appear no manner of connexion betwixt motion or thought, the case is the
same with all other causes and effects. Place one body of a pound weight
on one end of a lever, and another body of the same weight on another end;
you will never find in these bodies any principle of motion dependent on
their distances from the center, more than of thought and perception. If
you pretend, therefore, to prove a priori, that such a position of bodies
can never cause thought; because turn it which way you will, it is nothing
but a position of bodies; you must by the same course of reasoning
conclude, that it can never produce motion; since there is no more
apparent connexion in the one case than in the other. But as this latter
conclusion is contrary to evident experience, and as it is possible we may
have a like experience in the operations of the mind, and may perceive a
constant conjunction of thought and motion; you reason too hastily, when
from the mere consideration of the ideas, you conclude that it is
impossible motion can ever produce thought, or a different position of
parts give rise to a different passion or reflection. Nay it is not only
possible we may have such an experience, but it is certain we have it;
since every one may perceive, that the different dispositions of his body
change his thoughts and sentiments. And should it be said, that this
depends on the union of soul and body; I would answer, that we must
separate the question concerning the substance of the mind from that
concerning the cause of its thought; and that confining ourselves to the
latter question we find by the comparing their ideas, that thought and
motion are different from each other, and by experience, that they are
constantly united; which being all the circumstances, that enter into the
idea of cause and effect, when applied to the operations of matter, we
may certainly conclude, that motion may be, and actually is, the cause of
thought and perception.

There seems only this dilemma left us in the present case; either to
assert, that nothing can be the cause of another, but where the mind can
perceive the connexion in its idea of the objects: Or to maintain, that
all objects, which we find constantly conjoined, are upon that account to
be regarded as causes and effects. If we choose the first part of the
dilemma, these are the consequences. First, We in reality affirm, that
there is no such thing in the universe as a cause or productive
principle, not even the deity himself; since our idea of that supreme
Being is derived from particular impressions, none of which contain any
efficacy, nor seem to have any connexion with any other existence. As to
what may be said, that the connexion betwixt the idea of an infinitely
powerful being, and that of any effect, which he wills, is necessary and
unavoidable; I answer, that we have no idea of a being endowed with any
power, much less of one endowed with infinite power. But if we will
change expressions, we can only define power by connexion; and then in
saying, that the idea, of an infinitely powerful being is connected with
that of every effect, which he wills, we really do no more than assert,
that a being, whose volition is connected with every effect, is connected
with every effect: which is an identical proposition, and gives us no
insight into the nature of this power or connexion. But, secondly,
supposing, that the deity were the great and efficacious principle, which
supplies the deficiency of all causes, this leads us into the grossest
impieties and absurdities. For upon the same account, that we have
recourse to him in natural operations, and assert that matter cannot of
itself communicate motion, or produce thought, viz. because there is no
apparent connexion betwixt these objects; I say, upon the very same
account, we must acknowledge that the deity is the author of all our
volitions and perceptions; since they have no more apparent connexion
either with one another, or with the supposed but unknown substance of
the soul. This agency of the supreme Being we know to have been asserted
by [As father Malebranche and other Cartesians.] several philosophers with
relation to all the actions of the mind, except volition, or rather an
inconsiderable part of volition; though it is easy to perceive, that this
exception is a mere pretext, to avoid the dangerous consequences. of that
doctrine. If nothing be active but what has an apparent power, thought is
in no case any more active than matter; and if this inactivity must make
us have recourse to a deity, the supreme being is the real cause of all
our actions, bad as well as good, vicious as well as virtuous.

Thus we are necessarily reduced to the other side of the dilemma, viz..
that all objects, which are found to be constantly conjoined, are upon
that account only to be regarded as causes and effects. Now as all
objects, which are not contrary, are susceptible of a constant
conjunction, and as no real objects are contrary: it follows, that for
ought we can determine by the mere ideas, any thing may be the cause or
effect of any thing; which evidently gives the advantage to the
materialists above their antagonists.

To pronounce, then, the final decision upon the whole; the question
concerning the substance of the soul is absolutely unintelligible: All
our perceptions are not susceptible of a local union, either with what is
extended or unextended: there being some of them of the one kind, and
some of the other: And as the constant conjunction of objects constitutes
the very essence of cause and effect, matter and motion may often be
regarded as the causes of thought, as far as we have any notion of that
relation.

It is certainly a kind of indignity to philosophy, whose sovereign
authority ought every where to be acknowledged, to oblige her on every
occasion to make apologies for her conclusions, and justify herself to
every particular art and science, which may be offended at her. This puts
one in mind of a king arrainged for high-treason against his subjects.
There is only one occasion, when philosophy will think it necessary and
even honourable to justify herself, and that is, when religion may seem
to be in the least offended; whose rights are as dear to her as her own,
and are indeed the same. If any one, therefore, should imagine that the
foregoing arguments are any ways dangerous to religion, I hope the
following apology will remove his apprehensions.

There is no foundation for any conclusion a priori, either concerning the
operations or duration of any object, of which it is possible for the
human mind to form a conception. Any object may be imagined to become
entirely inactive, or to be annihilated in a moment; and it is an evident
principle, that whatever we can imagine, is possible. Now this is no more
true of matter, than of spirit; of an extended compounded substance, than
of a simple and unextended. In both cases the metaphysical arguments for
the immortality of the soul are equally inconclusive: and in both cases
the moral arguments and those derived from the analogy of nature are
equally strong and convincing. If my philosophy, therefore, makes no
addition to the arguments for religion, I have at least the satisfaction
to think it takes nothing from them, but that every thing remains
precisely as before.



SECT. VI.  OF PERSONAL IDENTITY


There are some philosophers. who imagine we are every moment intimately
conscious of what we call our SELF; that we feel its existence and its
continuance in existence; and are certain, beyond the evidence of a
demonstration, both o its perfect identity and simplicity. The strongest
sensation, the most violent passion, say they, instead of distracting us
from this view, only fix it the more intensely, and make us consider
their influence on self either by their pain or pleasure. To attempt a
farther proof of this were to weaken its evidence; since no proof can be
derived from any fact, of which we are so intimately conscious; nor is
there any thing, of which we can be certain, if we doubt of this.

Unluckily all these positive assertions are contrary to that very
experience, which is pleaded for them, nor have we any idea of self,
after the manner it is here explained. For from what impression coued
this idea be derived? This question it is impossible to answer without a
manifest contradiction and absurdity; and yet it is a question, which must
necessarily be answered, if we would have the idea of self pass for clear
and intelligible, It must be some one impression, that gives rise to
every real idea. But self or person is not any one impression, but that
to which our several impressions and ideas are supposed to have a
reference. If any impression gives rise to the idea of self, that
impression must continue invariably the same, through the whole course of
our lives; since self is supposed to exist after that manner. But there
is no impression constant and invariable. Pain and pleasure, grief and
joy, passions and sensations succeed each other, and never all exist at
the same time. It cannot, therefore, be from any of these impressions,
or from any other, that the idea of self is derived; and consequently
there is no such idea.

But farther, what must become of all our particular perceptions upon this
hypothesis? All these are different, and distinguishable, and separable
from each other, and may be separately considered, and may exist
separately, and have no Deed of tiny thing to support their existence.
After what manner, therefore, do they belong to self; and how are they
connected with it? For my part, when I enter most intimately into what I
call myself, I always stumble on some particular perception or other, of
heat or cold, light or shade, love or hatred, pain or pleasure. I never
can catch myself at any time without a perception, and never can observe
any thing but the perception. When my perceptions are removed for any
time, as by sound sleep; so long am I insensible of myself, and may truly
be said not to exist. And were all my perceptions removed by death, and
coued I neither think, nor feel, nor see, nor love, nor hate after the
dissolution of my body, I should be entirely annihilated, nor do I
conceive what is farther requisite to make me a perfect non-entity. If
any one, upon serious and unprejudiced reflection thinks he has a
different notion of himself, I must confess I call reason no longer with
him. All I can allow him is, that he may be in the right as well as I,
and that we are essentially different in this particular. He may,
perhaps, perceive something simple and continued, which he calls himself;
though I am certain there is no such principle in me.

But setting aside some metaphysicians of this kind, I may venture to
affirm of the rest of mankind, that they are nothing but a bundle or
collection of different perceptions, which succeed each other with an
inconceivable rapidity, and are in a perpetual flux and movement. Our
eyes cannot turn in their sockets without varying our perceptions. Our
thought is still more variable than our sight; and all our other senses
and faculties contribute to this change; nor is there any single power of
the soul, which remains unalterably the same, perhaps for one moment. The
mind is a .kind of theatre, where several perceptions successively make
their appearance; pass, re-pass, glide away, and mingle in an infinite
variety of postures and situations. There is properly no simplicity in it
at one time, nor identity in different; whatever natural propension we
may have to imagine that simplicity and identity. The comparison of the
theatre must not mislead us. They are the successive perceptions only,
that constitute the mind; nor have we the most distant notion of the
place, where these scenes are represented, or of the materials, of which
it is composed.

What then gives us so great a propension to ascribe an identity to these
successive perceptions, and to suppose ourselves possest of an invariable
and uninterrupted existence through the whole course of our lives? In
order to answer this question, we must distinguish betwixt personal
identity, as it regards our thought or imagination, and as it regards our
passions or the concern we take in ourselves. The first is our present
subject; and to explain it perfectly we must take the matter pretty deep,
and account for that identity, which we attribute to plants and animals;
there being a great analogy betwixt it, and the identity of a self or
person.

We have a distinct idea of an object, that remains invariable and
uninterrupted through a supposed variation of time; and this idea we call
that of identity or sameness. We have also a distinct idea of several
different objects existing in succession, and connected together by a
close relation; and this to an accurate view affords as perfect a notion
of diversity, as if there was no manner of relation among the objects.
But though these two ideas of identity, and a succession of related
objects be in themselves perfectly distinct, and even contrary, yet it is
certain, that in our common way of thinking they are generally confounded
with each other. That action of the imagination, by which we consider the
uninterrupted and invariable object, and that by which we reflect on the
succession of related objects, are almost the same to the feeling, nor is
there much more effort of thought required in the latter case than in the
former. The relation facilitates the transition of the mind from one
object to another, and renders its passage as smooth as if it
contemplated one continued object. This resemblance is the cause of the
confusion and mistake, and makes us substitute the notion of identity,
instead of that of related objects. However at one instant we may
consider the related succession as variable or interrupted, we are sure
the next to ascribe to it a perfect identity, and regard it as enviable
and uninterrupted. Our propensity to this mistake is so great from the
resemblance above-mentioned, that we fall into it before we are aware;
and though we incessantly correct ourselves by reflection, and return to a
more accurate method of thinking, yet we cannot long sustain our
philosophy, or take off this biass from the imagination. Our last
resource is to yield to it, and boldly assert that these different
related objects are in effect the same, however interrupted and variable.
In order to justify to ourselves this absurdity, we often feign some new
and unintelligible principle, that connects the objects together, and
prevents their interruption or variation. Thus we feign the continued
existence of the perceptions of our senses, to remove the interruption:
and run into the notion of a soul, and self, and substance, to disguise
the variation. But we may farther observe, that where we do not give rise
to such a fiction, our propension to confound identity with relation is
so great, that we are apt to imagine [Footnote 10] something unknown and
mysterious, connecting the parts, beside their relation; and this I take
to be the case with regard to the identity we ascribe to plants and
vegetables. And even when this does not take place, we still feel a
propensity to confound these ideas, though we a-re not able fully to
satisfy ourselves in that particular, nor find any thing invariable and
uninterrupted to justify our notion of identity.

[Footnote 10  If the reader is desirous to see how a great genius may be
influencd by these seemingly trivial principles of the imagination, as
well as the mere vulgar, let him read my Lord SHAFTSBURYS reasonings
concerning the uniting principle of the universe, and the identity of
plants and animals. See his MORALISTS: or, PHILOSOPHICAL RHAPSODY.]

Thus the controversy concerning identity is not merely a dispute of
words. For when we attribute identity, in an improper sense, to variable
or interrupted objects, our mistake is not confined to the expression,
but is commonly attended with a fiction, either of something invariable
and uninterrupted, or of something mysterious and inexplicable, or at
least with a propensity to such fictions. What will suffice to prove this
hypothesis to the satisfaction of every fair enquirer, is to shew from
daily experience and observation, that the objects, which are variable or
interrupted, and yet are supposed to continue the same, are such only as
consist of a succession of parts, connected together by resemblance,
contiguity, or causation. For as such a succession answers evidently to
our notion of diversity, it can only be by mistake we ascribe to it an
identity; and as the relation of parts, which leads us into this mistake,
is really nothing but a quality, which produces an association of ideas,
and an easy transition of the imagination from one to another, it can
only be from the resemblance, which this act of the mind bears to that,
by which we contemplate one continued object, that the error arises. Our
chief business, then, must be to prove, that all objects, to which we
ascribe identity, without observing their invariableness and
uninterruptedness, are such as consist of a succession of related
objects.

In order to this, suppose any mass of matter, of which the parts are
contiguous and connected, to be placed before us; it is plain we must
attribute a perfect identity to this mass, provided all the parts
continue uninterruptedly and invariably the same, whatever motion or
change of place we may observe either in the whole or in any of the
parts. But supposing some very small or inconsiderable part to be added
to the mass, or subtracted from it; though this absolutely destroys the
identity of the whole, strictly speaking; yet as we seldom think so
accurately, we scruple not to pronounce a mass of matter the same, where
we find so trivial an alteration. The passage of the thought from the
object before the change to the object after it, is so smooth and easy,
that we scarce perceive the transition, and are apt to imagine, that it is
nothing but a continued survey of the same object.

There is a very remarkable circumstance, that attends this experiment;
which is, that though the change of any considerable part in a mass of
matter destroys the identity of the whole, let we must measure the
greatness of the part, not absolutely, but by its proportion to the
whole. The addition or diminution of a mountain would not be sufficient
to produce a diversity in a planet: though the change of a very few inches
would be able to destroy the identity of some bodies. It will be
impossible to account for this, but by reflecting that objects operate
upon the mind, and break or interrupt the continuity of its actions not
according to their real greatness, but according to their proportion to
each other: And therefore, since this interruption makes an object cease
to appear the same, it must be the uninterrupted progress o the thought,
which constitutes the imperfect identity.

This may be confirmed by another phenomenon. A change in any considerable
part of a body destroys its identity; but it is remarkable, that where the
change is produced gradually and insensibly we are less apt to ascribe to
it the same effect. The reason can plainly be no other, than that the
mind, in following the successive changes of the body, feels an easy
passage from the surveying its condition in one moment to the viewing of
it in another, and at no particular time perceives any interruption in
its actions. From which continued perception, it ascribes a continued
existence and identity to the object.

But whatever precaution we may use in introducing the changes gradually,
and making them proportionable to the whole, it is certain, that where the
changes are at last observed to become considerable, we make a scruple of
ascribing identity to such different objects. There is, however, another
artifice, by which we may induce the imagination to advance a step
farther; and that is, by producing a reference of the parts to each
other, and a combination to some common end or purpose. A ship, of which
a considerable part has been changed by frequent reparations, is still
considered as the same; nor does the difference of the materials hinder
us from ascribing an identity to it. The common end, in which the parts
conspire, is the same under all their variations, and affords an easy
transition of the imagination from one situation of the body to another.

But this is still more remarkable, when we add a sympathy of parts to
their common end, and suppose that they bear to each other, the
reciprocal relation of cause and effect in all their actions and
operations. This is the case with all animals and vegetables; where not
only the several parts have a reference to some general purpose, but also
a mutual dependence on, and connexion with each other. The effect of so
strong a relation is, that though every one must allow, that in a very few
years both vegetables and animals endure a total change, yet we still
attribute identity to them, while their form, size, and substance are
entirely altered. An oak, that grows from a small plant to a large tree,
is still the same oak; though there be not one particle of matter, or
figure of its parts the same. An infant becomes a man-, and is sometimes
fat, sometimes lean, without any change in his identity.

We may also consider the two following phaenomena, which are remarkable
in their kind. The first is, that though we commonly be able to
distinguish pretty exactly betwixt numerical and specific identity, yet it
sometimes happens, that we confound them, and in our thinking and
reasoning employ the one for the other. Thus a man, who bears a noise,
that is frequently interrupted and renewed, says, it is still the same
noise; though it is evident the sounds have only a specific identity or
resemblance, and there is nothing numerically the same, but the cause,
which produced them. In like manner it may be said without breach of the
propriety of language, that such a church, which was formerly of brick,
fell to ruin, and that the parish rebuilt the same church of free-stone,
and according to modern architecture. Here neither the form nor materials
are the same, nor is there any thing common to the two objects, but their
relation to the inhabitants of the parish; and yet this alone is
sufficient to make us denominate them the same. But we must observe, that
in these cases the first object is in a manner annihilated before the
second comes into existence; by which means, we are never presented in any
one point of time with the idea of difference and multiplicity: and for
that reason are less scrupulous in calling them the same.

Secondly, We may remark, that though in a succession of related objects,
it be in a manner requisite, that the change of parts be not sudden nor
entire, in order to preserve the identity, yet where the objects are in
their nature changeable and inconstant, we admit of a more sudden
transition, than would otherwise be consistent with that relation. Thus as
the nature of a river consists in the motion and change of parts; though
in less than four and twenty hours these be totally altered; this hinders
not the river from continuing the same during several ages. What is
natural and essential to any thing is, in a manner, expected; and what is
expected makes less impression, and appears of less moment, than what is
unusual and extraordinary. A considerable change of the former kind seems
really less to the imagination, than the most trivial alteration of the
latter; and by breaking less the continuity of the thought, has less
influence in destroying the identity.

We now proceed to explain the nature of personal identity, which has
become so great a question ill philosophy, especially of late years in
England, where all the abstruser sciences are studyed with a peculiar
ardour and application. And here it is evident, the same method of
reasoning must be continued. which has so successfully explained the
identity of plants, and animals, and ships, and houses, and of all the
compounded and changeable productions either of art or nature. The
identity, which we ascribe to the mind of man, is only a fictitious one,
and of a like kind with that which we ascribe to vegetables and animal
bodies. It cannot, therefore, have a different origin, but must proceed
from a like operation of the imagination upon like objects.

But lest this argument should not convince the reader; though in my
opinion perfectly decisive; let him weigh the following reasoning, which
is still closer and more immediate. It is evident, that the identity,
which we attribute to the human mind, however perfect we may imagine it to
be, is not able to run the several different perceptions into one, and
make them lose their characters of distinction and difference, which are
essential to them. It is still true, that every distinct perception, which
enters into the composition of the mind, is a distinct existence, and is
different, and distinguishable, and separable from every other
perception, either contemporary or successive. But, as, notwithstanding
this distinction and separability, we suppose the whole train of
perceptions to be united by identity, a question naturally arises
concerning this relation of identity; whether it be something that really
binds our several perceptions together, or only associates their ideas in
the imagination. That is, in other words, whether in pronouncing
concerning the identity of a person, we observe some real bond among his
perceptions, or only feel one among the ideas we form of them. This
question we might easily decide, if we would recollect what has been
already proud at large, that the understanding never observes any real
connexion among objects, and that even the union of cause and effect,
when strictly examined, resolves itself into a customary association of
ideas. For from thence it evidently follows, that identity is nothing
really belonging to these different perceptions, and uniting them
together; but is merely a quality, which we attribute to them, because of
the union of their ideas in the imagination, when we reflect upon them.
Now the only qualities, which can give ideas an union in the imagination,
are these three relations above-mentioned. There are the uniting
principles in the ideal world, and without them every distinct object is
separable by the mind, and may be separately considered, and appears not
to have any more connexion with any other object, than if disjoined by
the greatest difference and remoteness. It is, therefore, on some of these
three relations of resemblance, contiguity and causation, that identity
depends; and as the very essence of these relations consists in their
producing an easy transition of ideas; it follows, that our notions of
personal identity, proceed entirely from the smooth and uninterrupted
progress of the thought along a train of connected ideas, according to
the principles above-explained.

The only question, therefore, which remains, is, by what relations this
uninterrupted progress of our thought is produced, when we consider the
successive existence of a mind or thinking person. And here it is evident
we must confine ourselves to resemblance and causation, and must drop
contiguity, which has little or no influence in the present case.

To begin with resemblance; suppose we coued see clearly into the breast
of another, and observe that succession of perceptions, which constitutes
his mind or thinking principle, and suppose that he always preserves the
memory of a considerable part of past perceptions; it is evident that
nothing coued more contribute to the bestowing a relation on this
succession amidst all its variations. For what is the memory but a
faculty, by which we raise up the images of past perceptions? And as an
image necessarily resembles its object, must not. the frequent placing of
these resembling perceptions in the chain of thought, convey the
imagination more easily from one link to another, and make the whole seem
like the continuance of one object? In this particular, then, the memory
not only discovers the identity, but also contributes to its production,
by producing the relation of resemblance among the perceptions. The case
is the same whether we consider ourselves or others.

As to causation; we may observe, that the true idea of the human mind, is
to consider it as a system of different perceptions or different
existences, which are linked together by the relation of cause and
effect, and mutually produce, destroy, influence, and modify each other.
Our impressions give rise to their correspondent ideas; said these ideas
in their turn produce other impressions. One thought chaces another, and
draws after it a third, by which it is expelled in its turn. In this
respect, I cannot compare the soul more properly to any thing than to a
republic or commonwealth, in which the several members are united by the
reciprocal ties of government and subordination, and give rise to other
persons, who propagate the same republic in the incessant changes of its
parts. And as the same individual republic may not only change its
members, but also its laws and constitutions; in like manner the same
person may vary his character and disposition, as well as his impressions
and ideas, without losing his identity. Whatever changes he endures, his
several parts are still connected by the relation of causation. And in
this view our identity with regard to the passions serves to corroborate
that with regard to the imagination, by the making our distant
perceptions influence each other, and by giving us a present concern for
our past or future pains or pleasures.

As a memory alone acquaints us with the continuance and extent of this
succession of perceptions, it is to be considered, upon that account
chiefly, as the source of personal identity. Had we no memory, we never
should have any notion of causation, nor consequently of that chain of
causes and effects, which constitute our self or person. But having once
acquired this notion of causation from the memory, we can extend the same
chain of causes, and consequently the identity of car persons beyond our
memory, and can comprehend times, and circumstances, and actions, which
we have entirely forgot, but suppose in general to have existed. For how
few of our past actions are there, of which we have any memory? Who can
tell me, for instance, what were his thoughts and actions on the 1st of
January 1715, the 11th of March 1719, and the 3rd of August 1733? Or will
he affirm, because he has entirely forgot the incidents of these days,
that the present self is not the same person with the self of that time;
and by that means overturn all the most established notions of personal
identity? In this view, therefore, memory does not so much produce as
discover personal identity, by shewing us the relation of cause and
effect among our different perceptions. It will be incumbent on those, who
affirm that memory produces entirely our personal identity, to give a
reason why we cm thus extend our identity beyond our memory.

The whole of this doctrine leads us to a conclusion, which is of great
importance in the present affair, viz. that all the nice and subtile
questions concerning personal identity can never possibly be decided, and
are to be regarded rather as gramatical than as philosophical
difficulties. Identity depends on the relations of ideas; and these
relations produce identity, by means of that easy transition they
occasion. But as the relations, and the easiness of the transition may
diminish by insensible degrees, we have no just standard, by. which we
can decide any dispute concerning the time, when they acquire or lose a
title to the name of identity. All the disputes concerning the identity
of connected objects are merely verbal, except so fax as the relation of
parts gives rise to some fiction or imaginary principle of union, as we
have already observed.

What I have said concerning the first origin and uncertainty of our
notion of identity, as applied to the human mind, may be extended with
little or no variation to that of simplicity. An object, whose different
co-existent parts are bound together by a close relation, operates upon
the imagination after much the same manner as one perfectly simple and
indivisible and requires not a much greater stretch of thought in order
to its conception. From this similarity of operation we attribute a
simplicity to it, and feign a principle of union as the support of this
simplicity, and the center of all the different parts and qualities of
the object.

Thus we have finished our examination of the several systems of
philosophy, both of the intellectual and natural world; and in our
miscellaneous way of reasoning have been led into several topics; which
will either illustrate and confirm some preceding part of this discourse,
or prepare the way for our following opinions. It is now time to return to
a more close examination of our subject, and to proceed in the accurate
anatomy of human nature, having fully explained the nature of our
judgment and understandings.



SECT. VII.  CONCLUSION OF THIS BOOK.


But before I launch out into those immense depths of philosophy, which
lie before me, I find myself inclined to stop a moment in my present
station, and to ponder that voyage, which I have undertaken, and which
undoubtedly requires the utmost art and industry to be brought to a happy
conclusion. Methinks I am like a man, who having struck on many shoals,
and having narrowly escaped shipwreck in passing a small frith, has yet
the temerity to put out to sea in the same leaky weather-beaten vessel,
and even carries his ambition so far as to think of compassing the globe
under these disadvantageous circumstances. My memory of past errors and
perplexities, makes me diffident for the future. The wretched condition,
weakness, and disorder of the faculties, I must employ in my enquiries,
encrease my apprehensions. And the impossibility of amending or
correcting these faculties, reduces me almost to despair, and makes me
resolve to perish on the barren rock, on which I am at present, rather
than venture myself upon that boundless ocean, which runs out into
immensity. This sudden view of my danger strikes me with melancholy; and
as it is usual for that passion, above all others, to indulge itself; I
cannot forbear feeding my despair, with all those desponding reflections,
which the present subject furnishes me with in such abundance.

I am first affrighted and confounded with that forelorn solitude, in
which I am placed in my philosophy, and fancy myself some strange uncouth
monster, who not being able to mingle and unite in society, has been
expelled all human commerce, and left utterly abandoned and disconsolate.
Fain would I run into the crowd for shelter and warmth; but cannot
prevail with myself to mix with such deformity. I call upon others to
join me, in order to make a company apart; but no one will hearken to me.
Every one keeps at a distance, and dreads that storm, which beats upon me
from every side. I have exposed myself to the enmity of all
metaphysicians, logicians, mathematicians, and even theologians; and can
I wonder at the insults I must suffer? I have declared my disapprobation
of their systems; and can I be surprized, if they should express a hatred
of mine and of my person? When I look abroad, I foresee on every side,
dispute, contradiction, anger, calumny and detraction. When I turn my eye
inward, I find nothing but doubt and ignorance. All the world conspires
to oppose and contradict me; though such is my weakness, that I feel all
my opinions loosen and fall of themselves, when unsupported by the
approbation of others. Every step I take is with hesitation, and every
new reflection makes me dread an error and absurdity in my reasoning.

For with what confidence can I venture upon such bold enterprises, when
beside those numberless infirmities peculiar to myself, I find so many
which are common to human nature? Can I be sure, that in leaving all
established opinions I am following truth; and by what criterion shall I
distinguish her, even if fortune should at last guide me on her
foot-steps? After the most accurate and exact of my reasonings, I can
give no reason why I should assent to it; and feel nothing but a strong
propensity to consider objects strongly in that view, under which they
appear to me. Experience is a principle, which instructs me in the
several conjunctions of objects for the past. Habit is another principle,
which determines me to expect the same for the future; and both of them
conspiring to operate upon the imagination, make me form certain ideas in
a more intense and lively manner, than others, which are not attended
with the same advantages. Without this quality, by which the mind
enlivens some ideas beyond others (which seemingly is so trivial, and so
little founded on reason) we coued never assent to any argument, nor
carry our view beyond those few objects, which are present to our senses.
Nay, even to these objects we coued never attribute any existence, but
what was dependent on the senses; and must comprehend them entirely in
that succession of perceptions, which constitutes our self or person. Nay
farther, even with relation to that succession, we coued only admit of
those perceptions, which are immediately present to our consciousness,
nor coued those lively images, with which the memory presents us, be ever
received as true pictures of past perceptions. The memory, senses, and
understanding are, therefore, all of them founded on the imagination, or
the vivacity of our ideas.

No wonder a principle so inconstant and fallacious should lead us into
errors, when implicitly followed (as it must be) in all its variations.
It is this principle, which makes us reason from causes and effects; and
it is the same principle, which convinces us of the continued existence of
external objects, when absent from the senses. But though these two
operations be equally natural and necessary in the human mind, yet in
some circumstances they are [Sect. 4.] directly contrary, nor is it
possible for us to reason justly and regularly from causes and effects,
and at the same time believe the continued existence of matter. How then
shall we adjust those principles together? Which of them shall we prefer?
Or in case we prefer neither of them, but successively assent to both, as
is usual among philosophers, with what confidence can we afterwards usurp
that glorious title, when we thus knowingly embrace a manifest
contradiction?

This contradiction [Part III. Sect. 14.] would be more excusable, were it
compensated by any degree of solidity and satisfaction in the other parts
of our reasoning. But the case is quite contrary. When we trace up the
human understanding to its first principles, we find it to lead us into
such sentiments, as seem to turn into ridicule all our past pains and
industry, and to discourage us from future enquiries. Nothing is more
curiously enquired after by the mind of man, than the causes of every
phenomenon; nor are we content with knowing the immediate causes, but
push on our enquiries, till we arrive at the original and ultimate
principle. We would not willingly stop before we are acquainted with that
energy in the cause, by which it operates on its effect; that tie, which
connects them together; and that efficacious quality, on which the tie
depends. This is our aim in all our studies and reflections: And how must
we be disappointed, when we learn, that this connexion, tie, or energy
lies merely in ourselves, and is nothing but that determination of the
mind, which is acquired by custom, and causes us to make a transition
from an object to its usual attendant, and from the impression of one to
the lively idea of the other? Such a discovery not only cuts off all hope
of ever attaining satisfaction, but even prevents our very wishes; since
it appears, that when we say we desire to know the ultimate and operating
principle, as something, which resides in the external object, we either
contradict ourselves, or talk without a meaning.

This deficiency in our ideas is not, indeed, perceived in common life,
nor are we sensible, that in the most usual conjunctions of cause and
effect we are as ignorant of the ultimate principle, which binds them
together, as in the most unusual and extraordinary. But this proceeds
merely from an illusion of the imagination; and the question is, how far
we ought to yield to these illusions. This question is very difficult,
and reduces us to a very dangerous dilemma, whichever way we answer it.
For if we assent to every trivial suggestion of the fancy; beside that
these suggestions are often contrary to each other; they lead us into
such errors, absurdities, and obscurities, that we must at last become
ashamed of our credulity. Nothing is more dangerous to reason than the
flights of the imagination, and nothing has been the occasion of more
mistakes among philosophers. Men of bright fancies may in this respect be
compared to those angels, whom the scripture represents as covering their
eyes with their wings. This has already appeared in so many instances,
that we may spare ourselves the trouble of enlarging upon it any farther.

But on the other hand, if the consideration of these instances makes us
take a resolution to reject all the trivial suggestions of the fancy, and
adhere to the understanding, that is, to the general and more established
properties of the imagination; even this resolution, if steadily
executed, would be dangerous, and attended with the most fatal
consequences. For I have already shewn [Sect. 1.], that the understanding,
when it acts alone, and according to its most general principles, entirely
subverts itself, and leaves not the lowest degree of evidence in any
proposition, either in philosophy or common life. We save ourselves from
this total scepticism only by means of that singular and seemingly
trivial property of the fancy, by which we enter with difficulty into
remote views of things, and are not able to accompany them with so
sensible an impression, as we do those, which are more easy and natural.
Shall we, then, establish it for a general maxim, that no refined or
elaborate reasoning is ever to be received? Consider well the
consequences of such a principle. By this means you cut off entirely all
science and philosophy: You proceed upon one singular quality of the
imagination, and by a parity of reason must embrace all of them: And you
expressly contradict yourself; since this maxim must be built on the
preceding reasoning, which will be allowed to be sufficiently refined and
metaphysical. What party, then, shall we choose among these difficulties?
If we embrace this principle, and condemn all refined reasoning, we run
into the most manifest absurdities. If we reject it in favour of these
reasonings, we subvert entirely the, human understanding. We have,
therefore, no choice left but betwixt a false reason and none at all. For
my part, know not what ought to be done in the present case. I can only
observe what is commonly done; which is, that this difficulty is seldom
or never thought of; and even where it has once been present to the mind,
is quickly forgot, and leaves but a small impression behind it. Very
refined reflections have little or no influence upon us; and yet we do
not, and cannot establish it for a rule, that they ought not to have any
influence; which implies a manifest contradiction.

But what have I here said, that reflections very refined and metaphysical
have little or no influence upon us? This opinion I can scarce forbear
retracting, and condemning from my present feeling and experience. The
intense view of these manifold contradictions and imperfections in human
reason has so wrought upon me, and heated my brain, that I am ready to
reject all belief and reasoning, and can look upon no opinion even as
more probable or likely than another. Where am I, or what? From what
causes do I derive my existence, and to what condition shall I return?
Whose favour shall I court, and whose anger must I dread? What beings
surround me? and on whom have, I any influence, or who have any influence
on me? I am confounded with all these questions, and begin to fancy
myself in the most deplorable condition imaginable, invironed with the
deepest darkness, and utterly deprived of the use of every member and
faculty.

Most fortunately it happens, that since reason is incapable of dispelling
these clouds, nature herself suffices to that purpose, and cures me of
this philosophical melancholy and delirium, either by relaxing this bent
of mind, or by some avocation, and lively impression of my senses, which
obliterate all these chimeras. I dine, I play a game of backgammon, I
converse, and am merry with my friends; and when after three or four
hours' amusement, I would return to these speculations, they appear so
cold, and strained, and ridiculous, that I cannot find in my heart to
enter into them any farther.

Here then I find myself absolutely and necessarily determined to live,
and talk, and act like other people in the common affairs of life. But
notwithstanding that my natural propensity, and the course of my animal
spirits and passions reduce me to this indolent belief in the general
maxims of the world, I still feel such remains of my former disposition,
that I am ready to throw all my books and papers into the fire, and
resolve never more to renounce the pleasures of life for the sake of
reasoning and philosophy. For those are my sentiments in that splenetic
humour, which governs me at present. I may, nay I must yield to the
current of nature, in submitting to my senses and understanding; and in
this blind submission I shew most perfectly my sceptical disposition and
principles. But does it follow, that I must strive against the current of
nature, which leads me to indolence and pleasure; that I must seclude
myself, in some measure, from the commerce and society of men, which is
so agreeable; and that I must torture my brains with subtilities and
sophistries, at the very time that I cannot satisfy myself concerning the
reasonableness of so painful an application, nor have any tolerable
prospect of arriving by its means at truth and certainty. Under what
obligation do I lie of making such an abuse of time? And to what end can
it serve either for the service of mankind, or for my own private
interest? No: If I must be a fool, as all those who reason or believe any
thing certainly are, my follies shall at least be natural and agreeable.
Where I strive against my inclination, I shall have a good reason for my
resistance; and will no more be led a wandering into such dreary
solitudes, and rough passages, as I have hitherto met with.

These are the sentiments of my spleen and indolence; and indeed I must
confess, that philosophy has nothing to oppose to them, and expects a
victory more from the returns of a serious good-humoured disposition,
than from the force of reason and conviction. In all the incidents of
life we ought still to preserve our scepticism. If we believe, that fire
warms, or water refreshes, it is only because it costs us too much pains
to think otherwise. Nay if we are philosophers, it ought only to be upon
sceptical principles, and from an inclination, which we feel to the
employing ourselves after that manner. Where reason is lively, and mixes
itself with some propensity, it ought to be assented to. Where it does
not, it never can have any title to operate upon us.

At the time, therefore, that I am tired with amusement and company, and
have indulged a reverie in my chamber, or in a solitary walk by a
river-side, I feel my mind all collected within itself, and am naturally
inclined to carry my view into all those subjects, about which I have met
with so many disputes in the course of my reading and conversation. I
cannot forbear having a curiosity to be acquainted with the principles of
moral good and evil, the nature and foundation of government, and the
cause of those several passions and inclinations, which actuate and
govern me. I am uneasy to think I approve of one object, and disapprove
of another; call one thing beautiful, and another deformed; decide
concerning truth and falshood, reason and folly, without knowing upon
what principles I proceed. I am concerned for the condition of the
learned world, which lies under such t deplorable ignorance in all these
particulars. I feel an ambition to arise in me of contributing to the
instruction of mankind, and of acquiring a name by my inventions and
discoveries. These sentiments spring up naturally in my present
disposition; and should I endeavour to banish them, by attaching myself
to any other business or diversion, I feel I should be a loser in point
of pleasure; and this is the origin of my philosophy.

But even suppose this curiosity and ambition should not transport me into
speculations without the sphere of common life, it would necessarily
happen, that from my very weakness I must be led into such enquiries.
It is certain, that superstition is much more bold in its systems and
hypotheses than philosophy; and while the latter contents itself with
assigning new causes and principles to the phaenomena, which appear in
the visible world, the former opens a world of its own, and presents us
with scenes, and beings, and objects, which are altogether new. Since
therefore it is almost impossible for the mind of man to rest, like those
of beasts, in that narrow circle of objects, which are the subject of
daily conversation and action, we ought only to deliberate concerning the
choice of our guide, and ought to prefer that which is safest and most
agreeable. And in this respect I make bold to recommend philosophy, and
shall not scruple to give it the preference to superstition of every kind
or denomination. For as superstition arises naturally and easily from the
popular opinions of mankind, it seizes more strongly on the mind, and is
often able to disturb us in the conduct of our lives and actions.
Philosophy on the contrary, if just, can present us only with mild and
moderate sentiments; and if false and extravagant, its opinions are
merely the objects of a cold and general speculation, and seldom go so
far as to interrupt the course of our natural propensities. The CYNICS
are an extraordinary instance of philosophers, who from reasonings purely
philosophical ran into as great extravagancies of conduct as any Monk or
Dervise that ever was in the world. Generally speaking, the errors in
religion are dangerous; those in philosophy only ridiculous.

I am sensible, that these two cases of the strength and weakness of the
mind will not comprehend all mankind, and that there are in England, in
particular, many honest gentlemen, who being always employed in their
domestic affairs, or amusing themselves in common recreations, have
carried their thoughts very little beyond those objects, which are every
day exposed to their senses. And indeed, of such as these I pretend not
to make philosophers, nor do I expect them either to be associates in
these researches or auditors of these discoveries. They do well to keep
themselves in their present situation; and instead of refining them into
philosophers, I wish we coued communicate to our founders of systems, a
share of this gross earthy mixture, as an ingredient, which they commonly
stand much in need of, and which would serve to temper those fiery
particles, of which they are composed. While a warm imagination is
allowed to enter into philosophy, and hypotheses embraced merely for
being specious and agreeable, we can never have any steady principles,
nor any sentiments, which will suit with common practice and experience.
But were these hypotheses once removed, we might hope to establish a
system or set of opinions, which if not true (for that, perhaps, is too
much to be hoped for) might at least be satisfactory to the human mind,
and might stand the test of the most critical examination. Nor should we
despair of attaining this end, because of the many chimerical systems,
which have successively arisen and decayed away among men, would we
consider the shortness of that period, wherein these questions have been
the subjects of enquiry and reasoning. Two thousand years with such long
interruptions, and under such mighty discouragements are a small space of
time to give any tolerable perfection to the sciences; and perhaps we are
still in too early an age of the world to discover any principles, which
will bear the examination of the latest posterity. For my part, my only
hope is, that I may contribute a little to the advancement of knowledge,
by giving in some particulars a different turn to the speculations of
philosophers, and pointing out to them more distinctly those subjects,
where alone they can expect assurance and conviction. Human Nature is the
only science of man; and yet has been hitherto the most neglected. It will
be sufficient for me, if I can bring it a little more into fashion; and
the hope of this serves to compose my temper from that spleen, and
invigorate it from that indolence, which sometimes prevail upon me. If
the reader finds himself in the same easy disposition, let him follow me
in my future speculations. If not, let him follow his inclination, and
wait the returns of application and good humour. The conduct of a man,
who studies philosophy in this careless manner, is more truly sceptical
than that of one, who feeling in himself an inclination to it, is yet so
overwhelmed with doubts and scruples, as totally to reject it. A true
sceptic will be diffident of his philosophical doubts, as well as of his
philosophical conviction; and will never refuse any innocent
satisfaction, which offers itself, upon account of either of them.

Nor is it only proper we should in general indulge our inclination in the
most elaborate philosophical researches, notwithstanding our sceptical
principles, but also that we should yield to that propensity, which
inclines us to be positive and certain in particular points, according to
the light, in which we survey them in any particular instant. It is easier
to forbear all examination and enquiry, than to check ourselves in so
natural a propensity, and guard against that assurance, which always
arises from an exact and full survey of an object. On such an occasion we
are apt not only to forget our scepticism, but even our modesty too; and
make use of such terms as these, it is evident, it is certain, it is
undeniable; which a due deference to the public ought, perhaps, to
prevent. I may have fallen into this fault after the example of others;
but I here enter a caveat against any Objections, which may be offered on
that head; and declare that such expressions were extorted from me by the
present view of the object, and imply no dogmatical spirit, nor conceited
idea of my own judgment, which are sentiments that I am sensible can
become no body, and a sceptic still less than any other.





BOOK II  OF THE PASSIONS




PART I  OF PRIDE AND HUMILITY



SECT. I  DIVISION OF THE SUBJECT


As all the perceptions of the mind may be divided into impressions and
ideas, so the impressions admit of another division into original and
secondary. This division of the impressions is the same with that
which I formerly made use of [Book I. Part I. Sect. 2.] when I
distinguished them into impressions of sensation and reflection. Original
impressions or impressions of sensation are such as without any antecedent
perception arise in the soul, from the constitution of the body, from the
animal spirits, or from the application of objects to the external organs.
Secondary, or reflective impressions are such as proceed from some of
these original ones, either immediately or by the interposition of its
idea. Of the first kind are all the impressions of the senses, and all
bodily pains and pleasures: Of the second are the passions, and other
emotions resembling them.

It is certain, that the mind, in its perceptions, must begin somewhere;
and that since the impressions precede their correspondent ideas, there
must be some impressions, which without any introduction make their
appearance in the soul. As these depend upon natural and physical causes,
the examination of them would lead me too far from my present subject,
into the sciences of anatomy and natural philosophy. For this reason I
shall here confine myself to those other impressions, which I have called
secondary and reflective, as arising either from the original
impressions, or from their ideas. Bodily pains and pleasures are the
source of many passions, both when felt and considered by the mind; but
arise originally in the soul, or in the body, whichever you please to
call it, without any preceding thought or perception. A fit of the gout
produces a long train of passions, as grief, hope, fear; but is not
derived immediately from any affection or idea. The reflective
impressions may be divided into two kinds, viz. the calm and the VIOLENT.
Of the first kind is the sense of beauty and deformity in action,
composition, and external objects. Of the second are the passions of love
and hatred, grief and joy, pride and humility. This division is far from
being exact. The raptures of poetry and music frequently rise to the
greatest height; while those other impressions, properly called PASSIONS,
may decay into so soft an emotion, as to become, in a manner,
imperceptible. But as in general the passions are more violent than the
emotions arising from beauty and deformity, these impressions have been
commonly distinguished from each other. The subject of the human mind
being so copious and various, I shall here take advantage of this vulgar
and spacious division, that I may proceed with the greater order; and
having said ali I thought necessary concerning our ideas, shall now
explain those violent emotions or passions, their nature, origin, causes,
and effects.

When we take a survey of the passions, there occurs a division of them
into DIRECT and INDIRECT. By direct passions I understand such as arise
immediately from good or evil, from pain or pleasure. By indirect such as
proceed from the same principles, but by the conjunction of other
qualities. This distinction I cannot at present justify or explain any
farther. I can only observe in general, that under the indirect passions
I comprehend pride, humility, ambition, vanity, love, hatred, envy, pity,
malice, generosity, with their dependants. And under the direct passions,
desire, aversion, grief, joy, hope, fear, despair and security. I shall
begin with the former.



SECT. II  OF PRIDE AND HUMILITY, THEIR OBJECTS AND CAUSES


The passions of PRIDE and HUMILITY being simple and uniform impressions,
it is impossible we can ever, by a multitude of words, give a just
definition of them, or indeed of any of the passions. The utmost we can
pretend to is a description of them, by an enumeration of such
circumstances, as attend them: But as these words, PRIDE and humility,
are of general use, and the impressions they represent the most common of
any, every one, of himself, will be able to form a just idea of them,
without any danger of mistake. For which reason, not to lose time upon
preliminaries, I shall immediately enter upon the examination of these
passions.

It is evident, that pride and humility, though directly contrary, have yet
the same OBJECT. This object is self, or that succession of related ideas
and impressions, of which we have an intimate memory and consciousness.
Here the view always fixes when we are actuated by either of these
passions. According as our idea of ourself is more or less advantageous,
we feel either of those opposite affections, and are elated by pride, or
dejected with humility. Whatever other objects may be comprehended by the
mind, they are always considered with a view to ourselves; otherwise they
would never be able either to excite these passions, or produce the
smallest encrease or diminution of them. When self enters not into the
consideration, there is no room either for pride or humility.

But though that connected succession of perceptions, which we call SELF,
be always the object of these two passions, it is impossible it can be
their CAUSE, or be sufficient alone to excite them. For as these passions
are directly contrary, and have the same object in common; were their
object also their cause; it coued never produce any degree of the one
passion, but at the same time it must excite an equal degree of the other;
which opposition and contrariety must destroy both. It is impossible a man
can at the same time be both proud and humble; and where he has different
reasons for these passions, as frequently happens, the passions either
take place alternately; or if they encounter, the one annihilates the
other, as far as its strength goes, and the remainder only of that, which
is superior, continues to operate upon the mind. But in the present case
neither of the passions coued ever become superior; because supposing it
to be the view only of ourself, which excited them, that being perfectly
indifferent to either, must produce both in the very same proportion; or
in other words, can produce neither. To excite any passion, and at the
same time raise an equal share of its antagonist, is immediately to undo
what was done, and must leave the mind at last perfectly calm and
indifferent.

We must therefore, make a distinction betwixt the cause and the object of
these passions; betwixt that idea, which excites them, and that to which
they direct their view, when excited. Pride and humility, being once
raised, immediately turn our attention to ourself, and regard that as
their ultimate and final object; but there is something farther requisite
in order to raise them: Something, which is peculiar to one of the
passions, and produces not both in the very same degree. The first idea,
that is presented to the mind, is that of the cause or productive
principle. This excites the passion, connected with it; and that passion,
when excited. turns our view to another idea, which is that of self. Here
then is a passion placed betwixt two ideas, of which the one produces it,
and the other is produced by it. The first idea, therefore, represents
the cause, the second the object of the passion.

To begin with the causes of pride and humility; we may observe, that
their most obvious and remarkable property is the vast variety of
subjects, on which they may be placed. Every valuable quality of the
mind, whether of the imagination, judgment, memory or disposition; wit,
good-sense, learning, courage, justice, integrity; all these are the
cause of pride; and their opposites of humility. Nor are these passions
confined to the mind but extend their view to the body likewise. A man
may he proud of his beauty, strength, agility, good mein, address in
dancing, riding, and of his dexterity in any manual business or
manufacture. But this is not all. The passions looking farther,
comprehend whatever objects are in the least allyed or related to us. Our
country, family, children, relations, riches, houses, gardens, horses,
dogs, cloaths; any of these may become a cause either of pride or of
humility.

From the consideration of these causes, it appears necessary we shoud
make a new distinction in the causes of the passion, betwixt that
QUALITY, which operates, and the subject, on which it is placed. A man,
for instance, is vain of a beautiful house, which belongs to him, or
which he has himself built and contrived. Here the object of the passion
is himself, and the cause is the beautiful house: Which cause again is
sub-divided into two parts, viz. the quality, which operates upon the
passion, and the subject in which the quality inheres. The quality is the
beauty, and the subject is the house, considered as his property or
contrivance. Both these parts are essential, nor is the distinction vain
and chimerical. Beauty, considered merely as such, unless placed upon
something related to us, never produces any pride or vanity; and the
strongest. relation alone, without beauty, or something else in its
place, has as little influence on that passion. Since, therefore, these
two particulars are easily separated and there is a necessity for their
conjunction, in order to produce the passion, we ought to consider them
as component parts of the cause; and infix in our minds an exact idea of
this distinction.



SECT. III  WHENCE THESE OBJECTS AND CAUSES ARE DERIVED


Being so far advanced as to observe a difference betwixt the object of
the passions and their cause, and to distinguish in the cause the
quality, which operates on the passions, from the subject, in which it
inheres; we now proceed to examine what determines each of them to be
what it is, and assigns such a particular object, and quality, and
subject to these affections. By this means we shall fully understand the
origin of pride and humility.

It is evident in the first place, that these passions are derermined to
have self for their object, not only by a natural but also by an original
property. No one can doubt but this property is natural from the constancy
and steadiness of its operations. It is always self, which is the
object of pride and humility; and whenever the passions look beyond, it is
still with a view to ourselves, nor can any person or object otherwise
have any influence upon us.

That this proceeds from an original quality or primary impulse, will
likewise appear evident, if we consider that it is the distinguishing
characteristic of these passions Unless nature had given some original
qualities to the mind, it coued never have any secondary ones; because in
that case it would have no foundation for action, nor coued ever begin to
exert itself. Now these qualities, which we must consider as original,
are such as are most inseparable from the soul, and can be resolved into
no other: And such is the quality, which determines the object of pride
and humility. We may, perhaps, make it a greater question, whether the
causes, that produce the passion, be as natural as the object, to which
it is directed, and whether all that vast variety proceeds from caprice
or from the constitution of the mind. This doubt we shall soon remove, if
we cast our eye upon human nature, and consider that in all nations and
ages, the same objects still give rise to pride and humility; and that
upon the view even of a stranger, we can know pretty nearly, what will
either encrease or diminish his passions of this kind. If there be any
variation in this particular, it proceeds from nothing but a difference
in the tempers and complexions of men; and is besides very
inconsiderable. Can we imagine it possible, that while human nature
remains the same, men will ever become entirely indifferent to their
power, riches, beauty or personal merit, and that their pride and vanity
will not be affected by these advantages?

But though the causes of pride and humility be plainly natural, we shall
find upon examination, that they are not original, and that it is utterly
impossible they should each of them be adapted to these passions by a
particular provision, and primary constitution of nature, Beside their
prodigious number, many of them are the effects of art, and arise partly
from the industry, partly from the caprice, and partly from the good
fortune of men, Industry produces houses, furniture, cloaths. Caprice
determines their particular kinds and qualities. And good fortune
frequently contributes to all this, by discovering the effects that
result from the different mixtures and combinations of bodies. It is
absurd, therefore, to imagine, that each of these was foreseen and
provided for by nature, and that every new production of art, which
causes pride or humility; instead of adapting itself to the passion by
partaking of some general quality, that naturally operates on the mind;
is itself the object of an original principle, which till then lay
concealed in the soul, and is only by accident at last brought to light.
Thus the first mechanic, that invented a fine scritoire, produced pride
in him, who became possest of it, by principles different from those,
which made him proud of handsome chairs and tables. As this appears
evidently ridiculous, we must conclude, that each cause of pride and
humility is not adapted to the passions by a distinct original quality;
but that there are some one or more circumstances common to all of them,
on which their efficacy depends.

Besides, we find in the course of nature, that though the effects be many,
the principles, from which they arise, are commonly but few and simple,
and that it is the sign of an unskilful naturalist to have recourse to a
different quality, in order to explain every different operation. How
much more must this be true with regard to the human mind, which being so
confined a subject may justly be thought incapable of containing such a
monstrous heap of principles, as wou d be necessary to excite the
passions of pride and humility, were each distinct cause adapted to the
passion by a distinct set of principles?

Here, therefore, moral philosophy is in the same condition as natural,
with regard to astronomy before the time of COPERNICUS. The antients,
though sensible of that maxim, THAT NATURE DOES NOTHING IN VAIN, contrived
such intricate systems of the heavens, as seemed inconsistent with true
philosophy, and gave place at last to something more simple and natural.
To invent without scruple a new principle to every new phaenomenon,
instead of adapting it to the old; to overload our hypotheses with a
variety of this kind; are certain proofs, that none of these principles
is the just one, and that we only desire, by a number of falsehoods, to
cover our ignorance of the truth.



SECT. IV  OF THE RELATIONS OF IMPRESSIONS AND IDEAS


Thus we have established two truths without any obstacle or difficulty,
that IT IS FROM NATURAL PRINCIPLES THIS VARIETY OF CAUSES EXCITES PRIDE
AND HUMILITY, and that IT IS NOT BY A DIFFERENT PRINCIPLE EACH DIFFERENT
CAUSE IS ADAPTED TO ITS PASSION. We shall now proceed to enquire how we
may reduce these principles to a lesser number, and find among the causes
something common, on which their influence depends.

In order to this we must reflect on certain properties of human nature,
which though they have a mighty influence on every operation both of the
understanding and passions, are not commonly much insisted on by
philosophers. The first of these is the association of ideas, which I
have so often observed and explained. It is impossible for the mind to fix
itself steadily upon one idea for any considerable time; nor can it by
its utmost efforts ever arrive at such a constancy. But however
changeable our thoughts may be, they are not entirely without rule and
method in their changes. The rule, by which they proceed, is to pass from
one object to what is resembling, contiguous to, or produced by it. When
one idea is present to the imagination, any other, united by these
relations, naturally follows it, and enters with more facility by means
of that introduction.

The second property I shall observe in the human mind is a like
association of impressions. All resembling impressions are connected
together, and no sooner one arises than the rest immediately follow.
Grief and disappointment give rise to anger, anger to envy, envy to
malice, and malice to grief again, till the whole circle be compleated.
In like manner our temper, when elevated with joy, naturally throws
itself into love, generosity, pity, courage, pride, and the other
resembling affections. It is difficult for the mind, when actuated by any
passion, to confine itself to that passion alone, without any change or
variation. Human nature is too inconstant to admit of any such
regularity. Changeableness is essential to it. And to what can it so
naturally change as to affections or emotions, which are suitable to the
temper, and agree with that set of passions, which then prevail? It is
evident, then, there is an attraction or association among impressions,
as well as among ideas; though with this remarkable difference, that ideas
are associated by resemblance, contiguity, and causation; and impressions
only by resemblance.

In the THIRD place, it is observable of these two kinds of association,
that they very much assist and forward each other, and that the
transition is more easily made where they both concur in the same object.
Thus a man, who, by any injury from another, is very much discomposed and
ruffled in his temper, is apt to find a hundred subjects of discontent,
impatience, fear, and other uneasy passions; especially if he can
discover these subjects in or near the person, who was the cause of his
first passion. Those principles, which forward the transition of ideas,
here concur with those, which operate on the passions; and both uniting
in one action, bestow on the mind a double impulse. The new passion,
therefore, must arise with so much greater violence, and the transition
to it must be rendered so much more easy and natural.

Upon this occasion I may cite the authority of an elegant writer, who
expresses himself in the following manner.

"As the fancy delights in every thing that is great, strange, or
beautiful, and is still more pleased the more it finds of these
perfections in the same object, so it is capable of receiving a new
satisfaction by the assistance of another sense. Thus any continued
sound, as the music of birds, or a fall of waters, awakens every moment
the mind of the beholder, and makes him more attentive to the several
beauties of the place, that lie before him. Thus if there arises a
fragrancy of smells or perfumes, they heighten the pleasure of the
imagination, and make even the colours and verdure of the landschape
appear more agreeable; for the ideas of both senses recommend each other,
and are pleasanter together than when they enter the mind separately: As
the different colours of a picture, when they are well disposed, set off
one another, and receive an additional beauty from the advantage of the
situation." [Addison, SPECTATOR 412, final paragraph.]

In this phaenomenon we may remark the association both of impressions and
ideas, as well as the mutual assistance they lend each other.



SECT. V  OF THE INFLUENCE OF THESE RELATIONS ON PRIDE AND HUMILITY


These principles being established on unquestionable experience, I begin
to consider how we shall apply them, by revolving over all the causes of
pride and humility, whether these causes be regarded, as the qualities,
that operate, or as the subjects, on which the qualities are placed. In
examining these qualities I immediately find many of them to concur in
producing the sensation of pain and pleasure, independent of those
affections, which I here endeavour to explain. Thus the beauty of our
person, of itself, and by its very appearance, gives pleasure, as well as
pride; and its deformity, pain as well as humility. A magnificent feast
delights us, and a sordid one displeases. What I discover to be true in
some instances, I suppose to be so in all; and take it for granted at
present, without any farther proof, that every cause of pride, by its
peculiar qualities, produces a separate pleasure, and of humility a
separate uneasiness.

Again, in considering the subjects, to which these qualities adhere, I
make a new supposition, which also appears probable from many obvious
instances, viz, that these subjects are either parts of ourselves, or
something nearly related to us. Thus the good and bad qualities of our
actions and manners constitute virtue and vice, and determine our
personal character, than which nothing operates more strongly on these
passions. In like manner, it is the beauty or deformity of our person,
houses, equipage, or furniture, by which we are rendered either vain or
humble. The same qualities, when transfered to subjects, which bear us no
relation, influence not in the smallest degree either of these
affections.

Having thus in a manner supposed two properties of the causes of these
affections, viz, that the qualities produce a separate pain or pleasure,
and that the subjects, on which the qualities are placed, are related to
self; I proceed to examine the passions themselves, in order to find
something in them, correspondent to the supposed properties of their
causes. First, I find, that the peculiar object of pride and humility is
determined by an original and natural instinct, and that it is absolutely
impossible, from the primary constitution of the mind, that these
passions should ever look beyond self, or that individual person. of
whose actions and sentiments each of us is intimately conscious. Here at
last the view always rests, when we are actuated by either of these
passions; nor can we, in that situation of mind, ever lose sight of this
object. For this I pretend not to give any reason; but consider such a
peculiar direction of the thought as an original quality.

The SECOND quality, which I discover in these passions, and which I
likewise consider an an original quality, is their sensations, or the
peculiar emotions they excite in the soul, and which constitute their
very being and essence. Thus pride is a pleasant sensation, and humility
a painful; and upon the removal of the pleasure and pain, there is in
reality no pride nor humility. Of this our very feeling convinces us; and
beyond our feeling, it is here in vain to reason or dispute.

If I compare, therefore, these two established properties of the
passions, viz, their object, which is self, and their sensation, which is
either pleasant or painful, to the two supposed properties of the causes,
viz, their relation to self, and their tendency to produce a pain or
pleasure, independent of the passion; I immediately find, that taking
these suppositions to be just, the true system breaks in upon me with an
irresistible evidence. That cause, which excites the passion, is related
to the object, which nature has attributed to the passion; the sensation,
which the cause separately produces, is related to the sensation of the
passion: From this double relation of ideas and impressions, the passion
is derived. The one idea is easily converted into its correlative; and
the one impression into that, which resembles and corresponds to it: With
how much greater facility must this transition be made, where these
movements mutually assist each other, and the mind receives a double
impulse from the relations both of its impressions and ideas?

That we may comprehend this the better, we must suppose, that nature has
given to the organs of the human mind, a certain disposition fitted to
produce a peculiar impression or emotion, which we call pride: To this
emotion she has assigned a certain idea, viz, that of self, which it
never fails to produce. This contrivance of nature is easily conceived.
We have many instances of such a situation of affairs. The nerves of the
nose and palate are so disposed, as in certain circumstances to convey
such peculiar sensations to the mind: The sensations of lust and hunger
always produce in us the idea of those peculiar objects, which are
suitable to each appetite. These two circumstances are united in pride.
The organs are so disposed as to produce the passion; and the passion,
after its production, naturally produces a certain idea. All this needs
no proof. It is evident we never should be possest of that passion, were
there not a disposition of mind proper for it; and it is as evident, that
the passion always turns our view to ourselves, and makes us think of our
own qualities and circumstances.

This being fully comprehended, it may now be asked, WHETHER NATURE
PRODUCES THE PASSION IMMEDIATELY, OF HERSELF; OR WHETHER SHE MUST BE
ASSISTED BY THE CO-OPERATION OF OTHER CAUSES? For it is observable, that
in this particular her conduct is different in the different passions and
sensations. The palate must be excited by an external object, in order to
produce any relish: But hunger arises internally, without the concurrence
of any external object. But however the case may stand with other
passions and impressions, it is certain, that pride requires the
assistance of some foreign object, and that the organs, which produce it,
exert not themselves like the heart and arteries, by an original internal
movement. For first, daily experience convinces us, that pride requires
certain causes to excite it, and languishes when unsupported by some
excellency in the character, in bodily accomplishments, in cloaths,
equipage or fortune. SECONDLY, it is evident pride would be perpetual, if
it arose immediately from nature; since the object is always the same,
and there is no disposition of body peculiar to pride, as there is to
thirst and hunger. Thirdly, Humility is in the very same situation with
pride; and therefore, either must, upon this supposition, be perpetual
likewise, or must destroy the contrary passion from, the very first
moment; so that none of them coued ever make its appearance. Upon the
whole, we may rest satisfyed with the foregoing conclusion, that pride
must have a cause, as well as an object, and that the one has no
influence without the other.

The difficulty, then, is only to discover this cause, and find what it is
that gives the first motion to pride, and sets those organs in action,
which are naturally fitted to produce that emotion. Upon my consulting
experience, in order to resolve this difficulty, I immediately find a
hundred different causes, that produce pride; and upon examining these
causes, I suppose, what at first I perceive to be probable, that all of
them concur in two circumstances; which are, that of themselves they
produce an impression, allyed to the passion, and are placed on a
subject, allyed to the object of the passion. When I consider after this
the nature of relation, and its effects both on the passions and ideas, I
can no longer doubt, upon these suppositions, that it is the very
principle, which gives rise to pride, and bestows motion on those organs,
which being naturally disposed to produce that affection, require only a
first impulse or beginning to their action. Any thing, that gives a
pleasant sensation, and is related to self, excites the passion of pride,
which is also agreeable, and has self for its object.

What I have said of pride is equally true of humility. The sensation of
humility is uneasy, as that of pride is agreeable; for which reason the
separate sensation, arising from the causes, must be reversed, while the
relation to self continues the same. Though pride and humility are
directly contrary in their effects, and in their sensations, they have
notwithstanding the same object; so that it is requisite only to change
the relation of impressions, without making any change upon that of
ideas. Accordingly we find, that a beautiful house, belonging to
ourselves, produces pride; and that the same house, still belonging to
ourselves, produces humility, when by any accident its beauty is changed
into deformity, and thereby the sensation of pleasure, which corresponded
to pride, is transformed into pain, which is related to humility. The
double relation between the ideas and impressions subsists in both cases,
and produces an easy transition from the one emotion to the other.

In a word, nature has bestowed a kind of attraction on certain
impressions and ideas, by which one of them, upon its appearance,
naturally introduces its correlative. If these two attractions or
associations of impressions and ideas concur on the same object, they
mutually assist each other, and the transition of the affections and of
the imagination is made with the greatest ease and facility. When an idea
produces an impression, related to an impression, which is connected with
an idea, related to the first idea, these two impressions must be in a
manner inseparable, nor will the one in any case be unattended with the
other. It is after this manner, that the particular causes of pride and
humility are determined. The quality, which operates on the passion,
produces separately an impression resembling it; the subject, to which
the quality adheres, is related to self, the object of the passion: No
wonder the whole cause, consisting of a quality and of a subject, does so
unavoidably give rise to the pass on.

To illustrate this hypothesis. we may compare it to that, by which I have
already explained the belief attending the judgments, which we form from
causation. I have observed, that in all judgments of this kind, there is
always a present impression. and a related idea; and that the present
impression gives a vivacity to the fancy, and the relation conveys this
vivacity, by an easy transition, to the related idea. Without the present
impression, the attention is not fixed, nor the spirits excited. Without
the relation, this attention rests on its first object, and has no
farther consequence. There is evidently a great analogy betwixt that
hypothesis. and our present one of an impression and idea, that transfuse
themselves into another impression and idea by means of their double
relation: Which analogy must be allowed to be no despicable proof of both
hypotheses.



SECT. VI  LIMITATIONS OF THIS SYSTEM


But before we proceed farther in this subject, and examine particularly
all the causes of pride and humility, it will be proper to make some
limitations to the general system, THAT ALL AGREEABLE OBJECTS, RELATED TO
OURSELVES, BY AN ASSOCIATION OF IDEAS AND OF IMPRESSIONS, PRODUCE PRIDE,
AND DISAGREEABLE ONES, HUMILITY: And these limitations are derived from
the very nature of the subject.

I. Suppose an agreeable object to acquire a relation to self, the first
passion, that appears on this occasion, is joy; and this passion
discovers itself upon a slighter relation than pride and vain-glory. We
may feel joy upon being present at a feast, where our senses are regard
with delicacies of every kind: But it is only the master of the feast,
who, beside the same joy, has the additional passion of self-applause and
vanity. It is true, men sometimes boast of a great entertainment, at which
they have only been present; and by so small a relation convert their
pleasure into pride: But however, this must in general be owned, that joy
arises from a more inconsiderable relation than vanity, and that many
things, which are too foreign to produce pride, are yet able to give us a
delight and pleasure, The reason of the difference may be explained thus.
A relation is requisite to joy, in order to approach the object to us,
and make it give us any satisfaction. But beside this, which is common to
both passions, it is requisite to pride, in order to produce a transition
from one passion to another, and convert the falsification into vanity.
As it has a double task to perform, it must be endowed with double force
and energy. To which we may add, that where agreeable objects bear not a
very close relation to ourselves, they commonly do to some other
person; and this latter relation not only excels, but even diminishes,
and sometimes destroys the former, as we shall see afterwards.
[Part II. Sec. 4.]

Here then is the first limitation, we must make to our general position,
that every thing related to us, which produces pleasure or pain, produces
likewise pride or humility. There is not only a relation required, but a
close one, and a closer than is required to joy.

II. The second limitation is, that the agreeable or disagreeable object
be not only closely related, but also peculiar to ourselves, or at least
common to us with a few persons. It is a quality observable in human
nature, and which we shall endeavour to explain afterwards, that every
thing, which is often presented. and to which we have been long
accustomed, loses its value in our eyes, and is in a little time despised
and neglected. We likewise judge of objects more from comparison than
from their real and intrinsic merit; and where we cannot by some contrast
enhance their value, we are apt to overlook even what is essentially good
in them. These qualities of the mind have an effect upon joy as well as
pride; and it is remarkable, that goods. which are common to all mankind,
and have become familiar to us by custom, give us little satisfaction;
though perhaps of a more excellent kind, than those on which, for their
singularity, we set a much higher value. But though this circumstance
operates on both these passions, it has a much greater influence on
vanity. We are rejoiced for many goods, which, on account of their
frequency, give us no pride. Health, when it returns after a long
absence, affords us a very sensible satisfaction; but is seldom regarded
as a subject of vanity, because it is shared with such vast numbers.

The reason, why pride is so much more delicate in this particular than
joy, I take to be, as follows. In order to excite pride, there are always
two objects we must contemplate. viz, the cause or that object which
produces pleasure; and self, which is the real object of the passion. But
joy has only one object necessary to its production. viz, that which
gives pleasure; and though it be requisite, that this bear some relation
to self, yet that is only requisite in order to render it agreeable; nor
is self, properly speaking, the object of this passion. Since, therefore,
pride has in a manner two objects, to which it directs our view; it
follows, that where neither of them have any singularity, the passion
must be more weakened upon that account, than a passion, which has only
one object. Upon comparing ourselves with others, as we are every moment
apt to do, we find we are not in the least distinguished; and upon
comparing the object we possess, we discover still the same unlucky
circumstance. By two comparisons so disadvantageous the passion must be
entirely destroyed.

III The third limitation is, that the pleasant or painful object be very
discernible and obvious, and that not only to ourselves, but to others
also. This circumstance, like the two foregoing, has an effect upon joy,
as well as pride. We fancy Ourselves more happy, as well as more virtuous
or beautiful, when we appear so to others; but are still more
ostentatious of our virtues than of our pleasures. This proceeds from
causes, which I shall endeavour to explain afterwards.

IV. The fourth limitation is derived from the inconstancy of the cause of
these passions, and from the short duration of its connexion with
ourselves. What is casual and inconstant gives but little joy, and less
pride. We are not much satisfyed with the thing itself; and are still
less apt to feel any new degrees of self-satisfaction upon its account.
We foresee and anticipate its change by the imagination; which makes us
little satisfyed with the thing: We compare it to ourselves, whose
existence is more durable; by which means its inconstancy appears still
greater. It seems ridiculous to infer an excellency in ourselves from an
object, which is of so much shorter duration, and attends us during so
small a part of our existence. It will be easy to comprehend the reason,
why this cause operates not with the same force in joy as in pride; since
the idea of self is not so essential to the former passion as to the
latter.

V. I may add as a fifth limitation, or rather enlargement of this system,
that general rules have a great influence upon pride and humility, as
well as on all the other passions. Hence we form a notion of different
ranks of men, suitable to the power of riches they are possest of; and
this notion we change not upon account of any peculiarities of the health
or temper of the persons, which may deprive them of all enjoyment in
their possessions. This may be accounted for from the same principles,
that explained the influence of general rules on the understanding.
Custom readily carries us beyond the just bounds in our passions, as well
as in our reasonings.

It may not be amiss to observe on this occasion, that the influence of
general rules and maxims on the passions very much contributes to
facilitate the effects of all the principles, which we shall explain in
the progress of this treatise. For it is evident, that if a person
full-grown, and of the same nature with ourselves, were on a
sudden-transported into our world, he would be very much embarrased with
every object, and would. not readily find what degree of love or hatred,
pride or humility, or any other passion he ought to attribute to it. The
passions are often varyed by very inconsiderable principles; and these do
not always play with a perfect regularity, especially on the first trial.
But as custom and practice have brought to light all these principles,
and have settled the just value of every thing; this must certainly
contribute to the easy production of the passions, and guide us, by means
of general established maxims, in the proportions we ought to observe in
preferring one object to another. This remark may, perhaps, serve to
obviate difficulties, that mayarise concerning some causes, which I shall
hereafter ascribe to particular passions, and which may be esteemed too
refined to operate so universally and certainly, as they are found to do.

I shall close this subject with a reflection derived from these five
limitations. This reflection is, that the persons, who are proudest, and
who in the eye of the world have most reason for their pride, are not
always the happiest; nor the most humble always the most miserable, as
may at first sight be imagined from this system. An evil may be real.
though its cause has no relation to us: It may be real, without being
peculiar: It may be real, without shewing itself to others: It may be
real, without being constant: And it may he real, without falling under
the general rules. Such evils as these will not fail to render us
miserable, though they have little tendency to diminish pride: And perhaps
the most real and the most solid evils of life will be found of this
nature.



SECT. VII  OF VICE AND VIRTUE


Taking these limitations along with us, let us proceed to examine the
causes of pride and humility; and see, whether in every case we can
discover the double relations, by which they operate on the passions. If
we find that all these causes are related to self, and produce a pleasure
or uneasiness separate from the passion, there will remain no farther
scruple with regard to the present system. We shall principally endeavour
to prove the latter point; the former being in a manner self-evident.

To begin, with vice and virtue; which are the most obvious causes of
these passions; it would be entirely foreign to my present purpose to
enter upon the controversy, which of late years has so much excited the
curiosity of the publick. WHETHER THESE MORAL DISTINCTIONS BE FOUNDED ON
NATURAL AND ORIGINAL PRINCIPLES, OR ARISE FROM INTEREST AND EDUCATION.
The examination of this I reserve for the following book; and in the mean
time I shall endeavour to show, that my system maintains its ground upon
either of these hypotheses; which will be a strong proof of its solidity.

For granting that morality had no foundation in nature, it must still be
allowed, that vice and virtue, either from self-interest or the
prejudices of education, produce in us a real pain and pleasure; and this
we may observe to be strenuously asserted by the defenders of that
hypothesis. Every passion, habit, or turn of character (say they) which
has a tendency to our advantage or prejudice, gives a delight or
uneasiness; and it is from thence the approbation or disapprobation
arises. We easily gain from the liberality of others, but are always in
danger of losing by their avarice: Courage defends us, but cowardice lays
us open to every attack: Justice is the support of society, but
injustice, unless checked would quickly prove its ruin: Humility exalts;
but pride mortifies us. For these reasons the former qualities are
esteemed virtues, and the latter regarded as vices. Now since it is
granted there is a delight or uneasiness still attending merit or demerit
of every kind, this is all that is requisite for my purpose.

But I go farther, and observe, that this moral hypothesis and my present
system not only agree together, but also that, allowing the former to be
just, it is an absolute and invincible proof of the latter. For if all
morality be founded on the pain or pleasure, which arises from the
prospect of any loss or advantage, that may result from our own
characters, or from those of others, all the effects of morality must-be
derived from the same pain or pleasure, and among the rest, the passions
of pride and humility. The very essence of virtue, according to this
hypothesis, is to produce pleasure and that of vice to give pain. The
virtue and vice must be part of our character in order to excite pride or
humility. What farther proof can we desire for the double relation of
impressions and ideas?

The same unquestionable argument may be derived from the opinion of
those, who maintain that morality is something real, essential, and
founded on nature. The most probable hypothesis, which has been advanced
to explain the distinction betwixt vice and virtue, and the origin of
moral rights and obligations, is, that from a primary constitution of
nature certain characters and passions, by the very view and
contemplation, produce a pain, and others in like manner excite a
pleasure. The uneasiness and satisfaction are not only inseparable from
vice and virtue, but constitute their very nature and essence. To approve
of a character is to feel an original delight upon its appearance. To
disapprove of it is to be sensible of an uneasiness. The pain and
pleasure, therefore, being the primary causes of vice and virtue, must
also be the causes of all their effects, and consequently of pride and
humility, which are the unavoidable attendants of that distinction.

But supposing this hypothesis of moral philosophy should be allowed to be
false, it is still evident, that pain and pleasure, if not the causes of
vice and virtue, are at least inseparable from them. A generous and noble
character affords a satisfaction even in the survey; and when presented to
us, though only in a poem or fable, never fails to charm and delight us.
On the other hand cruelty and treachery displease from their very nature;
nor is it possible ever to reconcile us to these qualities, either in
ourselves or others. Thus one hypothesis of morality is an undeniable
proof of the foregoing system, and the other at worst agrees with it. But
pride and humility arise not from these qualities alone of the mind,
which, according to the vulgar systems of ethicks, have been comprehended
as parts of moral duty, but from any other that has a connexion with
pleasure and uneasiness. Nothing flatters our vanity more than the talent
of pleasing by our wit, good humour, or any other accomplishment; and
nothing gives us a more sensible mortification than a disappointment in
any attempt of that nature. No one has ever been able to tell what wit
is, and to-shew why such a system of thought must be received under that
denomination, and such another rejected. It is only by taste we can decide
concerning it, nor are we possest of any other standard, upon which we
can form a judgment of this kind. Now what is this taste, from which true
and false wit in a manner receive their being, and without which no
thought can have a title to either of these denominations? It is plainly
nothing but a sensation of pleasure from true wit, and of uneasiness from
false, without oar being able to tell the reasons of that pleasure or
uneasiness. The power of bestowing these opposite sensations is.
therefore, the very essence of true and false wit; and consequently the
cause of that pride or humility, which arises from them.

There may, perhaps, be some, who being accustomed to the style of the
schools and pulpit. and having never considered human nature in any other
light, than that in which they place it, may here be surprized to hear me
talk of virtue as exciting pride, which they look upon as a vice; and of
vice as producing humility, which they have been taught to consider as a
virtue. But not to dispute about words, I observe, that by pride I
understand that agreeable impression, which arises in the mind, when the
view either of our virtue, beauty, riches or power makes us satisfyed
with ourselves: and that by humility I mean the opposite impression. It is
evident the former impression is not always vicious, nor the latter
virtuous. The most rigid morality allows us to receive a pleasure from
reflecting on a generous action; and it is by none esteemed a virtue to
feel any fruitless remorses upon the thoughts of past villainy and
baseness. Let us, therefore, examine these impressions, considered in
themselves; and enquire into their causes, whether placed on the mind or
body, without troubling ourselves at present with that merit or blame,
which may attend them.



SECT. VIII  OF BEAUTY AND DEFORMITY


Whether we consider the body as a part of ourselves, or assent to those
philosophers, who regard it as something external, it must still be
allowed to be near enough connected with us to form one of these double
relations, which I have asserted to be necessary to the causes of pride
and humility. Wherever, therefore, we can find the other relation of
impressions to join to this of ideas, we may expect with assurance either
of these passions, according as the impression is pleasant or uneasy. But
beauty of all kinds gives us a peculiar delight and satisfaction; as
deformity produces pain, upon whatever subject it may be placed, and
whether surveyed in an animate or inanimate object. If the beauty or
deformity, therefore, be placed upon our own bodies, this pleasure or
uneasiness must be converted into pride or humility, as having in this
case all the circumstances requisite to produce a perfect transition of
impressions and ideas. These opposite sensations are related to the
opposite passions. The beauty or deformity is closely related to self,
the object of both these passions. No wonder, then our own beauty becomes
an object of pride, and deformity of humility.

But this effect of personal and bodily qualities is not only a proof of.
the present system, by shewing that the passions arise not in this case
without all the circumstances I have required, but may be employed as a
stronger and more convincing argument. If we consider all the hypotheses,
which have been formed either by philosophy or common reason, to explain
the difference betwixt beauty and deformity, we shall find that all of
them resolve into this, that beauty is such an order and construction of
parts, as either by the primary constitution of our nature, by custom, or
by caprice, is fitted to give a pleasure and satisfaction to the soul.
This is the distinguishing character of beauty, and forms all the
difference betwixt it and deformity, whose natural tendency is to produce
uneasiness. Pleasure and pain, therefore, are not only necessary
attendants of beauty and deformity, but constitute their very essence.
And indeed, if we consider, that a great part of the beauty, which we
admire either in animals or in other objects, is derived from the idea of
convenience and utility, we shall make no scruple to assent to this
opinion. That shape, which produces strength, is beautiful in one animal;
and that which is a sign of agility in another. The order and convenience
of a palace are no less essential to its beauty, than its mere figure and
appearance. In like manner the rules of architecture require, that the
top of a pillar should be more slender than its base, and that because
such a figure conveys to us the idea of security, which is pleasant;
whereas the contrary form gives us the apprehension of danger, which is
uneasy. From innumerable instances of this kind, as well as from
considering that beauty like wit, cannot be defined, but is discerned
only by a taste or sensation, we may conclude, that beauty is nothing but
a form, which produces pleasure, as deformity is a structure of parts,
which conveys pain; and since the power of producing pain and pleasure
make in this manner the essence of beauty and deformity, all the effects
of these qualities must be derived from the sensation; and among the rest
pride and humility, which of all their effects are the most common and
remarkable.

This argument I esteem just and decisive; but in order to give greater
authority to the present reasoning, let us suppose it false for a moment,
and see what will follow. It is certain, then, that if the power of
producing pleasure and pain forms not the essence of beauty and
deformity, the sensations are at least inseparable from the qualities,
and it is even difficult to consider them apart. Now there is nothing
common to natural and moral beauty, (both of which are the causes of
pride) but this power of producing pleasure; and as a common effect
supposes always a common cause, it is plain the pleasure must in both
cases be the real and influencing cause of the passion. Again; there is
nothing originally different betwixt the beauty of our bodies and the
beauty of external and foreign objects, but that the one has a near
relation to ourselves, which is wanting in the other. This original
difference, therefore, must be the cause of all their other differences,
and among the rest, of their different influence upon the passion of
pride, which is excited by the beauty of our person, but is not affected
in the lcast by that of foreign and external objects. Placing, then,
these two conclusions together, we find they compose the preceding system
betwixt them, viz, that pleasure, as a related or resembling impression,
when placed on a related object. by a natural transition, produces pride;
and its contrary, humility. This system, then, seems already sufficiently
confirmed by experience; that we have not yet exhausted all our
arguments.

It is not the beauty of the body alone that produces pride, but also its
strength and force. Strength is a kind of power; and therefore the desire
to excel in strength is to be considered as an inferior species of
ambition. For this reason the present phaenomenon will be sufficiently
accounted for, in explaining that passion.

Concerning all other bodily accomplishments we may observe in general,
that whatever in ourselves is either useful, beautiful, or surprising, is
an object of pride; and it's contrary, of humility. Now it is obvious,
that every thing useful, beautiful or surprising, agrees in producing a
separate pleasure and agrees in nothing else. The pleasure, therefore,
with the relation to self must be the cause of the passion.

Though it should be questioned, whether beauty be not something real, and
different from the power of producing pleasure, it can never be disputed,
that as surprize is nothing but a pleasure arising from novelty, it is
not, properly speaking, a quality in any object, but merely a passion or
impression in the soul. It must, therefore, be from that impression, that
pride by a natural transition arises. And it arises so naturally, that
there is nothing in us or belonging to us, which produces surprize, that
does not at the same time excite that other passion. Thus we are vain of
the surprising adventures we have met with, the escapes we have made, and
dangers we have been exposed to. Hence the origin of vulgar lying; where
men without any interest, and merely out of vanity, heap up a number of
extraordinary events, which are either the fictions of their brain, or if
true, have at least no connexion with themselves. Their fruitful
invention supplies them with a variety of adventures; and where that
talent is wanting, they appropriate such as belong to others, in order to
satisfy their vanity.

In this phaenomenon are contained two curious experiments, which if we
compare them together, according to the known rules, by which we judge of
cause and effect in anatomy, natural philosophy, and other sciences, will
be an undeniable argument for that influence of the double relations
above-mentioned. By one of these experiments we find, that an object
produces pride merely by the interposition of pleasure; and that because
the quality, by which it produces pride, is in reality nothing but the
power of producing pleasure. By the other experiment we find, that the
pleasure produces the pride by a transition along related ideas; because
when we cut off that relation the passion is immediately destroyed.. A
surprising adventure, in which we have been ourselves engaged, is related
to us, and by that means produces pride: But the adventures of others,
though they may cause pleasure, yet for want of this relation of ideas,
never excite that passion. What farther proof can be desired for the
present system?

There is only one objection to this system with regard to our body: which
is, that though nothing be more agreeable than health, and more painful
than sickness, yet commonly men are neither proud of the one, nor
mortifyed with the other. This will easily be accounted for, if we
consider the second and fourth limitations, proposed to our general
system. It was observed, that no object ever produces pride or humility,
if it has not something peculiar to ourself; as also, that every cause of
that passion must be in some measure constant, and hold some proportion
to the duration of our self, which, is its object. Now as health and
sickness vary incessantly to all men, and there is none, who is solely or
certainly fixed in either, these accidental blessings and calamities are
in a manner separated from us, and are never considered as connected with
our being and existence. And that this account is just appears hence,
that wherever a malady of any kind is so rooted in our constitution, that
we no longer entertain any hopes of recovery, from that moment it becomes
an object of humility; as is evident in old men, whom nothing mortifies
more than the consideration of their age and infirmities. They endeavour,
as long as possible, to conceal their blindness and deafness, their
rheums and gouts; nor do they ever confess them without reluctance and
uneasiness. And though young men are not ashamed of every head-ach or cold
they fall into, yet no topic is so proper to mortify human pride, and
make us entertain a mean opinion of our nature, than this, that we are
every moment of our lives subject to such infirmities. This sufficiently
proves that bodily pain and sickness are in themselves proper causes of
humility; though the custom of estimating every thing by comparison more
than by its intrinsic worth and value, makes us overlook these
calamities, which we find to be incident to every one, and causes us to
form an idea of our merit and character independent of them.

We are ashamed of such maladies as affect others, and are either
dangerous or disagreeable to them. Of the epilepsy; because it gives a
horror to every one present: Of the itch; because it is infectious: Of
the king's-evil; because it commonly goes to posterity. Men always
consider the sentiments of others in their judgment of themselves. This
has evidently appeared in some of the foregoing reasonings; and will
appear still more evidently, and be more fully explained afterwards,



SECT. IX  OF EXTERNAL ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES


But though pride and humility have the qualities of our mind and body that
is self, for their natural and more immediate causes, we find by
experience, that there are many other objects, which produce these
affections, and that the primary one is, in some measure, obscured and
lost by the rnultiplicity of foreign and extrinsic. We found a vanity
upon houses, gardens, equipages, as well as upon personal merit and
accomplishments; and though these external advantages be in themselves
widely distant from thought or a person, yet they considerably influence
even a passion, which is directed to that as its ultimate object, This,
happens when external objects acquire any particular relation to
ourselves, and are associated or connected with us. A beautiful fish in
the ocean, an animal in a desart, and indeed any thing that neither
belongs, nor is related to us, has no manner of influence on our vanity,
whatever extraordinary qualities it may be endowed with, and whatever
degree of surprize and admiration it may naturally occasion. It must be
some way associated with us in order to touch our pride. Its idea must
hang in a manner, upon that of ourselves and the transition from the one
to the other must be easy and natural.

But here it is remarkable, that though the relation of resemblance
operates upon the mind in the same manner as contiguity and causation, in
conveying us from one idea to another, yet it is seldom a foundation
either of pride or of humility. If we resemble a person in any of the
valuable parts of his character, we must, in some degree, possess the
quality, in which we resemble him; and this quality we always chuse to
survey directly in ourselves rather than by reflexion in another person,
when we would found upon it any degree of vanity. So that though a
likeness may occasionally produce that passion by suggesting a more
advantageous idea of ourselves, it is there the view fixes at last, and
the passion finds its ultimate and final cause.

There are instances, indeed, wherein men shew a vanity in resembling a
great man in his countenance, shape, air, or other minute circumstances,
that contribute not in any degree to his reputation; but it must be
confessed that this extends not very far, nor is of any considerable
moment in these affections. For this I assign the following reason. We
can never have a vanity of resembling in trifles any person, unless he be
possessed of very shining qualities, which give us a respect and
veneration for him. These qualities, then, are, properly speaking, the
causes of our vanity, by means of their relation to ourselves. Now after
what manner are they related to ourselves? They are parts of the person
we value, and consequently connected with these trifles; which are also
supposed to be parts of him. These trifles are connected with the
resembling qualities in us; and these qualities in us, being parts, are
connected with the whole; and by that means form a chain of several links
of the person we resemble. But besides that this multitude of relations
must weaken the connexion; it is evident the mind, in passing from the
shining qualities to the trivial ones, must by that contrast the better
perceive the minuteness of the latter, and be in some measure ashamed of
the comparison and resemblance.

The relation, therefore, of contiguity, or that of causation, betwixt the
cause and object of pride and humility, is alone requisite to give rise
to these passions; and these relations are nothing else but qualities, by
which the imagination is conveyed from one idea to another. Now let us
consider what effect these can possibly have upon the mind, and by what
means they become so requisite to the production of the passions. It is
evident, that the association of ideas operates in so silent and
imperceptible a manner, that we are scarce sensible of it, and discover
it more by its effects than by any immediate feeling or perception. It
produces no emotion, and gives rise to no new impression of any kind, but
only modifies those ideas, of which the mind was formerly possessed, and
which it coued recal upon occasion. From this reasoning, as well as from
undoubted experience, we may conclude, that an association of ideas,
however necessary, is not alone sufficient to give rise to any passion.

It is evident, then, that when the mind feels the passion either of pride
or humility upon the appearance of related object, there is, beside the
relation or transition of thought, an emotion or original impression
produced by some other principle. The question is, whether the emotion
first produced be the passion itself, or some other impression related to
it. This question we cannot be long in deciding, For besides all the
other arguments, with which this subject abounds, it must evidently
appear, that the relation of ideas, which experience shews to be so
requisite a circumstance to the production of the passion, would be
entirely superfluous, were it not to second a relation of affections, and
facilitate the transition from one impression to another. If nature
produced immediately the passion of pride or humility, it would be
compleated in itself, and would require no farther addition or encrease
from any other affection. But supposing the first emotion to be only
related to pride or humility, it is easily conceived to what purpose the
relation of objects may serve, and how the two different associations, of
impressions and ideas, by uniting their forces, may assist each other's
operation. This is not only easily conceived, but I will venture to
affirm it is the only manner, in which we can conceive this subject. An
easy transition of ideas, which, of itself, causes no emotion, can never
be necessary, or even useful to the passions, but by forwarding the
transition betwixt some related impressions. Not to mention, that the
same object causes a greater or smaller degree of pride, not only in
proportion to the encrease or decrease of its qualities, but also to the
distance or nearness of the relation; which is a clear argument for the
transition of affections along the relation of ideas; since every change
in the relation produces a proportionable change in the passion. Thus one
part of the preceding system, concerning the relations of ideas is a
sufficient proof of the other, concerning that of impressions; and is
itself so evidently founded on experience, that it would be lost time to
endeavour farther to prove it.

This will appear still more evidently in particular instances. Men are
vain of the beauty of their country, of their county, of their parish.
Here the idea of beauty plainly produces a pleasure. This pleasure is
related to pride. The object or cause of this pleasure is, by the
supposition, related to self, or the object of pride. By this double
relation of impressions and ideas, a transition is made from the one
impression to the other.

Men are also vain of the temperature of the climate, in which they were
born; of the fertility of their native soil; of the goodness of the
wines, fruits or victuals, produced by it; of the softness or force of
their language; with other particulars of that kind. These objects have
plainly a reference to the pleasures of the senses, and are originally
considered as agreeable to the feeling, taste or hearing. How is it
possible they coued ever become objects of pride, except by means of that
transition above-explained?

There are some, that discover a vanity of an opposite kind, and affect to
depreciate their own country, in comparison of those, to which they have
travelled. These persons find, when they are at home, and surrounded with
their countrymen, that the strong relation betwixt them and their own
nation is shared with so many, that it is in a manner lost to them;
whereas their distant relation to a foreign country, which is formed by
their having seen it and lived in it, is augmented by their considering
how few there are who have done the same. For this reason they always
admire the beauty, utility and rarity of what is abroad, above what is at
home.

Since we can be vain of a country, climate or any inanimate object, which
bears a relation to us, it is no wonder we are vain of the qualities of
those, who are connected with us by blood or friendship. Accordingly we
find, that the very same qualities, which in ourselves produce pride,
produce also in a lesser degree the same affection, when discovered in
persons related to us. The beauty, address, merit, credit and honours of
their kindred are carefully displayed by the proud, as some of their most
considerable sources of their vanity.

As we are proud of riches in ourselves, so to satisfy our vanity we
desire that every one, who has any connexion with us, should likewise be
possest of them, and are ashamed of any one, that is mean or poor, among
our friends and relations. For this reason we remove the poor as far from
us as possible; and as we cannot prevent poverty in some distant
collaterals, and our forefathers are taken to be our nearest relations;
upon this account every one affects to be of a good family, and to be
descended from a long succession of rich and honourable ancestors.

I have frequently observed, that those, who boast of the antiquity of
their families, are glad when they can join this circumstance, that their
ancestors for many generations have been uninterrupted proprietors of the
same portion of land, and that their family has never changed its
possessions, or been transplanted into any other county or province. I
have also observed, that it is an additional subject of vanity, when they
can boast, that these possessions have been transmitted through a descent
composed entirely of males, and that the honour, and fortune have never
past through any female. Let us endeavour to explain these phaenomena by
the foregoing system.

It is evident, that when any one boasts of the antiquity of his family,
the subjects of his vanity are not merely the extent of time and number
of ancestors, but also their riches and credit, which are supposed to
reflect a lustre on himself on account of his relation to them. He first
considers these objects; is affected by them in an agreeable manner; and
then returning back to himself, through the relation of parent and child,
is elevated with the passion of pride, by means of the double relation,
of impressions and ideas. Since therefore the passion depends on these
relations, whatever strengthens any of the relations must also encrease
the passion, and whatever weakens the relations must diminish the
passion. Now it is certain the identity of the possesion strengthens the
relation of ideas arising from blood and kindred, and conveys the fancy
with greater facility from one generation to another, from the remote
ancestors to their posterity, who are both their heirs and their
descendants. By this facility the impression is transmitted more entire,
and excites a greater degree of pride and vanity.

The case is the same with the transmission of the honours and fortune
through a succession of males without their passing through any female. It
is a quality of human nature, which we shall consider [Part II. Sect, 2.]
afterwards, that the imagination naturally turns to whatever is important
and considerable; and where two objects are presented to it, a small and a
great one, usually leaves the former, and dwells entirely upon the latter.
As in the society of marriage, the male sex has the advantage above the
female, the husband first engages our attention; and whether we consider
him directly, or reach him by passing through related objects, the thought
both rests upon him with greater satisfaction, and arrives at him with
greater facility than his consort. It is easy to see, that this property
must strengthen the child's relation to the father, and weaken that to the
mother. For as all relations are nothing hut a propensity to pass from
one idea ma another, whatever strengthens the propensity strengthens the
relation; and as we have a stronger propensity to pass from the idea of
the children to that of the father, than from the same idea to that of
the mother, we ought to regard the former relation as the closer and more
considerable. This is the reason why children commonly bear their
father's name, and are esteemed to be of nobler or baser birth, according
to his family. And though the mother should be possest of a superior
spirit and genius to the father, as often happens, the general rule
prevails, notwithstanding the exceprion, according to the doctrine
above-explained. Nay even when a superiority of any kind is so great, or
when any other reasons have such an effect, as to make the children rather
represent: the mother's family than the father's, the general rule still
retains such an efficacy that it weakens the relation, and makes a kind of
break in the line of ancestors. The imagination runs not along them with
facility, nor is able to transfer the honour and credit of the ancestors
to their posterity of the same name and family so readily, as when the
transition is conformable to the general rules, and passes from father to
son, or from brother to brother.



SECT. X  OF PROPERTY AND RICHES


But the relation, which is esteemed the closest, and which of all others
produces most commonly the passion of pride, is that of property. This
relation it will be impossible for me fully to explain before I come to
treat of justice and the other moral virtues. It is sufficient to observe
on this occasion, that property may be defined, such a relation betwixt a
person and an. object as permits him, but forbids any other, the free use
and possession of it, without violating the laws of justice and moral
equity. If justice, therefore, be a virtue, which has a natural and
original influence on the human mind, property may be looked upon as a
particular species of causation; whether we consider the liberty it gives
the proprietor to operate as he please upon the object or the advantages,
which he reaps from it. It is the same case, if justice, according to the
system of certain philosophers, should be esteemed an artificial and not
a natural virtue. For then honour, and custom, and civil laws supply the
place of natural conscience, and produce, in some degree, the same
effects. This in the mean time is certain, that the mention of the
property naturally carries our thought to the proprietor, and of the
proprietor to the property; which being a proof of a perfect relation of
ideas is all that is requisite to our present purpose. A relation of
ideas, joined to that of impressions, always produces a transition of
affections; and therefore, whenever any pleasure or pain arises from an
object, connected with us by property. we may be certain, that either
pride or humility must arise from this conjunction of relations; if the
foregoing system be solid and satisfactory. And whether it be so or not,
we may soon satisfy ourselves by the most cursory view of human life.

Every thing belonging to a vain man is the best that is any where to be
found. His houses, equipage, furniture, doaths, horses, hounds, excel all
others in his conceit; and it is easy to observe, that from the least
advantage in any of these, he draws a new subject of pride and vanity.
His wine, if you'll believe him, has a finer flavour than any other; his
cookery is more exquisite; his table more orderly; his servants more
expert; the air, in which he lives, more healthful; the soil he
cultivates more fertile; his fruits ripen earlier and to greater
perfection: Such a thing is remarkable for its novelty; such another for
its antiquity: This is the workmanship of a famous artist; that belonged
once to such a prince or great man: All objects, in a word, that are
useful, beautiful or surprising, or are related to such, may, by means of
property, give rise to this passion. These agree in giving pleasure, and
agree in nothing else. This alone is common to them; and therefore must
be the quality that produces the passion, which is their common effect.
As every new instance is a new argument, and as the instances are here
without number, I may venture to affirm, that scarce any system was ever
so fully proved by experience, as that which I have here advanced.

If the property of any thing, that gives pleasure either by its utility,
beauty or novelty, produces also pride by a double relation of
impressions and ideas; we need not be surprized, that the power of
acquiring this property, should have the same effect. Now riches are to
be considered as the power of acquiring the property of what pleases; and
it is only in this view they have any influence on the passions. Paper
will, on many occasions, be considered as riches, and that because it may
convey the power of acquiring money: And money is not riches, as it is a
metal endowed with certain qualities of solidity, weight and fusibility;
but only as it has a relation to the pleasures and conveniences of life.
Taking then this for granted, which is in itself so evident, we may draw
from it one of the strongest arguments I have yet employed to prove the
influence of the double relations on pride and humility.

It has been observed in treating of the understanding, that the
distinction, which we sometimes make betwixt a power and the exercise of
it, is entirely frivolous, and that neither man nor any other being ought
ever to be thought possest of any ability, unless it be exerted and put in
action. But though this be strictly true in a just and philosophical way
of thinking, it is certain it is not the philosophy of our passions; but
that many things operate upon them by means of the idea and supposition
of power, independent of its actual exercise. We are pleased when we
acquire an ability of procuring pleasure, and are displeased when another
acquires a power of giving pain. This is evident from experience; but in
order to give a just explication of the matter, and account for this
satisfaction and uneasiness, we must weigh the following reflections.

It is evident the error of distinguishing power from its exercise proceeds
not entirely from the scholastic doctrine of free-will, which, indeed,
enters very little into common life, and has but small influence on our
vulgar and popular ways of thinking. According to that doctrine, motives
deprive us not of free-will, nor take away our power of performing or
forbearing any action. But according to common notions a man has no
power, where very considerable motives lie betwixt him and the
satisfaction of his desires, and determine him to forbear what he wishes
to perform. I do not think I have fallen into my enemy's power, when I
see him pass me in the streets with a sword by his side, while I am
unprovided of any weapon. I know that the fear of the civil magistrate is
as strong a restraint as any of iron, and that I am in as perfect safety
as if he were chained or imprisoned. But when a person acquires such an
authority over me, that not only there is no external obstacle to his
actions; but also that he may punish or reward me as he pleases, without
any dread of punishment in his turn, I then attribute a full power to
him, and consider myself as his subject or vassal.

Now if we compare these two cases, that of a person, who has very strong
motives of interest or safety to forbear any action, and that of another,
who lies under no such obligation, we shall find, according to the
philosophy explained in the foregoing book, that the only known
difference betwixt them lies in this, that in the former case we conclude
from past experience, that the person never will perform that action, and
in the latter, that he possibly or probably will perform it. Nothing is
more fluctuating and inconstant on many occasions, than the will of man;
nor is there any thing but strong motives, which can give us an absolute
certainty in pronouncing concerning any of his future actions. When we
see a person free from these motives, we suppose a possibility either of
his acting or forbearing; and though in general we may conclude him to be
determined by motives and causes, yet this removes not the uncertainty of
our judgment concerning these causes, nor the influence of that
uncertainty on the passions. Since therefore we ascribe a power of
performing an action to every one, who has no very powerful motive to
forbear it, and refuse it to such as have; it may justly be concluded,
that power has always a reference to its exercise, either actual or
probable, and that we consider a person as endowed with any ability when
we find from past experience, that it is probable, or at least possible he
may exert it. And indeed, as our passions always regard the real
existence of objects, and we always judge of this reality from past
instances; nothing can be more likely of itself, without any farther
reasoning, than that power consists in the possibility or probability of
any action, as discovered by experience and the practice of the world.

Now it is evident, that wherever a person is in such a situadon with
regard to me, that there is no very powerful motive to deter him from
injuring me, and consequently it is uncertain whether he will injure me or
not, I must be uneasy in such a situation, and cannot consider the
possibility or probability of that injury without a sensible concern. The
passions are not only affected by such events as are certain and
infallible, but also in an inferior degree by such as are possible and
contingent. And though perhaps I never really feel any harm, and discover
by the event, that, philosophically speaking, the person never had any
power of harming me; since he did not exert any; this prevents not my
uneasiness from the preceding uncertainty. The agreeable passions may
here operate as well as the uneasy, and convey a pleasure when I perceive
a good to become either possible or probable by the possibility or
probability of another's bestowing it on me, upon the removal of any
strong motives, which might formerly have hindered him.

But we may farther observe, that this satisfaction encreases, when any
good approaches in such a manner that it it in one's own power to take or
leave it, and there neither is any physical impediment, nor any very
strong motive to hinder our enjoyment. As all men desire pleasure,
nothing can be more probable, than its existence when there is no
external obstacle to the producing it, and men perceive no danger in
following their inclinations. In that case their imagination easily
anticipates the satisfaction, and conveys the same joy, as if they were
persuaded of its real and actual existence.

But this accounts not sufficiently for the satisfaction, which attends
riches. A miser receives delight from his money; that is, from the power
it affords him of procuring all the pleasures and conveniences of life,
though he knows he has enjoyed his riches for forty years without ever
employing them; and consequently cannot conclude by any species of
reasoning, that the real existence of these pleasures is nearer, than if
he were entirely deprived of all his possessions. But though he cannot
form any such conclusion in a way of reasoning concerning she nearer
approach of the pleasure, it is certain he imagines it to approach nearer,
whenever all external obstacles are removed, along with the more powerful
motives of interest and danger, which oppose it. For farther satisfaction
on this head I must refer to my account of the will, where I shall
[Part III. Sect. 2.] explain that false sensation of liberty, which make,
us imagine we can perform any thing, that is not very dangerous or
destructive. Whenever any other person is under no strong obligations of
interest to forbear any pleasure, we judge from experience, that the
pleasure will exist, and that he will probably obtain it. But when
ourselves are in that situation, we judge from an illusion of the fancy,
that the pleasure is still closer and more immediate. The will seems to
move easily every way, and casts a shadow or image of itself, even to that
side, on which it did not settle. By means of this image the enjoyment
seems to approach nearer to us, and gives us the same lively satisfaction,
as if it were perfectly certain and unavoidable.

It will now be easy to draw this whole reasoning to a paint, and to prove,
that when riches produce any pride or vanity in their possessors, as they
never fail so do, it is only by means of a double relation of impressions
and ideas. The very essence of riches consists in the power of procuring
the pleasures and conveniences of life. The very essence of this consists
in the probability of its exercise, and in its causing us to anticipate,
by a true or false reasoning, the real existence of the pleasure. This
anticipation of pleasure is, in itself, a very considerable pleasure; and
as its cause is some possession or property, which we enjoy, and which is
thereby related to us, we here dearly see all the parts of the foregoing
system most exactly and distinctly drawn out before us. For the same
reason, that riches cause pleasure and pride, and poverty excites
uneasiness and humility, power must produce the former emotions, and
slavery the latter. Power or an authority over others makes us capable of
satisfying all our desires; as slavery, by subjecting us to the will of
others, exposes us to a thousand wants, and mortifications.

It is here worth observing, that the vanity of power, or shame of slavery,
are much augmented by the consideration of the persons, over whom we
exercise our authority, or who exercise it over us. For supposing it
possible to frame statues of such an admirable mechanism, that they coued
move and act in obedience to the will; it is evident the possession of
them would give pleasure and pride, but not to such a degree, as the same
authority, when exerted over sensible and rational creatures, whose
condition, being compared to our own, makes it seem more agreeable and
honourable. Comparison is in every case a sure method of augmenting our
esteem of any thing. A rich man feels the felicity of his condition
better by opposing it to that of a beggar. But there is a peculiar
advantage in power, by the contrast, which is, in a manner, presented to
us, betwixt ourselves and the person we command. The comparison is
obvious and natural: The imagination finds it in the very subject: The
passage of the thought to its conception is smooth and easy. And that
this circumstance has a considerable effect in augmenting its influence,
will appear afterwards in examining the nature of malice and envy.



SECT. XI  OF THE LOVE OF FAME


But beside these original causes of pride and humility, there is a
secondary one in the opinions of others, which has an equal influence on
the affections. Our reputation, our character, our name are
considerations of vast weight and importance; and even the other causes
of pride; virtue, beauty and riches; have little influence, when not
seconded by the opinions and sentiments of others. In order to account
for this phaenomenon it will be necessary to take some compass, and first
explain the nature of sympathy.

No quality of human nature is more remarkable, both in itself and in its
consequences, than that propensity we have to sympathize with others, and
to receive by communication their inclinations and sentiments, however
different from, or even contrary to our own. This is not only conspicuous
in children, who implicitly embrace every opinion proposed to them; but
also in men of the greatest judgment and understanding, who find it very
difficult to follow their own reason or inclination, in opposition to
that of their friends and daily companions. To this principle we ought to
ascribe the great uniformity we may observe in the humours and turn of
thinking of those of the same nation; and it is much more probable, that
this resemblance arises from sympathy, than from any influence of the
soil and climate, which, though they continue invariably the same, are not
able to preserve the character of a nation the same for a century
together. A good-natured man finds himself in an instant of the same
humour with his company; and even the proudest and most surly take a
tincture from their countrymen and acquaintance. A chearful countenance
infuses a sensible complacency and serenity into my mind; as an angry or
sorrowful one throws a sudden dump upon me. Hatred, resentment, esteem,
love, courage, mirth and melancholy; all these passions I feel more from
communication than from my own natural temper and disposition. So
remarkable a phaenomenon merits our attention, and must be traced up to
its first principles.

When any affection is infused by sympathy, it is at first known only by
its effects, and by those external signs in the countenance and
conversation, which convey an idea of it. This idea is presently
converted into an impression, and acquires such a degree of force and
vivacity, as to become the very passion itself, and produce an equal
emotion, as any original affection. However instantaneous this change of
the idea into an impression may be, it proceeds from certain views and
reflections, which will not escape the strict scrutiny of a. philosopher,
though they may the person himself, who makes them.

It is evident, that the idea, or rather impression of ourselves is always
intimately present with us, and that our consciousness gives us so lively
a conception of our own person, that it is not possible to imagine, that
any thing can in this particular go beyond it. Whatever object,
therefore, is related to ourselves must be conceived with a little
vivacity of conception, according to the foregoing principles; and though
this relation should not be so strong as that of causation, it must still
have a considerable influence. Resemblance and contiguity are relations
not to be neglected; especially when by an inference from cause and
effect, and by the observation of external signs, we are informed of the
real existence of the object, which is resembling or contiguous.

Now it is obvious, that nature has preserved a great resemblance among all
human creatures, and that we never remark any passion or principle in
others, of which, in some degree or other, we may not find a parallel in
ourselves. The case is the same with the fabric of the mind, as with that
of the body. However the parts may differ in shape or size, their
structure and composition are in general the same. There is a very
remarkable resemblance, which preserves itself amidst all their variety;
and this resemblance must very much contribute to make us enter into the
sentiments of others; and embrace them with facility and pleasure.
Accordingly we find, that where, beside the general resemblance of our
natures, there is any peculiar similarity in our manners, or character,
or country, or language, it facilitates the sympathy. The stronger the
relation is betwixt ourselves and any object, the more easily does the
imagination make the transition, and convey to the related idea the
vivacity of conception, with which we always form the idea of our own
person.

Nor is resemblance the only relation, which has this effect, but receives
new force from other relations, that may accompany it. The sentiments of
others have little influence, when far removed from us, and require the
relation of contiguity, to make them communicate themselves entirely. The
relations of blood, being a species of causation, may sometimes
contribute to the same effect; as also acquaintance, which operates in
the same manner with education and custom; as we shall see more fully
[Part II. Sect. 4.] afterwards. All these relations, when united together,
convey the impression or consciousness of our own person to the idea of
the sentiments or passions of others, and makes us conceive them in the
strongest and most lively manner.

It has been remarked in the beginning of this treatise, that all ideas
are borrowed from impressions, and that these two kinds of perceptions
differ only in the degrees of force and vivacity, with which they strike
upon the soul. The component part. of ideas and impressions are precisely
alike. The manner and order of their appearance may be the same. The
different degrees of their force and vivacity are, therefore, the only
particulars, that distinguish them: And as this difference may be
removed, in some measure, by a relation betwixt the impressions and
ideas, it is no wonder an idea of a sentiment or passion, may by this
means be inlivened as to become the very sentiment or passion. The lively
idea of any object always approaches is impression; and it is certain we
may feel sickness and pain from the mere force of imagination, and make a
malady real by often thinking of it. But this is most remarkable in the
opinions and affections; and it is there principally that a lively idea is
converted into an impression. Our affections depend more upon ourselves,
and the internal operations of the mind, than any other impressions; for
which reason they arise more naturally from the imagination, and from
every lively idea we form of them. This is the nature and cause of
sympathy; and it is after this manner we enter so deep into the opinions
and affections of others, whenever we discover them.

What is principally remarkable in this whole affair is the strong
confirmation these phaenomena give to the foregoing system concerning the
understanding, and consequently to the present one concerning the
passions; since these are analogous to each other. It is indeed evident,
that when we sympathize with the passions and sentiments of others, these
movements appear at first in our mind as mere ideas, and are conceived to
belong to another person, as we conceive any other matter of fact. It is
also evident, that the ideas of the affections of others are converted
into the very impressions they represent, and that the passions arise in
conformity to the images we form of them. All this is an object of the
plainest experience, and depends not on any hypothesis of philosophy.
That science can only be admitted to explain the phaenomena; though at the
same time it must be confest, they are so clear of themselves, that there
is but little occasion to employ it. For besides the relation of cause
and effect, by which we are convinced of the reality of the passion, with
which we sympathize; besides this, I say, we must be assisted by the
relations of resemblance and contiguity, in order to feel the sympathy in
its full perfection. And since these relations can entirely convert an
idea into an impression, and convey the vivacity of the latter into the
former, so perfectly as to lose nothing of it in the transition, we may
easily conceive how the relation of cause and effect alone, may serve to
strengthen and inliven an idea. In sympathy there is an evident
conversion of an idea into an impression. This conversion arises from the
relation of objects to ourself. Ourself is always intimately present to
us. Let us compare all these circumstances, and we shall find, that
sympathy is exactly correspondent to the operations of our understanding;
and even contains something more surprizing and extraordinary.

It is now time to turn our view from the general consideration of
sympathy, to its influence on pride and humility, when these passions
arise from praise and blame, from reputation and infamy. We may observe,
that no person is ever praised by another for any quality, which would
not, if real, produce, of itself, a pride in the person possest of it.
The elogiums either turn upon his power, or riches, or family, or virtue;
all of which are subjects of vanity, that we have already explained and
accounted for. It is certain, then, that if a person considered himself in
the same light, in which he appears to his admirer, he would first
receive a separate pleasure, and afterwards a pride or self-satisfaction,
according to the hypothesis above explained. Now nothing is more natural
than for us to embrace the opinions of others in this particular; both
from sympathy, which renders all their sentiments intimately present to
us; and from reasoning, which makes us regard their judgment, as a kind
of argument for what they affirm. These two principles of authority and
sympathy influence almost all our opinions; but must have a peculiar
influence, when we judge of our own worth and character. Such judgments
are always attended with passion [Book I, Part III. Sect. 10.]; and
nothing tends more to disturb our understanding, and precipitate us into
any opinions, however unreasonable, than their connexion with passion;
which diffuses itself over the imagination, and gives an additional force
to every related idea. To which we may add, that being conscious of great
partiality in our own favour, we are peculiarly pleased with any thing,
that confirms the good opinion we have of ourselves, and are easily
shocked with whatever opposes it.

All this appears very probable in theory; but in order to bestow a full
certainty on this reasoning, we must examine the phaenonena of the
passions, and see if they agree with it,

Among these phaenomena we may esteem it a very favourable one to our
present purposes that though fame in general be agreeable, yet we receive
a much greater satisfaction from the approbation of those, whom we
ourselves esteem and approve of, than of those, whom we hate and despise.
In like measure we are principally mortifyed with the contempt of
persons, upon whose judgment we set some value, and are, in a peat
measure, indifferent about the opinions of the rest of mankind. But if
the mind received from any original instinct a desire of fame and
aversion to infamy, fame and infamy would influence us without
distinction; and every opinion, according as it were favourabk or
unfavourable, would equally excite that desire or aversion. The judgment
of a fool is the judgment of another person, as well as that of a wise
man, and is only inferior in its influence on our own judgment.

We are not only better pleased with the approbation of a wise man than
with that of a fool, but receive an additional satisfaction from the
former, when it is obtained after a long and intimate acquaintance. This
is accounted for after the same manner.

The praises of others never give us much pleasure, unless they concur
with our own opinion, and extol us for those qualities, in which we
chiefly excel. A mere soldier little values the character of eloquence: A
gownman of courage: A bishop of humour: Or a merchant of learning.
Whatever esteem a man may have for any quality, abstractedly considered;
when he is conscious he is not possest of it; the opinions of the whole
world will give him little pleasure in that particular, and that because
they never will be able to draw his own opinion after them.

Nothing is more usual than for men of good families, but narrow
circumstances, to leave their friends and country, and rather seek their
livelihood by mean and mechanical employments among strangers, than among
those, who are acquainted with their birth and education. We shall be
unknown, say they, where we go. No body will suspect from what family we
are sprung. We shall be removed from all our friends and acquaintance,
and our poverty and meanness will by that means sit more easy upon us. In
examining these sentiments, I find they afford many very convincing
arguments for my present purpose.

First, We may infer from them, that the uneasiness of being contemned
depends on sympathy, and that sympathy depends on the relation of objects
to ourselves; since we are most uneasy under the contempt of persons, who
are both related to us by blood, and contiguous in place. Hence we-seek
to diminish this sympathy and uneasiness by separating these relations,
and placing ourselves in a contiguity to strangers, and at a distance
from relations.

Secondly, We may conclude, that relations are requisite to sympathy, not
absolutely considered as relations, but by their influence in converting
our ideas of the sentiments of others into the very sentiments, by means
of the association betwixt the idea of their persons, and that of our
own. For here the relations of kindred and contiguity both subsist; but
not being united in the same persons, they contribute in a less degree to
the sympathy.

Thirdly, This very circumstance of the diminution of sympathy by the
separation of relations is worthy of our attention. Suppose I am placed
in a poor condition among strangers, and consequently am but lightly
treated; I yet find myself easier in that situation, than when I was
every day exposed to the contempt of my kindred and countrymen. Here I
feel a double contempt; from my relations, but they are absent; from
those about me, but they are strangers. This double contempt is likewise
strengthened by the two relations of kindred and contiguity. But as the
persons are not the same, who are connected with me by those two
relations, this difference of ideas separates the impressions arising
from the contempt, and keeps them from running into each other. The
contempt of my neighbours has a certain influence; as has also that of my
kindred: But these influences are distinct, and never unite; as when the
contempt proceeds from persons who are at once both my neighbours and
kindred. This phaenomenon is analogous to the system of pride and
humility above-explained, which may seem so extraordinary to vulgar
apprehensions.

Fourthly, A person in these circumstances naturally conceals his birth
from those among whom he lives, and is very uneasy, if any one suspects
him to be of a family, much superior to his present fortune and way of
living. Every thing in this world is judged of by comparison. What is an
immense fortune for a private gentleman is beggary for a prince. A
peasant would think himself happy in what cannot afford necessaries for a
gentleman. When a man has either been acustomed to a more splendid way of
living, or thinks himself intitled to it by his birth and quality, every
thing below is disagreeable and even shameful; and it is with she greatest
industry he conceals his pretensions to a better fortune. Here he himself
knows his misfortunes; but as those, with whom he lives. are ignorant of
them, he has the disagreeable reflection and comparison suggested only by
his own thoughts, and never receives it by a sympathy with others; which
must contribute very much so his ease and satisfaction.

If there be any objections to this hypothesis, THAT THE PLEASURE, WHICH
WE RECEIVE FROM PRAISE, ARISES FROM A COMMUNICATION OF SENTIMENTS, we
shall find, uponexamination, that these objections, when taken in a
properlight, will serve to confirm it. Popular fame may be agreeable even
to a man, who despises the vulgar; but it is because their multitude gives
them additional weight and authority. Plagiaries are delighted with
praises, which they are conscious they do not deserve; but this is a kind
of castle-building, where the imagination amuses itself with its own
fictions, and strives to render them firm and stable by a sympathy with
the sentiments of others. Proud men are most shocked with contempt, should
they do not most readily assent to it; but it is because of the opposition
betwixt the passion, which is natural so them, and that received by
sympathy. A violent lover in like manner is very much disp pleased when
you blame and condemn his love; though it is evident your opposition can
have no influence, but by the hold it takes of himself, and by his
sympathy with you. If he despises you, or perceives you are in jest,
whatever you say has no effect upon him.



SECT. XII  OF THE PRIDE AND HUMILITY OF ANIMALS


Thus in whatever light we consider this subject, we may still observe,
that die causes of pride and humility correspond exactly to our
hypothesis, and that nothing can excite either of these passions, unless
it be both related to ourselves, and produces a pleasure or pain
independent of the passion. We have not only proved, that a tendency to
produce pleasure or pain is common to all the causes of pride or
humility, but also that it is the only thing, which is common; and
consequently is the quality, by which they operate. We have farther
proved, that the most considerable causes of these passions are really
nothing but the power of producing either agreeable or uneasy sensations;
and therefore that all their effects, and amongst the rest, pride and
humility, are derived solely from that origin. Such simple and natural
principles, founded on such solid proofs, cannot fail to be received by
philosophers, unless opposed by some objections, that have escaped me.

It is usual with anatomists to join their observations and experiments on
human bodies to those on beasts, and from the agreement of these
experiments to derive an additional argument for any particular
hypothesis. It is indeed certain, that where the structure of parts in
brutes is the same as in men, and the operation of these parts also the
same, the causes of that operation cannot be different, and that whatever
we discover to be true of the one species, may be concluded without
hesitation to be certain of the other. Thus though the mixture of humours
and the composition of minute parts may justly be presumed so be somewhat
different in men from what it is in mere animals; and therefore any
experiment we make upon the one concerning the effects of medicines will
not always apply to the other; yet as the structure of the veins and
muscles, the fabric and situation of the heart, of the lungs, the
stomach, the liver and other parts, are the same or nearly the same in
all animals, the very same hypothesis, which in one species explains
muscular motion, the progress of the chyle, the circulation of the blood,
must be applicable to every one; and according as it agrees or disagrees
with the experiments we may make in any species of creatures, we may draw
a proof of its truth or falshood on the whole. Let us, therefore, apply
this method of enquiry, which is found so just and useful in reasonings
concerning the body, to our present anatomy of the mind, and see what
discoveries we can make by it.

In order to this we must first shew the correspondence of passions in men
and animals, and afterwards compare the causes, which produce these
passions.

It is plain, that almost in every species of creatures, but especially of
the nobler kind, there are many evident marks of pride and humility. The
very port and gait of a swan, or turkey, or peacock show the high idea he
has entertained of himself, and his contempt of all others. This is the
more remarkable, that in the two last species of animals, the pride
always attends the beauty, and is discovered in the male only. The vanity
and emulation of nightingales in singing have been commonly remarked; as
likewise that of horses in swiftness, of hounds in sagacity and smell, of
the bull and cock in strength, and of every other animal in his
particular excellency. Add to this, that every species of creatures,
which approach so often to man, as to familiarize themselves with him,
show an evident pride in his approbation, and are pleased with his
praises and caresses, independent of every other consideration. Nor are
they the caresses of every one without distinction, which give them this
vanity, but those principally of the persons they know and love; in the
same manner as that passion is excited in mankind. All these are evident
proofs, that pride and humility are not merely human passions, but extend
themselves over the whole animal creation.

The CAUSES of these passions are likewise much the same in beasts as in
us, making a just allowance for our superior knowledge and understanding.
Thus animals have little or no sense of virtue or vice; they quickly lose
sight of the relations of blood; and are incapable of that of right and
property: For which reason the causes of their pride and humility must
lie solely in the body, and can never be placed either in the mind or
external objects. But so far as regards the body, the same qualities
cause pride in the animal as in the human kind; and it is on beauty,
strength, swiftness or some other useful or agreeable quality that this
passion is always founded.

The next question is, whether, since those passions are the same, and
arise from the same causes through the whole creation, the manner, in
which the causes operate, be also the same. According to all rules of
analogy, this is justly to be expected; and if we find upon trial, that
the explication of these phaenomena, which we make use of in one species,
will not apply to the rest, we may presume that that explication, however
specious, is in reality without foundation.

In order to decide this question, let us consider, that there is
evidently the same relation of ideas, and derived from the same causes,
in the minds of animals as in those of men. A dog, that has hid a bone,
often forgets the place; but when brought to it, his thought passes
easily to what he formerly concealed, by means of the contiguity, which
produces a relation among his ideas. In like manner, when he has been
heartily beat in any place, he will tremble on his approach to it, even
though he discover no signs of any present danger. The effects of
resemblance are not so remarkable; but as that relation makes a
considerable ingredient in causation, of which all animals shew so
evident a judgment, we may conclude that the three relations of
resemblance, contiguity and causation operate in the same manner upon
beasts as upon human creatures.

There are also instances of the relation of impressions, sufficient to
convince us, that there is an union of certain affections with each other
in the inferior species of creatures as well as in the superior, and that
their minds are frequently conveyed through a series of connected
emotions. A dog, when elevated with joy, runs naturally into love and
kindness, whether of his master or of the sex. In like manner, when full
of pain and sorrow, he becomes quarrelsome and illnatured; and that
passion; which at first was grief, is by the smallest occasion converted
into anger.

Thus all the internal principles, that are necessary in us to produce
either pride or humility, are commcm to all creaturn; and since the
causes, which excite these passions, are likewise the same, we may justly
conclude, that these causes operate after the same manner through the
whole animal creation. My hypothesis Is so simple, and supposes so little
reflection and judgment, that it is applicable to every sensible creature;
which must not only be allowed to be a convincing proof of its veracity,
but, I am confident, will be found an objection to every other system.




PART II  OF LOVE AND HATRED



SECT. I  OF THE OBJECT AND CAUSES OF LOVE AND HATRED


It is altogether impossible to give any definition of the passions of love
and hatred; and that because they produce merely a simple impression,
without any mixture or composition. Twould be as unnecessary to attempt
any description of them, drawn from their nature, origin, causes and
objects; and that both because these are the subjects of our present
enquiry, and because these passions of themselves are sufficiently known
from our common feeling and experience. This we have already observed
concerning pride and humility, and here repeat it concerning love and
hatred; and indeed there is so great a resemblance betwixt these two sets
of passions, that we shall be obliged to begin with a kind of abridgment
of our reasonings concerning the former, in order to explain the latter.

As the immediate object of pride and humility is self or that identical
person, of whose thoughts, actions, and sensations we are intimately
conscious; so the object of love and hatred is some other person, of
whose thoughts, actions, and sensations we are not conscious. This is
sufficiently evident from experience. Our love and hatred are always
directed to some sensible being external to us; and when we talk of
self-love, it is not in a proper sense, nor has the sensation it produces
any thing in common with that tender emotion which is excited by a friend
or mistress. It is the same case with hatred. We may be mortified by our
own faults and follies; but never feel any anger or hatred. except from
the injuries of others.

But though the object of love and hatred be always some other person, it
is plain that the object is not, properly speaking, the cause of these
passions, or alone sufficient to excite them. For since love and hatred
are directly contrary in their sensation, and have the same object in
common, if that object were also their cause, it would produce these
opposite passions in an equal degree; and as they must, from the very
first moment, destroy each other, none of them would ever be able to make
its appearance. There must, therefore, be some cause different from the
object.

If we consider the causes of love and hatred, we shall find they are very
much diversifyed, and have not many things in common. The virtue,
knowledge, wit, good sense, good humour of any person, produce love and
esteem; as the opposite qualities, hatred and contempt. The same passions
arise from bodily accomplishments, such as beauty, force, swiftness,
dexterity; and from their contraries; as likewise from the external
advantages and disadvantages of family, possession, cloaths, nation and
climate. There is not one of these objects, but what by its different
qualities may produce love and esteem, or hatred and contempt

From the view of these causes we may derive a new distinction betwixt the
quality that operates, and the subject on which it is placed. A prince,
that is possessed of a stately palace, commands the esteem of the people
upon that account; and that first, by the beauty of the palace, and
secondly, by the relation of property, which connects it with him. The
removal of either of these destroys the passion; which evidently proves
that the cause Is a compounded one.

Twould be tedious to trace the passions of love and hatred, through all
the observations which we have formed concerning pride and humility, and
which are equally applicable to both sets of passions. Twill be
sufficient to remark in general, that the object of love and hatred is
evidently some thinking person; and that the sensation of the former
passion is always agreeable, and of the latter uneasy. We may also
suppose with some shew of probability, THAT THE CAUSE OF BOTH THESE
PASSIONS IS ALWAYS RELATED TO A THINKING BEING, AND THAT THE CAUSE OF THE
FORMER PRODUCE A SEPARATE PLEASURE, AND OF THE LATTER A SEPARATE
UNEASINESS.

One of these suppositions, viz, that the cause of love and hatred must be
related to a person or thinking being, in order to produce these
passions, is not only probable, but too evident to be contested. Virtue
and vice, when considered in the abstract; beauty and deformity, when
placed on inanimate objects; poverty and riches when belonging to a third
person, excite no degree of love or hatred, esteem or contempt towards
those, who have no relation to them. A person looking out at a window,
sees me in the street, and beyond me a beautiful palace, with which I
have no concern: I believe none will pretend, that this person will pay
me the same respect, as if I were owner of the palace.

It is not so evident at first sight, that a relation of impressions is
requisite to these passions, and that because in the transition the one
impression is so much confounded with the other, that they become in a
manner undistinguishable. But as in pride and humility, we have easily
been able to make the separation, and to prove, that every cause of these
passions, produces a separate pain or pleasure, I might here observe the
same method with the same success, in examining particularly the several
causes of love and hatred. But as I hasten a full and decisive proof of
these systems, I delay this examination for a moment: And in the mean
time shall endeavour to convert to my present purpose all my reaaonings
concerning pride and humility, by an argument that isfounded on
unquestionable ex

There are few persons, that are satisfyed with their own character, or
genius, or fortune, who are nor desirous of shewing themselves to the
world, and of acquiring the love and approbation of mankind. Now it is
evident, that the very same qualities and circumstances, which are the
causes of pride or self-esteem, are also the causes of vanity or the
desire of reputation; and that we always put to view those particulars
with which in ourselves we are best satisfyed. But if love and esteem
were not produced by the same qualities as pride, according as these
qualities are related to ourselves or others, this method of proceeding
would be very absurd, nor coued men expect a correspondence in the
sentiments of every other person, with those themselves have entertained.
It is true, few can form exact systems of the passions, or make
reflections on their general nature and resemblances. But without such a
progress in philosophy, we are not subject to many mistakes in this
particular, but are sufficiently guided by common experience, as well as
by a kind of presentation; which tells us what will operate on others, by
what we feel immediately in ourselves. Since then the same qualities that
produce pride or humility, cause love or hatred; all the arguments that
have been employed to prove, that the causes of the former passions
excite a pain or pleasure independent of the passion, will be applicable
with equal evidence to the causes of the latter.



SECT. II  EXPERIMENTS TO CONFIRM THIS SYSTEM


Upon duly weighing these arguments, no one will make any scruple to
assent to that condusion I draw from them, concerning the transition
along related impressions and ideas, especially as it is a principle, in
itself, so easy and natural. But that we may place this system beyond
doubt both with regard to love and hatred, pride and humility, it will be
proper to make some new experiments upon all these passions, as well as
to recal a few of these observations, which I have formerly touched upon.

In order to make these experiments, let us suppose I am m company with a
person, whom I formerly regarded without any sentiments either of
friendship or enmity. Here I have the natural and ultimate object of all
these four pas sions placed before me. Myself am the proper object of
pride or humility; the other person of love or hatred.

Regard now with attention the nature of these passions, and their
situation with respect to each other. It is evident here are four
affections, placed, as it were, in a square or regular connexion with,
and distance from each other. The passions of pride and humility, as well
as those of love and hatred, are connected together by the identity of
their object, which to the first set of passions is self, to the second
some other person. These two lines of communication or connexion form two
opposite sides of the square. Again, pride and love are agreeable
passions; hatred and humility uneasy. This similitude of sensation
betwixt pride and love, and that betwixt humility and hatred form a new
connexion, and may be considered as the other two sides of the square.
Upon the whole, pride is connected with humility, love with hatred, by
their objects or ideas: Pride with love, humility with hatred, by their
sensations or impressions.

I say then, that nothing can produce any of these passions without
bearing it a double relation, viz, of ideas to the object of the passion,
and of sensation to the passion itself. This we must prove by our
experiments. First Experiment. To proceed with the greater order in these
experiments, let us first suppose, that being placed in the situation
above-mentioned, viz, in company with some other person, there is an
object presented, that has no relation either of impressions or ideas to
any of these passions. Thus suppose we regard together an ordinary stone,
or other common object, belonging to neither of us, and causing of itself
no emotion, or independent pain and pleasure: It is evident such an object
will produce none of these four passions. Let us try it upon each of them
successively. Let us apply it to love, to hatred, to humility, to pride;
none of them ever arises in the smallest degree imaginable. Let us change
the object, as oft as we please; provided still we choose one, that has
neither of these two relations. Let us repeat the experiment in all the
dispositions, of which the mind is susceptible. No object, in the vast
variety of nature, will, in any disposition, produce any passion without
these relations.

Second Experiment. Since an object, that wants both these relations can
never produce any passion, let us bestow on it only one of these
relations; and see what will follow. Thus suppose, I regard a stone or
any common object, that belongs either to me or my companion, and by that
means acquires a relation of ideas to the object of the passions: It is
plain, that to consider the matter a priori, no emotion of any kind can
reasonably be expected. For besides, that a relation of ideas operates
secretly and calmly on the mind, it bestows an equal impulse towards the
opposite passions of pride and humility, love and hatred, according as
the object belongs to ourselves or others; which opposition of the
passions must destroy both, and leave the mind perfectly free from any
affection or emotion. This reasoning a priori is confirmed by experience.
No trivial or vulgar object, that causes not a pain or pleasure,
independent of the passion, will ever, by its property or other relations
either to ourselves or others, be able to produce the affections of pride
or humility, love or hatred.

Third Experiment. It is evident, therefore, that a relation of ideas is
not able alone to give rise to these affections. Let us now remove this
relation, and in its stead place a relation of impressions, by presenting
an object, which is agreeable or disagreeable, but has no relation either
to ourself or companion; and let us observe the consequences. To consider
the matter first a priori, as in the preceding experiment; we may
conclude, that the object will have a small, but an uncertain connexion
with these passions. For besides, that this relation is not a cold and
imperceptible one, it has not the inconvenience of the relation of ideas,
nor directs us with equal force to two contrary passions, which by their
opposition destroy each other. But if we consider, on the other hand,
that this transition from the sensation to the affection is not forwarded
by any principle, that produces a transition of ideas; but, on the
contrary, that though the one impression be easily transfused into the
other, yet the change of objects is supposed contrary to all the
principles, that cause a transition of that kind; we may from thence
infer, that nothing will ever be a steady or durable cause of any
passion, that is connected with the passion merely by a relation of
impressions. What our reason would conclude from analogy, after balancing
these arguments, would be, that an object, which produces pleasure or
uneasiness, but has no manner of connexion either with ourselves or
others, may give such a turn to the disposition, as that may naturally
fall into pride or love, humility or hatred, and search for other
objects, upon which by a double relation, it can found these affections;
but that an object, which has only one of these relations, though the most
advantageous one, can never give rise to any constant and established
passion.

Most fortunately all this reasoning is found to be exactly conformable to
experience, and the phaenomena of the passions. Suppose I were
travelling with a companion through a country, to which we are both utter
strangers; it is evident, that if the prospects be beautiful, the roads
agreeable, and the inns commodious, this may put me into good humour both
with myself and fellow-traveller. But as we suppose, that this country
has no relation either to myself or friend. it can never be the immediate
cause of pride or love; and therefore if I found not the passion on some
other object, that bears either of us a closer relation, my emotions are
rather to be considerd as the overflowings of an elevate or humane
disposition, than as an established passion. The case is the same where
the object produces uneasiness.

Fourth Experiment. Having found, that neither an object without any
relation of ideas or impressions, nor an object, that has only one
relation, can ever cause pride or humility, love or hatred; reason alone
may convince us, without any farther experiment, that whatever has a
double relation must necessarily excite these passions; since it is
evident they must have some cause. But to leave as little room for doubt
as possible, let us renew our experiments, and see whether the event in
this case answers our expectation. I choose an object, such as virtue,
that causes a separate satisfaction: On this object I bestow a relation
to self; and find, that from this disposition of affairs, there
immediately arises a passion. But what passion? That very one of pride,
to which this object bears a double relation. Its idea is related to that
of self, the object of the passion: The sensation it causes resembles the
sensation of the passion. That I may be sure I am not mistaken in this
experiment, I remove first one relation; then another; and find, that
each removal destroys the passion, and leaves the object perfectly
indifferent. But I am not content with this. I make a still farther
trial; and instead of removing the relation, I only change it for one of
a different kind. I suppose the virtue to belong to my companion, not to
myself; and observe what follows from this alteration. I immediately
perceive the affections wheel to about, and leaving pride, where there is
only one relation, viz, of impressions, fall to the side of love, where
they are attracted by a double relation of impressions and ideas. By
repeating the same experiment, in changing anew the relation of ideas, I
bring the affections back to pride; and by a new repetition I again place
them at love or kindness. Being fully convinced of the influence of this
relation, I try the effects of the other; and by changing virtue for
vice, convert the pleasant impression, which arises from the former, into
the disagreeable one, which proceeds from the latter. The effect still
answers expectation. Vice, when placed on another, excites, by means of
its double relations, the passion of hatred, instead of love, which for
the same reason arises from virtue. To continue the experiment, I change
anew the relation of ideas, and suppose the vice to belong to myself.
What follows? What is usual. A subsequent change of the passion from
hatred to humility. This humility I convert into pride by a new change of
the impression; and find after all that I have compleated the round, and
have by these changes brought back the passion to that very situation, in
which I first found it.

But to make the matter still more certain, I alter the object; and
instead of vice and virtue, make the trial upon beauty and deformity,
riches and poverty, power and servitude. Each of these objects runs the
circle of the passions in the same manner, by a change of their
relations: And in whatever order we proceed, whether through pride, love,
hatred, humility, or through humility, hatred, love, pride, the experiment
is not in the least diversifyed. Esteem and contempt, indeed, arise on
some occasions instead of love and hatred; but these are at the bottom
the same passions, only diversifyed by some causes, which we shall
explain afterwards.

Fifth Experiment. To give greater authority to these experiments, let us
change the situation of affairs as much as possible, and place the
passions and objects in all the different positions, of which they are
susceptible. Let us suppose, beside the relations above-mentioned, that
the person, along with whom I make all these experiments, is closely
connected with me either by blood or friendship. He is, we shall suppose,
my son or brother, or is united to me by a long and familiar
acquaintance. Let us next suppose, that the cause of the passion acquires
a double relation of impressions and ideas to this person; and let us see
what the effects are of all these complicated attractions and relations.

Before we consider what they are in fact, let us determine what they
ought to be, conformable to my hypothesis. It is plain, that, according as
the impression is either pleasant or uneasy, the passion of love or
hatred must arise towards the person, who is thus connected to the cause
of the impression by these double relations, which I have all along
required. The virtue of a brother must make me love him; as his vice or
infamy must excite the contrary passion. But to judge only from the
situation of affairs, I should not expect, that the affections would rest
there, and never transfuse themselves into any other impression. As there
is here a person, who by means of a double relation is the object of my
passion, the very same reasoning leads me to think the passion will be
carryed farther. The person has a relation of ideas to myself, according
to the supposition; the passion, of which he is the object, by being
either agreeable or uneasy, has a relation of impressions to pride or
humility. It is evident, then, that one of these passions must arise from
the love or hatred.

This is the reasoning I form in conformity to my hypothesis; and am
pleased to find upon trial that every thing answers exactly to my
expectation. The virtue or vice of a son or brother not only excites love
or hatred, but by a new transition, from similar causes, gives rise to
pride or humility. Nothing causes greater vanity than any shining quality
in our relations; as nothing mortifies us more than their vice or infamy.
This exact conformity of experience to our reasoning is a convincing
proof of the solidity of that hypothesis, upon which we reason.

Sixth Experiment. This evidence will be still augmented, if we reverse
the experiment, and preserving still the same relations, begin only with
a different passion. Suppose, that instead of the virtue or vice of a son
or brother, which causes first love or hatred, and afterwards pride or
humility, we place these good or bad qualities on ourselves, without any
immediate connexion with the person, who is related to us: Experience
shews us, that by this change of situation the whole chain is broke, and
that the mind is not conveyed from one passion to another, as in the
preceding instance. We never love or hate a son or brother for the virtue
or vice we discern in ourselves; though it is evident the same qualities
in him give us a very sensible pride or humility. The transition from
pride or humility to love or hatred is not so natural as from love or
hatred to pride or humility. This may at first sight be esteemed contrary
to my hypothesis; since the relations of impressions and ideas are in both
cases precisely the same. Pride and humility are impressions related to
love and hatred. Myself am related to the person. It should, therefore,
be expected, that like causes must produce like effects, and a perfect
transition arise from the double relation, as in all other cases. This
difficulty we may easily solve by the following reflections.

It is evident, that as we are at all times intimately conscious of
ourselves, our sentiments and passions, their ideas must strike upon us
with greater vivacity than the ideas of the sentiments and passions of
any other person. But every thing, that strikes upon us with vivacity,
and appears in a full and strong light, forces itself, in a manner, into
our consideration, and becomes present to the mind on the smallest hint
and most trivial relation. For the same reason, when it is once present,
it engages the attention, and keeps it from wandering to other objects,
however strong may be their relation to our first object. The imagination
passes easily from obscure to lively ideas, but with difficulty from
lively to obscure. In the one case the relation is aided by another
principle: In the other case, it is opposed by it.

Now I have observed, that those two faculties of the mind, the
imagination and passions, assist each other in their operations when
their propensities are similar, and when they act upon the same object.
The mind has always a propensity to pass from a passion to any other
related to it; and this propensity is forwarded when the object of the
one passion is related to that of the other. The two impulses concur with
each other, and render the whole transition more smooth and easy. But if
it should happen, that while the relation of ideas, strictly speaking,
continues the same, its influence, in causing a transition of the
imagination, should no longer take place, it is evident its influence on
the passions must also cease, as being dependent entirely on that
transition. This is the reason why pride or humility is not transfused
into love or hatred with the same ease, that the latter passions are
changed into the former. If a person be my brother I am his likewise: but
though the relations be reciprocal they have very different effects on the
imagination. The passage is smooth and open from the consideration of any
person related to us to that of ourself, of whom we are every moment
conscious. But when the affections are once directed to ourself. the
fancy passes not with the same facility from that object to any other
person, how closely so ever connected with us. This easy or difficult
transition of the imagination operates upon the passions, and facilitates
or retards their transition, which is a clear proof, that these two
faculties of the passions and imagination are connected together, and
that the relations of ideas have an influence upon the affections.
Besides innumerable experiments that prove this, we here find, that even
when the relation remains; if by any particular circumstance its usual
effect upon the fancy in producing an association or transition of ideas,
is prevented; its usual effect upon the passions, in conveying us from
one to another, is in like manner prevented.

Some may, perhaps, find a contradiction betwixt this phaenomenon and that
of sympathy, where the mind passes easily from the idea of ourselves to
that of any other object related to us. But this difficulty will vanish,
if we consider that in sympathy our own person is not the object of any
passion, nor is there any thing, that fixes our attention on ourselves;
as in the present case, where we are supposed to be actuated with pride
or humility. Ourself, independent of the perception of every other
object, is in reality nothing: For which reason we must turn our view to
external objects; and it is natural for us to consider with most attention
such as lie contiguous to us, or resemble us. But when self is the object
of a passion, it is not natural to quit the consideration of it, till the
passion be exhausted: in which case the double relations of impressions
and ideas can no longer operate.

Seventh Experiment. To put this whole reasoning to a farther trial, let
us make a new experiment; and as we have already seen the effects of
related passions and ideas, let us here suppose an identity of passions
along with a relation of ideas; and let us consider the effects of this
new situation. It is evident a transition of the passions from the one
object to the other is here in all reason to be expected; since the
relation of ideas is supposed still to continue, and identity of
impressions must produce a stronger connexion, than the most perfect
resemblance, that can be imagined. If a double relation, therefore, of
impressions and ideas is able to produce a transition from one to the
other, much more an identity of impressions with a relation of ideas.
Accordingly we find, that when we either love or hate any person, the
passions seldom continue within their first bounds; but extend themselves
towards all the contiguous objects, and comprehend the friends and
relations of him we love or hate. Nothing is more natural than to bear a
kindness to one brother on account of our friendship for another, without
any farther examination of his character. A quarrel with one person gives
us a hatred for the whole family, though entirely innocent of that, which
displeases us. Instances of this kind are every where to be met with.

There is only one difficulty in this experiment, which it will be
necessary to account for, before we proceed any farther. It is evident,
that though all passions pass easily from one object to another related to
it, yet this transition is made with greater facility, where the more
considerable object is first presented, and the lesser follows it, than
where this order is reversed, and the lesser takes the precedence. Thus
it is more natural for us to love the son upon account of the father, than
the father upon account of the son; the servant for the master, than the
master for the servant; the subject for the prince, than the prince for
the subject. In like manner we more readily contract a hatred against a
whole family, where our first quarrel is with the head of it, than where
we are displeased with a son, or servant, or some inferior member. In
short, our passions, like other objects, descend with greater facility
than they ascend.

That we may comprehend, wherein consists the difficulty of explaining
this phaenomenon, we must consider, that the very same reason, which
determines the imagination to pass from remote to contiguous objects,
with more facility than from contiguous to remote, causes it likewise to
change with more ease, the less for the greater, than the greater for the
less. Whatever has the greatest influence is most taken notice of; and
whatever is most taken notice of, presents itself most readily to the
imagination. We are more apt to over-look in any subject, what is
trivial, than what appears of considerable moment; but especially if the
latter takes the precedence, and first engages our attention. Thus if any
accident makes us consider the Satellites of JUPITER, our fancy is
naturally determined to form the idea of that planet; but if we first
reflect on the principal planet, it is more natural for us to overlook its
attendants. The mention of the provinces of any empire conveys our
thought to the seat of the empire; but the fancy returns not with the
same facility to the consideration of the provinces. The idea of the
servant makes us think of the master; that of the subject carries our
view to the prince. But the same relation has not an equal influence in
conveying us back again. And on this is founded that reproach of Cornelia
to her sons, that they ought to be ashamed she should be more known by
the title of the daughter of Scipio than by that of the mother of the
Gracchi. This was, in other words, exhorting them to render themselves as
illustrious and famous as their grandfather, otherwise the imagination of
the people, passing from her who was intermediate, and placed in an equal
relation to both, would always leave them, and denominate her by what was
more considerable and of greater moment. On the same principle is founded
that common custom of making wives bear the name of their husbands,
rather than husbands that of their wives; as also the ceremony of giving
the precedency to those, whom we honour and respect. We might find many
other instances to confirm this principle, were it not already
sufficiently evident.

Now since the fancy finds the same facility in passing from the lesser to
the greater, as from remote to contiguous, why does not this easy
transition of ideas assist the transition of passions in the former case,
as well as in the latter? The virtues of a friend or brother produce
first love, and then pride; because in that case the imagination passes
from remote to contiguous, according to its propensity. Our own virtues
produce not first pride, and then love to a friend or brother; because
the passage in that case would be from contiguous to remote, contrary to
its propensity. But the love or hatred of an inferior causes not readily
any passion to the superior, though that be the natural propensity of the
imagination: While the love or hatred of a superior, causes a passion to
the inferior, contrary to its propensity. In short, the same facility of
transition operates not in the same manner upon superior and inferior as
upon contiguous and remote. These two phaenomena appear contradictory,
and require some attention to be reconciled.

As the transition of ideas is here made contrary to the natural
propensity of the imagination, that faculty must be overpowered by some
stronger principle of another kind; and as there is nothing ever present
to the mind but impressions and ideas, this principle must necessarily
lie in the impressions. Now it has been observed, that impressions or
passions are connected only by their resemblance, and that where any two
passions place the mind in the same or in similar dispositions, it very
naturally passes from the one to the other: As on the contrary, a
repugnance in the dispositions produces a difficulty in the transition of
the passions. But it is observable, that this repugnance may arise from a
difference of degree as well as of kind; nor do we experience a greater
difficulty in passing suddenly from a small degree of love to a small
degree of hatred, than from a small to a great degree of either of these
affections. A man, when calm or only moderately agitated, is so
different, in every respect, from himself, when disturbed with a violent
passion, that no two persons can be more unlike; nor is it easy to pass
from the one extreme to the other, without a considerable interval
betwixt them.

The difficulty is not less, if it be not rather greater, in passing from
the strong passion to the weak, than in passing from the weak to the
strong, provided the one passion upon its appearance destroys the other,
and they do not both of them exist at once. But the case is entirely
altered, when the passions unite together, and actuate the mind at the
same time. A weak passion, when added to a strong, makes not so
considerable a change in the disposition, as a strong when added to a
weak; for which reason there is a closer connexion betwixt the great
degree and the small, than betwixt the small degree and the great.

The degree of any passion depends upon the nature of its object; and an
affection directed to a person, who is considerable in our eyes, fills
and possesses the mind much more than one, which has for its object a
person we esteem of less consequence. Here then the contradiction betwixt
the propensities of the imagination and passion displays itself. When we
turn our thought to a great and a small object, the imagination finds
more facility in passing from the small to the great, than from the great
to the small; but the affections find a greater difficulty: And as the
affections are a more powerful principle than the imagination, no wonder
they prevail over it, and draw the mind to their side. In spite of the
difficulty of passing from the idea of great to that of little, a passion
directed to the former, produces always a similar passion towards the
latter; when the great and little are related together. The idea of the
servant conveys our thought most readily to the master; but the hatred or
love of the master produces with greater facility anger or good-will to
the servant. The strongest passion in this case takes the precedence; and
the addition of the weaker making no considerable change on the
disposition, the passage is by that means rendered more easy and natural
betwixt them.

As in the foregoing experiment we found, that a relation of ideas, which,
by any particular circumstance, ceases to produce its usual effect of
facilitating the transition of ideas, ceases likewise to operate on the
passions; so in the present experiment we find the same property of the
impressions. Two different degrees of the same passion are surely related
together; but if the smaller be first present, it has little or no
tendency to introduce the greater; and that because the addition of the
great to the little, produces a more sensible alteration on the temper,
than the addition of the little to the great. These phaenomena, when duly
weighed, will be found convincing proofs of this hypothesis.

And these proofs will be confirmed, if we consider the manner in which
the mind here reconciles the contradiction, I have observed betwixt the
passions and the imagination. The fancy passes with more facility from
the less to the greater, than from the greater to the less: But on the
contrary a violent passion produces more easily a feeble, than that does
a violent. In this opposition the passion in the end prevails over the
imagination; but it is commonly by complying with it, and by seeking
another quality, which may counter-ballance that principle, from whence
the opposition arises. When we love the father or master of a family, we
little think of his children or servants. But when these are present with
us, or when it lies any ways in our power to serve them, the nearness and
contiguity in this case encreases their magnitude, or at least removes
that opposition, which the fancy makes to the transition of the
affections. If the imagination finds a difficulty in passing from greater
to less, it finds an equal facility in passing from remote to contiguous,
which brings the matter to an equality, and leaves the way open from the
one passion to the other.

Eighth Experiment. I have observed that the transition from love or
hatred to pride or humility, is more easy than from pride or humility to
love or hatred; and that the difficulty, which the imagination finds in
passing from contiguous to remote, is the cause why we scarce have any
instance of the latter transition of the affections. I must, however,
make one exception, viz, when the very cause of the pride and humility is
placed in some other person. For in that case the imagination is
necessitated to consider the person, nor can it possibly confine its view
to ourselves. Thus nothing more readily produces kindness and affection
to any person, than his approbation of our conduct and character: As on
the other hand, nothing inspires us with a stronger hatred, than his
blame or contempt. Here it is evident, that the original passion is pride
or humility, whose object is self; and that this passion is transfused
into love or hatred, whose object is some other person, notwithstanding
the rule I have already established, THAT THE IMAGINATION PASSES WITH
DIFFICULTY FROM CONTIGUOUS TO REMOTE. But the transition in this case is
not made merely on account of the relation betwixt ourselves and the
person; but because that very person is the real cause of our first
passion, and of consequence is intimately connected with it. It is his
approbation that produces pride; and disapprobation, humility. No wonder,
then, the imagination returns back again attended with the related
passions of love and hatred. This is not a contradiction, but an
exception to the rule; and an exception that arises from the same reason
with the rule itself.

Such an exception as this is, therefore, rather a confirmation of the
rule. And indeed, if we consider all the eight experiments I have
explained, we shall find that the same principle appears in all of them,
and that it is by means of a transition arising from a double relation of
impressions and ideas, pride and humility, love and hatred are produced.
An object without [First Experiment.] a relation, or [Second and Third
Experiments] with but one, never produces either of these passions; and it
is [Fourth Experiment.] found that the passion always varies in conformity
to the relation. Nay we may observe, that where the relation, by any
particular circumstance, has not its usual effect of producing a
transition either of [Sixth Experiment.] ideas or of impressions, it
ceases to operate upon the passions, and gives rise neither to pride nor
love, humility nor hatred. This rule we find still to hold good [Seventh
and Eighth Experiments.] even under the appearance of its contrary; and as
relation is frequently experienced to have no effect; which upon
examination is found to proceed from some particular circumstance, that
prevents the transition; so even in instances, where that circumstance,
though present, prevents not the transition, it is found to arise from
some other circumstance, which counter-balances it. Thus not only the
variations resolve themselves into the general principle, but even the
variations of these variations.



SECT. III  DIFFICULTIES SOLVED


After so many and such undeniable proofs drawn from daily experience and
observation, it may seem superfluous to enter into a particular
examination of all the causes of love and hatred. I shall, therefore,
employ the sequel of this part, First, In removing some difficulties,
concerning particular causes of these passions. Secondly, In examining
the compound affections, which arise from the mixture of love and hatred
with other emotions.

Nothing is more evident, than that any person acquires our kindness, or
is exposed to our ill-will, in proportion to the pleasure or uneasiness
we receive from him, and that the passions keep pace exactly with the
sensations in all their changes and variations. Whoever can find the
means either by his services, his beauty, or his flattery, to render
himself useful or agreeable to us, is sure of our affections: As on the
other hand, whoever harms or displeases us never fails to excite our
anger or hatred. When our own nation is at war with any other, we detest
them under the character of cruel, perfidious, unjust and violent: But
always esteem ourselves and allies equitable, moderate, and merciful. If
the general of our enemies be successful, it is with difficulty we allow
him the figure and character of a man. He is a sorcerer: He has a
communication with daemons; as is reported of OLIVER CROMWELL, and the
DUKE OF LUXEMBOURG: He is bloody-minded, and takes a pleasure in death
and destruction. But if the success be on our side, our commander has all
the opposite good qualities, and is a pattern of virtue, as well as of
courage and conduct. His treachery we call policy: His cruelty is an evil
inseparable from war. In short, every one of his faults we either
endeavour to extenuate, or dignify it with the name of that virtue, which
approaches it. It is evident the same method of thinking runs through
common life.

There are some, who add another condition, and require not only that the
pain and pleasure arise from the person, but likewise that it arise
knowingly, and with a particular design and intention. A man, who wounds
and harms us by accident, becomes not our enemy upon that account, nor do
we think ourselves bound by any ties of gratitude to one, who does us any
service after the same manner. By the intention we judge of the actions,
and according as that is good or bad, they become causes of love or
hatred.

But here we must make a distinction. If that quality in another, which
pleases or displeases, be constant and inherent in his person and
character, it will cause love or hatred independent of the intention: But
otherwise a knowledge and design is requisite, in order to give rise to
these passions. One that is disagreeable by his deformity or folly is the
object of our aversion, though nothing be more certain, than that he has
not the least intention of displeasing us by these qualities. But if the
uneasiness proceed not from a quality, but an action, which is produced
and annihilated in a moment, it is necessary, in order to produce some
relation, and connect this action sufficiently with the person. that it
be derived from a particular fore-thought and design. It is not enough,
that the action arise from the person, and have him for its immediate
cause and author. This relation alone is too feeble and inconstant to be
a foundation for these passions. It reaches not the sensible and thinking
part, and neither proceeds from any thing durable in him, nor leaves any
thing behind it; but passes in a moment, and is as if it had never been.
On the other hand, an intention shews certain qualities, which remaining
after the action is performed, connect it with the person, and facilitate
the transition of ideas from one to the other. We can never think of him
without reflecting on these qualities; unless repentance and a change of
life have produced an alteration in that respect: In which case the
passion is likewise altered. This therefore is one reason, why an
intention is requisite to excite either love or hatred.

But we must farther consider, that an intention, besides its
strengthening the relation of ideas, is often necessary to produce a
relation of impressions, and give rise to pleasure and uneasiness. For
it is observable, that the principal part of an injury is the contempt and
hatred, which it shews in the person, that injures us; and without that,
the mere harm gives us a less sensible uneasiness. In like manner, a good
office is agreeable, chiefly because it flatters our vanity, and is a
proof of the kindness and esteem of the person, who performs it. The
removal of the intention, removes the mortification in the one case, and
vanity in the other, and must of course cause a remarkable diminution in
the passions of love and hatred.

I grant, that these effects of the removal of design, in diminishing the
relations of impressions and ideas, are not entire, nor able to remove
every degree of these relations. But then I ask, if the removal of design
be able entirely to remove the passion of love and hatred? Experience, I
am sure, informs us of the contrary, nor is there any thing more certain,
than that men often fall into a violent anger for injuries, which they
themselves must own to be entirely involuntary and accidental. This
emotion, indeed, cannot be of long continuance; but still is sufficient
to shew, that there is a natural connexion betwixt uneasiness and anger,
and that the relation of impressions will operate upon a very small
relation of ideas. But when the violence of the impression is once a
little abated, the defect of the relation begins to be better felt; and
as the character of a person is no wise interested in such injuries as
are casual and involuntary, it seldom happens that on their account, we
entertain a lasting enmity.

To illustrate this doctrine by a parallel instance, we may observe, that
not only the uneasiness, which proceeds from another by accident, has but
little force to excite our passion, but also that which arises from an
acknowledged necessity and duty. One that has a real design of harming
us, proceeding not from hatred and ill-will, but from justice and equity,
draws not upon him our anger, if we be in any degree reasonable;
notwithstanding he is both the cause, and the knowing cause of our
sufferings. Let us examine a little this phaenomenon.

It is evident in the first place, that this circumstance is not decisive;
and though it may be able to diminish the passions, it is seldom it can
entirely remove them. How few criminals are there, who have no ill-will
to the person, that accuses them, or to the judge, that condemns them,
even though they be conscious of their own deserts? In like manner our
antagonist in a law-suit, and our competitor for any office, are commonly
regarded as our enemies; though we must acknowledge, if we would but
reflect a moment, that their motive is entirely as justifiable as our
own.

Besides we may consider, that when we receive harm from any person, we
are apt to imagine him criminal, and it is with extreme difficulty we
allow of his justice and innocence. This is a clear proof, that,
independent of the opinion of iniquity, any harm or uneasiness has a
natural tendency to excite our hatred, and that afterwards we seek for
reasons upon which we may justify and establish the passion. Here the
idea of injury produces not the passion, but arises from it.

Nor is it any wonder that passion should produce the opinion of injury;
since otherwise it must suffer a considerable diminution, which all the
passions avoid as much as possible. The removal of injury may remove the
anger, without proving that the anger arises only from the injury. The
harm and the justice are two contrary objects, of which the one has a
tendency to produce hatred, and the other love; and it is according to
their different degrees, and our particular turn of thinking, that either
of the objects prevails, and excites its proper passion.



SECT. IV  OF THE LOVE OF RELATIONS


Having given a reason, why several actions, that cause a real pleasure or
uneasiness, excite not any degree, or but a small one, of the passion of
love or hatred towards the actors; it will be necessary to shew, wherein
consists the pleasure or uneasiness of many objects, which we find by
experience to produce these passions.

According to the preceding system there is always required a double
relation of impressions and ideas betwixt the cause and effect, in order
to produce either love or hatred. But though this be universally true, it
is remarkable that the passion of love may be excited by only one relation
of a different kind, viz, betwixt ourselves and the object; or more
properly speaking, that this relation is always attended with both the
others. Whoever is united to us by any connexion is always sure of a
share of our love, proportioned to the connexion, without enquiring into
his other qualities. Thus the relation of blood produces the strongest
tie the mind is capable of in the love of parents to their children, and
a lesser degree of the same affection, as the relation lessens. Nor has
consanguinity alone this effect, but any other relation without
exception. We love our country-men, our neighbours, those of the same
trade, profession, and even name with ourselves. Every one of these
relations is esteemed some tie, and gives a title to a share of our
affection.

There is another phaenomenon, which is parallel to this, viz, that
acquaintance, without any kind of relation, gives rise to love and
kindness. When we have contracted a habitude and intimacy with any person;
though in frequenting his company we have not been able to discover
any very valuable quality, of which he is possessed; yet we cannot
forebear preferring him to strangers, of whose superior merit we are
fully convinced. These two phaenomena of the effects of relation and
acquaintance will give mutual light to each other, and may be both
explained from the same principle.

Those, who take a pleasure in declaiming against human nature, have
observed, that man is altogether insufficient to support himself; and
that when you loosen all the holds, which he has of external objects, he
immediately drops down into the deepest melancholy and despair. From
this, say they, proceeds that continual search after amusement in gaming,
in hunting, in business; by which we endeavour to forget ourselves, and
excite our spirits from the languid state, into which they fall, when not
sustained by some brisk and lively emotion. To this method of thinking I
so far agree, that I own the mind to be insufficient, of itself, to its
own entertainment, and that it naturally seeks after foreign objects,
which may produce a lively sensation, and agitate the spirits. On the
appearance of such an object it awakes, as it were, from a dream: The
blood flows with a new tide: The heart is elevated: And the whole man
acquires a vigour, which he cannot command in his solitary and calm
moments. Hence company is naturally so rejoicing, as presenting the
liveliest of all objects, viz, a rational and thinking Being like
ourselves, who communicates to us all the actions of his mind; makes us
privy to his inmost sentiments and affections; and lets us see, in the
very instant of their production, all the emotions, which are caused by
any object. Every lively idea is agreeable, but especially that of a
passion, because such an idea becomes a kind of passion, and gives a more
sensible agitation to the mind, than any other image or conception.

This being once admitted, all the rest is easy. For as the company of
strangers is agreeable to us for a short time, by inlivening our thought;
so the company of our relations and acquaintance must be peculiarly
agreeable, because it has this effect in a greater degree, and is of more
durable influence. Whatever is related to us is conceived in a lively
manner by the easy transition from ourselves to the related object.
Custom also, or acquaintance facilitates the entrance, and strengthens
the conception of any object. The first case is parallel to our
reasonings from cause and effect; the second to education. And as
reasoning and education concur only in producing a lively and strong idea
of any object; so is this the only particular, which is common to
relation and acquaintance. This must, therefore, be the influencing
quality, by which they produce all their common effects; and love or
kindness being one of these effects, it must be from the force and
liveliness of conception, that the passion is derived. Such a conception
is peculiarly agreeable, and makes us have an affectionate regard for
every thing, that produces it, when the proper object of kindness and
goodwill.

It is obvious, that people associate together according to their
particular tempers and dispositions, and that men of gay tempers
naturally love the gay; as the serious bear an affection to the serious.
This not only happens, where they remark this resemblance betwixt
themselves and others, but also by the natural course of the disposition,
and by a certain sympathy, which always arises betwixt similar
characters. Where they remark the resemblance, it operates after the
manner of a relation, by producing a connexion of ideas. Where they do
not remark it, it operates by some other principle; and if this latter
principle be similar to the former, it must be received as a confirmation
of the foregoing reasoning.

The idea of ourselves is always intimately present to us, and conveys a
sensible degree of vivacity to the idea of any other object, to which we
are related. This lively idea changes by degrees into a real impression;
these two kinds of perception being in a great measure the same, and
differing only in their degrees of force and vivacity. But this change
must be produced with the greater ease, that our natural temper gives us
a propensity to the same impression, which we observe in others, and
makes it arise upon any slight occasion. In that case resemblance
converts the idea into an impression, not only by means of the relation,
and by transfusing the original vivacity into the related idea; but also
by presenting such materials as take fire from the least spark. And as in
both cases a love or affection arises from the resemblance, we may learn
that a sympathy with others is agreeable only by giving an emotion to the
spirits, since an easy sympathy and correspondent emotions are alone
common to RELATION, ACQUAINTANCE, and RESEMBLANCE.

The great propensity men have to pride may be considered as another
similar phaenomenon. It often happens, that after we have lived a
considerable time in any city; however at first it might be disagreeable
to us; yet as we become familiar with the objects, and contact an
acquaintance, though merely with the streets and buildings, the aversion
diminishes by degrees, and at last changes into the opposite passion. The
mind finds a satisfaction and ease in the view of objects, to which it is
accustomed, and naturally prefers them to others, which, though, perhaps,
in themselves more valuable, are less known to it. By the same quality of
the mind we are seduced into a good opinion of ourselves, and of all
objects, that belong to us. They appear in a stronger light; are more
agreeable; and consequently fitter subjects of pride and vanity, than any
other.

It may not be amiss, in treating of the affection we bear our
acquaintance and relations, to observe some pretty curious phaenomena,
which attend it. It is easy to remark in common life, that children esteem
their relation to their mother to be weakened, in a great measure, by her
second marriage, and no longer regard her with the same eye, as if she
had continued in her state of widow-hood. Nor does this happen only, when
they have felt any inconveniences from her second marriage, or when her
husband is much her inferior; but even without any of these
considerations, and merely because she has become part of another family.
This also takes place with regard to the second marriage of a father; but
in a much less degree: And it is certain the ties of blood are not so much
loosened in the latter case as by the marriage of a mother. These two
phaenomena are remarkable in themselves, but much more so when compared.

In order to produce a perfect relation betwixt two objects, it is
requisite, not only that the imagination be conveyed from one to the
other by resemblance, contiguity or causation, but also that it return
back from the second to the first with the same ease and facility. At
first sight this may seem a necessary and unavoidable consequence. If one
object resemble another, the latter object must necessarily resemble the
former. If one object be the cause of another, the second object is
effect to its cause. It is the same case with contiguity: And therefore
the relation being always reciprocal, it may be thought, that the return
of the imagination from the second to the first must also, in every case,
be equally natural as its passage from the first to the second. But upon
farther examination we shall easily discover our mistake. For supposing
the second object, beside its reciprocal relation to the first, to have
also a strong relation to a third object; in that case the thought,
passing from the first object to the second, returns not back with the
same facility, though the relation continues the same; but is readily
carryed on to the third object, by means of the new relation, which
presents itself, and gives a new impulse to the imagination. This new
relation, therefore, weakens the tie betwixt the first and second
objects. The fancy is by its very nature wavering and inconstant; and
considers always two objects as more strongly related together, where it
finds the passage equally easy both in going and returning, than where
the transition is easy only in one of these motions. The double motion is
a kind of a double tie, and binds the objects together in the closest and
most intimate manner.

The second marriage of a mother breaks not the relation of child and
parent; and that relation suffices to convey my imagination from myself
to her with the greatest ease and facility. But after the imagination is
arrived at this point of view, it finds its object to be surrounded with
so many other relations, which challenge its regard, that it knows not
which to prefer, and is at a loss what new object to pitch upon. The ties
of interest and duty bind her to another family, and prevent that return
of the fancy from her to myself, which is necessary to support the union.
The thought has no longer the vibration, requisite to set it perfectly at
ease, and indulge its inclination to change. It goes with facility, but
returns with difficulty; and by that interruption finds the relation much
weakened from what it would be were the passage open and easy on both
sides.

Now to give a reason, why this effect follows not in the same degree upon
the second marriage of a father: we may reflect on what has been proved
already, that though the imagination goes easily from the view of a lesser
object to that of a greater, yet it returns not with the same facility
from the greater to the less. When my imagination goes from myself to my
father, it passes not so readily from him to his second wife, nor
considers him as entering into a different family, but as continuing the
head of that family, of which I am myself a part. His superiority
prevents the easy transition of the thought from him to his spouse, but
keeps the passage still open for a return to myself along the same
relation of child and parent. He is not sunk in the new relation he
acquires; so that the double motion or vibration of thought is still easy
and natural. By this indulgence of the fancy in its inconstancy, the tie
of child and parent still preserves its full force and influence. A
mother thinks not her tie to a son weakened, because it is shared with her
husband: Nor a son his with a parent, because it is shared with a brother.
The third object is here related to the first, as well as to the second;
so that the imagination goes and comes along all of them with the
greatest facility.



SECT. V  OF OUR ESTEEM FOR THE RICH AND POWERFUL


Nothing has a greater tendency to give us an esteem for any person, than
his power and riches; or a contempt, than his poverty and meanness: And
as esteem and contempt are to be considered as species of love and
hatred, it will be proper in this place to explain these phaenomena.

Here it happens most fortunately, that the greatest difficulty is not to
discover a principle capable of producing such an effect, but to choose
the chief and predominant among several, that present themselves. The
satisfaction we take in the riches of others, and the esteem we have for
the possessors may be ascribed to three different causes. FIRST, To the
objects they possess; such as houses, gardens, equipages; which, being
agreeable in themselves, necessarily produce a sentiment of pleasure in
every one; that either considers or surveys them. SECONDLY, To the
expectation of advantage from the rich and powerful by our sharing their
possessions. THIRDLY, To sympathy, which makes us partake of the
satisfaction of every one, that approaches us. All these principles may
concur in producing the present phaenomenon. The question is, to which of
them we ought principally to ascribe it,

It is certain, that the first principle, viz, the reflection on agreeable
objects, has a greater influence, than what, at first sight, we may be
apt to imagine. We seldom reflect on what is beautiful or ugly, agreeable
or disagreeable, without an emotion of pleasure or uneasiness; and though
these sensations appear not much in our common indolent way of thinking,
it is easy, either in reading or conversation, to discover them. Men of
wit always turn the discourse on subjects that are entertaining to the
imagination; and poets never present any objects but such as are of the
same nature. Mr Philips has chosen CYDER for the subject of an excellent
poem. Beer would not have been so proper, as being neither so agreeable
to the taste nor eye. But he would certainly have preferred wine to
either of them, coued his native country have afforded him so agreeable a
liquor. We may learn from thence, that every thing, which is agreeable to
the senses, is also in some measure agreeable to the fancy, and conveys
to the thought an image of that satisfaction, which it gives by its real
application to the bodily organs.

But though these reasons may induce us to comprehend this delicacy of the
imagination among the causes of the respect, which we pay the rich and
powerful, there are many other reasons, that may keep us from regarding
it as the sole or principal. For as the ideas of pleasure can have an
influence only by means of their vivacity, which makes them approach
impressions, it is most natural those ideas should have that influence,
which are favoured by most circumstances, and have a natural tendency to
become strong and lively; such as our ideas of the passions and
sensations of any human creature. Every human creature resembles
ourselves, and by that means has an advantage above any other object, in
operating on the imagination.

Besides, if we consider the nature of that faculty, and the great
influence which all relations have upon it, we shall easily be persuaded,
that however the ideas of the pleasant wines, music, or gardens, which
the rich man enjoys, may become lively and agreeable, the fancy will not
confine itself to them, but will carry its view to the related objects;
and in particular, to the person, who possesses them. And this is the
more natural, that the pleasant idea or image produces here a passion
towards the person, by means of his relation to the object; so that it is
unavoidable but he must enter into the original conception, since he
makes the object of the derivative passion: But if he enters into the
original conception, and is considered as enjoying these agreeable
objects, it is sympathy, which is properly the cause of the affection; and
the third principle is more powerful and universal than the first.

Add to this, that riches and power alone, even though unemployed,
naturally cause esteem and respect: And consequently these passions arise
not from the idea of any beautiful or agreeable objects. It is true; money
implies a kind of representation of such objects, by the power it affords
of obtaining them; and for that reason may still be esteemed proper to
convey those agreeable images, which may give rise to the passion. But as
this prospect is very distant, it is more natural for us to take a
contiguous object, viz, the satisfaction, which this power affords the
person, who is possest of it. And of this we shall be farther satisfyed,
if we consider, that riches represent the goods of life, only by means of
the will; which employs them; and therefore imply in their very nature an
idea of the person, and cannot be considered without a kind of sympathy
with his sensations and enjoyments.

This we may confirm by a reflection, which to some will, perhaps, appear
too subtile and refined. I have already observed, that power, as
distinguished from its exercise, has either no meaning at all, or is
nothing but a possibility or probability of existence; by which any
object approaches to reality, and has a sensible influence on the mind. I
have also observed, that this approach, by an illusion of the fancy,
appears much greater, when we ourselves are possest of the power, than
when it is enjoyed by another; and that in the former case the objects
seem to touch upon the very verge of reality, and convey almost an equal
satisfaction, as if actually in our possession. Now I assert, that where
we esteem a person upon account of his riches, we must enter into this
sentiment of the proprietor, and that without such a sympathy the idea of
the agreeable objects, which they give him the power to produce, would
have but a feeble influence upon us. An avaritious man is respected for
his money, though he scarce is possest of a power; that is, there scarce
is a probability or even possibility of his employing it in the
acquisition of the pleasures and conveniences of life. To himself alone
this power seems perfect and entire; and therefore we must receive his
sentiments by sympathy, before we can have a strong intense idea of these
enjoyments, or esteem him upon account of them.

Thus we have found, that the first principle, viz, the agreeable idea of
those objects, which riches afford the enjoyment of; resolves itself in a
great measure into the third, and becomes a sympathy with the person we
esteem or love. Let us now examine the second principle, viz, the
agreeable expectation of advantage, and see what force we may justly
attribute to it.

It is obvious, that though riches and authority undoubtedly give their
owner a power of doing us service, yet this power is not to be considered
as on the same footing with that, which they afford him, of pleasing
himself, and satisfying his own appetites. Self-love approaches the power
and exercise very near each other in the latter case; but in order to
produce a similar effect in the former, we must suppose a friendship and
good-will to be conjoined with the riches. Without that circumstance it is
difficult to conceive on what we can found our hope of advantage from the
riches of others, though there is nothing more certain, than that we
naturally esteem and respect the rich, even before we discover in them
any such favourable disposition towards us.

But I carry this farther, and observe, not only that we respect the rich
and powerful, where they shew no inclination to serve us, but also when
we lie so much out of the sphere of their activity, that they cannot even
be supposed to be endowed with that power. Prisoners of war are always
treated with a respect suitable to their condition; and it is certain
riches go very far towards fixing the condition of any person. If birth
and quality enter for a share, this still affords us an argument of the
same kind. For what is it we call a man of birth, but one who is
descended from a long succession of rich and powerful ancestors, and who
acquires our esteem by his relation to persons whom we esteem? His
ancestors, therefore, though dead, are respected, in some measure, on
account of their riches, and consequently without any kind of
expectation.

But not to go so far as prisoners of war and the dead to find instances
of this disinterested esteem for riches, let us observe with a little
attention those phaenomena that occur to us in common life and
conversation. A man, who is himself of a competent fortune, upon coming
into a company of strangers, naturally treats them with different degrees
of respect and deference, as he is informed of their different fortunes
and conditions; though it is impossible he can ever propose, and perhaps
would not accept of any advantage from them. A traveller is always
admitted into company, and meets with civility, in proportion as his
train and equipage speak him a man of great or moderate fortune. In
short, the different ranks of men are, in a great measure, regulated by
riches, and that with regard to superiors as well as inferiors, strangers
as well as acquaintance.

There is, indeed, an answer to these arguments, drawn from the influence
of general rules. It may be pretended, that being accustomed to expect
succour and protection from the rich and powerful, and to esteem them
upon that account, we extend the same sentiments to those, who resemble
them in their fortune, but from whom we can never hope for any advantage.
The general rule still prevails, and by giving a bent to the imagination
draws along the passion, in the same manner as if its proper object were
real and existent.

But that this principle does not here take place, will easily appear, if
we consider, that in order to establish a general rule, and extend it
beyond its proper bounds, there is required a certain uniformity in our
experience, and a great superiority of those instances, which are
conformable to the rule, above the contrary. But here the case is quite
otherwise. Of a hundred men of credit and fortune I meet with, there is
not, perhaps, one from whom I can expect advantage; so that it is
impossible any custom can ever prevail in the present case.

Upon the whole, there remains nothing, which can give us an esteem for
power and riches, and a contempt for meanness and poverty, except the
principle of sympathy, by which we enter into the sentiments of the rich
and poor, and partake of their pleasure and uneasiness. Riches give
satisfaction to their possessor; and this satisfaction is conveyed to the
beholder by the imagination, which produces an idea resembling the
original impression in force and vivacity. This agreeable idea or
impression is connected with love, which is an agreeable passion. It
proceeds from a thinking conscious being, which is the very object of
love. From this relation of impressions, and identity of ideas, the
passion arises, according to my hypothesis.

The best method of reconciling us to this opinion is to take a general
survey of the universe, and observe the force of sympathy through the
whole animal creation, and the easy communication of sentiments from one
thinking being to another. In all creatures, that prey not upon others,
and are not agitated with violent passions, there appears a remarkable
desire of company, which associates them together, without any advantages
they can ever propose to reap from their union. This is still more
conspicuous in man, as being the creature of the universe, who has the
most ardent desire of society, and is fitted for it by the most
advantages. We can form no wish, which has not a reference to society. A
perfect solitude is, perhaps, the greatest punishment we can suffer.
Every pleasure languishes when enjoyed a-part from company, and every
pain becomes more cruel and intolerable. Whatever other passions we may
be actuated by; pride, ambition, avarice, curiosity, revenge or lust; the
soul or animating principle of them all is sympathy; nor would they have
any force, were we to abstract entirely from the thoughts and sentiments
of others. Let all the powers and elements of nature conspire to serve
and obey one man: Let the sun rise and set at his command: The sea and
rivers roll as he pleases, and the earth furnish spontaneously whatever
may be useful or agreeable to him: He will still be miserable, till you
give him some one person at least, with whom he may share his happiness,
and whose esteem and friendship he may enjoy.

This conclusion from a general view of human nature, we may confirm by
particular instances, wherein the force of sympathy is very remarkable.
Most kinds of beauty are derived from this origin; and though our first
object be some senseless inanimate piece of matter, it is seldom we rest
there, and carry not our view to its influence on sensible and rational
creatures. A man, who shews us any house or building, takes particular
care among other things to point out the convenience of the apartments,
the advantages of their situation, and the little room lost in the
stairs, antichambers and passages; and indeed it is evident, the chief
part of the beauty consists in these particulars. The observation of
convenience gives pleasure, since convenience is a beauty. But after what
manner does it give pleasure? It is certain our own interest is not in the
least concerned; and as this is a beauty of interest, not of form, so to
speak, it must delight us merely by communication, and by our
sympathizing with the proprietor of the lodging. We enter into his
interest by the force of imagination, and feel the same satisfaction,
that the objects naturally occasion in him.

This observation extends to tables, chairs, scritoires, chimneys,
coaches, sadles, ploughs, and indeed to every work of art; it being an
universal rule, that their beauty is chiefly derived from their utility,
and from their fitness for that purpose, to which they are destined. But
this is an advantage, that concerns only the owner, nor is there any
thing but sympathy, which can interest the spectator.

It is evident, that nothing renders a field more agreeable than its
fertility, and that scarce any advantages of ornament or situation will
be able to equal this beauty. It is the same case with particular trees
and plants, as with the field on which they grow. I know not but a plain,
overgrown with furze and broom, may be, in itself, as beautiful as a hill
covered with vines or olive-trees; though it will never appear so to one,
who is acquainted with the value of each. But this is a beauty merely of
imagination, and has no foundation in what appears to the senses.
Fertility and value have a plain reference to use; and that to riches,
joy, and plenty; in which though we have no hope of partaking, yet we
enter into them by the vivacity of the fancy, and share them, in some
measure, with the proprietor.

There is no rule in painting more reasonable than that of ballancing the
figures, and placing them with the greatest exactness on their proper
centers of gravity. A figure, which is not justly ballanced, is
disagreeable; and that because it conveys the ideas of its fall, of harm,
and of pain: Which ideas are painful, when by sympathy they acquire any
degree of force and vivacity.

Add to this, that the principal part of personal beauty is an air of
health and vigour, and such a construction of members as promises
strength and activity. This idea of beauty cannot be accounted for but by
sympathy.

In general we may remark, that the minds of men are mirrors to one
another, not only because they reflect each others emotions, but also
because those rays of passions, sentiments and opinions may be often
reverberated, and may decay away by insensible degrees. Thus the
pleasure, which a rich man receives from his possessions, being thrown
upon the beholder, causes a pleasure and esteem; which sentiments again,
being perceived and sympathized with, encrease the pleasure of the
possessor; and being once more reflected, become a new foundation for
pleasure and esteem in the beholder. There is certainly an original
satisfaction in riches derived from that power, which they bestow, of
enjoying all the pleasures of life; and as this is their very nature and
essence, it must be the first source of all the passions, which arise
from them. One of the most considerable of these passions is that of love
or esteem in others, which therefore proceeds from a sympathy with the
pleasure of the possessor. But the possessor has also a secondary
satisfaction in riches arising from the love and esteem he acquires by
them, and this satisfaction is nothing but a second reflexion of that
original pleasure, which proceeded from himself. This secondary
satisfaction or vanity becomes one of the principal recommendations of
riches, and is the chief reason, why we either desire them for ourselves,
or esteem them in others. Here then is a third rebound of the original
pleasure; after which it is difficult to distinguish the images and
reflexions, by reason of their faintness and confusion.



SECT. VI  OF BENEVOLENCE AND ANGER


Ideas may be compared to the extension and solidity of matter, and
impressions, especially reflective ones, to colours, tastes, smells and
other sensible qualities. Ideas never admit of a total union, but are
endowed with a kind of impenetrability, by which they exclude each other,
and are capable of forming a compound by their conjunction, not by their
mixture. On the other hand, impressions and passions are susceptible of
an entire union; and like colours, may be blended so perfectly together,
that each of them may lose itself, and contribute only to vary that
uniform impression, which arises from the whole. Some of the most curious
phaenomena of the human mind are derived from this property of the
passions.

In examining those ingredients, which are capable of uniting with love
and hatred, I begin to be sensible, in some measure, of a misfortune,
that has attended every system of philosophy, with which the world has
been yet acquainted. It is commonly found, that in accounting for the
operations of nature by any particular hypothesis; among a number of
experiments, that quadrate exactly with the principles we would endeavour
to establish; there is always some phaenomenon, which is more stubborn,
and will not so easily bend to our purpose. We need not be surprized,
that this should happen in natural philosophy. The essence and
composition of external bodies are so obscure, that we must necessarily,
in our reasonings, or rather conjectures concerning them, involve
ourselves in contradictions and absurdities. But as the perceptions of
the mind are perfectly known, and I have used all imaginable caution in
forming conclusions concerning them, I have always hoped to keep clear of
those contradictions, which have attended every other system. Accordingly
the difficulty, which I have at present in my eye, is nowise contrary to
my system; but only departs a little from that simplicity, which has been
hitherto its principal force and beauty.

The passions of love and hatred are always followed by, or rather
conjoined with benevolence and anger. It is this conjunction, which
chiefly distinguishes these affections from pride and humility. For pride
and humility are pure emotions in the soul, unattended with any desire,
and not immediately exciting us to action. But love and hatred are not
compleated within themselves, nor rest in that emotion, which they
produce, but carry the mind to something farther. Love is always followed
by a desire of the happiness of the person beloved, and an aversion to
his misery: As hatred produces a desire of the misery and an aversion to
the happiness of the person hated. So remarkable a difference betwixt
these two sets of passions of pride and humility, love and hatred, which
in so many other particulars correspond to each other, merits our
attention.

The conjunction of this desire and aversion with love and hatred may be
accounted for by two different hypotheses. The first is, that love and
hatred have not only a cause, which excites them, viz, pleasure and pain;
and an object, to which they are directed, viz, a person or thinking
being; but likewise an end, which they endeavour to attain, viz, the
happiness or misery of the person beloved or hated; all which views,
mixing together, make only one passion. According to this system, love is
nothing but the desire of happiness to another person, and hatred that of
misery. The desire and aversion constitute the very nature of love and
hatred. They are not only inseparable but the same.

But this is evidently contrary to experience. For though it is certain we
never love any person without desiring his happiness, nor hate any
without wishing his misery, yet these desires arise only upon the ideas
of the happiness or misery of our friend or enemy being presented by the
imagination, and are not absolutely essential to love and hatred. They
are the most obvious and natural sentiments of these affections, but not
the only ones. The passions may express themselves in a hundred ways, and
may subsist a considerable time, without our reflecting on the happiness
or misery of their objects; which clearly proves, that these desires are
not the same with love and hatred, nor make any essential part of them.

We may, therefore, infer, that benevolence and anger are passions
different from love and hatred, and only conjoined with them, by the
original constitution of the mind. As nature has given to the body
certain appetites and inclinations, which she encreases, diminishes, or
changes according to the situation of the fluids or solids; she has
proceeded in the same manner with the mind. According as we are possessed
with love or hatred, the correspondent desire of the happiness or misery
of the person, who is the object of these passions, arises in the mind,
and varies with each variation of these opposite passions. This order of
things, abstractedly considered, is not necessary. Love and hatred might
have been unattended with any such desires, or their particular connexion
might have been entirely reversed. If nature had so pleased, love might
have had the same effect as hatred, and hatred as love. I see no
contradiction in supposing a desire of producing misery annexed to love,
and of happiness to hatred. If the sensation of the passion and desire be
opposite, nature coued have altered the sensation without altering the
tendency of the desire, and by that means made them compatible with each
other.



SECT. VII  OF COMPASSION


But though the desire of the happiness or misery of others, according to
the love or hatred we bear them, be an arbitrary and original instinct
implanted in our nature, we find it may be counterfeited on many
occasions, and may arise from secondary principles. Pity is a concern
for, and malice a joy in the misery of others, without any friendship or
enmity to occasion this concern or joy. We pity even strangers, and such
as are perfectly indifferent to us: And if our ill-will to another
proceed from any harm or injury, it is not, properly speaking, malice,
but revenge. But if we examine these affections of pity and malice we
shall find them to be secondary ones, arising from original affections,
which are varied by some particular turn of thought and imagination.

It will be easy to explain the passion of pity, from the precedent
reasoning concerning sympathy. We have a lively idea of every thing
related to us. All human creatures are related to us by resemblance.
Their persons, therefore, their interests, their passions, their pains
and pleasures must strike upon us in a lively manner, and produce an
emotion similar to the original one; since a lively idea is easily
converted into an impression. If this be true in general, it must be more
so of affliction and sorrow. These have always a stronger and more
lasting influence than any pleasure or enjoyment.

A spectator of a tragedy passes through a long train of grief, terror,
indignation, and other affections, which the poet represents in the
persons he introduces. As many tragedies end happily, and no excellent
one can be composed without some reverses of fortune, the spectator must
sympathize with all these changes, and receive the fictitious joy as well
as every other passion. Unless, therefore, it be asserted, that every
distinct passion is communicated by a distinct original quality, and is
not derived from the general principle of sympathy above-explained, it
must be allowed, that all of them arise from that principle. To except
any one in particular must appear highly unreasonable. As they are all
first present in the mind of one person, and afterwards appear in the
mind of another; and as the manner of their appearance, first as an idea,
then as an impression, is in every case the same, the transition must
arise from the same principle. I am at least sure, that this method of
reasoning would be considered as certain, either in natural philosophy or
common life.

Add to this, that pity depends, in a great measure, on the contiguity,
and even sight of the object; which is a proof, that it is derived from
the imagination. Not to mention that women and children are most subject
to pity, as being most guided by that faculty. The same infirmity, which
makes them faint at the sight of a naked sword, though in the hands of
their best friend, makes them pity extremely those, whom they find in any
grief or affliction. Those philosophers, who derive this passion from I
know not what subtile reflections on the instability of fortune, and our
being liable to the same miseries we behold, will find this observation
contrary to them among a great many others, which it were easy to
produce.

There remains only to take notice of a pretty remarkable phaenomenon of
this passion; which is, that the communicated passion of sympathy
sometimes acquires strength from the weakness of its original, and even
arises by a transition from affections, which have no existence. Thus
when a person obtains any honourable office, or inherits a great fortune,
we are always the more rejoiced for his prosperity, the less sense he
seems to have of it, and the greater equanimity and indifference he shews
in its enjoyment. In like manner a man, who is not dejected by
misfortunes, is the more lamented on account of his patience; and if that
virtue extends so far as utterly to remove all sense of uneasiness, it
still farther encreases our compassion. When a person of merit falls into
what is vulgarly esteemed a great misfortune, we form a notion of his
condition; and carrying our fancy from the cause to the usual effect,
first conceive a lively idea of his sorrow, and then feel an impression
of it, entirely over-looking that greatness of mind, which elevates him
above such emotions, or only considering it so far as to encrease our
admiration, love and tenderness for him. We find from experience, that
such a degree of passion is usually connected with such a misfortune; and
though there be an exception in the present case, yet the imagination is
affected by the general rule, and makes us conceive a lively idea of the
passion, or rather feel the passion itself, in the same manner, as if the
person were really actuated by it. From the same principles we blush for
the conduct of those, who behave themselves foolishly before us; and that
though they shew no sense of shame, nor seem in the least conscious of
their folly. All this proceeds from sympathy; but it is of a partial kind,
and views its objects only on one side, without considering the other,
which has a contrary effect, and would entirely destroy that emotion,
which arises from the first appearance.

We have also instances, wherein an indifference and insensibility under
misfortune encreases our concern for the misfortunate, even though the
indifference proceed not from any virtue and magnanimity. It is an
aggravation of a murder, that it was committed upon persons asleep and in
perfect security; as historians readily observe of any infant prince, who
is captive in the hands of his enemies, that he is the more worthy of
compassion the less sensible he is of his miserable condition. As we
ourselves are here acquainted with the wretched situation of the person,
it gives us a lively idea and sensation of sorrow, which is the passion
that generally attends it; and this idea becomes still more lively, and
the sensation more violent by a contrast with that security and
indifference, which we observe in the person himself. A contrast of any
kind never fails to affect the imagination, especially when presented by
the subject; and it is on the imagination that pity entirely depends.

[Footnote 11.  To prevent all ambiguity, I must observe, that where I
oppose the imagination to the memory, I mean in general the faculty that
presents our fainter ideas. In all other places, and particularly when it
is opposed to the understanding, I understand the same faculty, excluding
only our demonstrative and probable reasonings.]



SECT. VIII  OF MALICE AND ENVY


We must now proceed to account for the passion of malice, which imitates
the effects of hatred, as pity does those of love; and gives us a joy in
the sufferings and miseries of others, without any offence or injury on
their part.

So little are men governed by reason in their sentiments and opinions,
that they always judge more of objects by comparison than from their
intrinsic worth and value. When the mind considers, or is accustomed to,
any degree of. perfection, whatever falls short of it, though really
esteemable, has notwithstanding the same effect upon the passions; as
what is defective and ill. This is an original quality of the soul, and
similar to what we have every day experience of in our bodies. Let a man
heat one band and cool the other; the same water will, at the same time,
seem both hot and cold, according to the disposition of the different
organs. A small degree of any quality, succeeding a greater, produces the
same sensation, as if less than it really is, and even sometimes as the
opposite quality. Any gentle pain, that follows a violent one, seems as
nothing, or rather becomes a pleasure; as on the other hand a violent
pain, succeeding a gentle one, is doubly grievous and uneasy.

This no one can doubt of with regard to our passions and sensations. But
there may arise some difficulty with regard to our ideas and objects.
When an object augments or diminishes to the eye or imagination from a
comparison with others, the image and idea of the object are still the
same, and are equally extended in the retina, and in the brain or organ
of perception. The eyes refract the rays of light, and the optic nerves
convey the images to the brain in the very same manner, whether a great
or small object has preceded; nor does even the imagination alter the
dimensions of its object on account of a comparison with others. The
question then is, how from the same impression and the same idea we can
form such different judgments concerning the same object, and at one time
admire its bulk, and at another despise its littleness. This variation in
our judgments must certainly proceed from a variation in some perception;
but as the variation lies not in the immediate impression or idea of the
object, it must lie in some other impression, that accompanies it.

In order to explain this matter, I shall just touch upon two principles,
one of which shall be more fully explained in the progress of this
treatise; the other has been already accounted for. I believe it may
safely be established for a general maxim, that no object is presented to
the senses, nor image formed in the fancy, but what is accompanyed with
some emotion or movement of spirits proportioned to it; and however
custom may make us insensible of this sensation and cause us to confound
it with the object or idea, it will be easy, by careful and exact
experiments, to separate and distinguish them. For to instance only in
the cases of extension and number; it is evident, that any very bulky
object, such as the ocean, an extended plain, a vast chain of mountains,
a wide forest: or any very numerous collection of objects, such as an
army, a fleet, a crowd, excite in the mind a sensible emotion; and that
the admiration, which arises on the appearance of such objects, is one of
the most lively pleasures, which human nature is capable of enjoying. Now
as this admiration encreases or diminishes by the encrease or diminution
of the objects, we may conclude, according to our foregoing
[Book I. Part III. Sect. 15.] principles, that it is a compound effect,
proceeding from the conjunction of the several effects, which arise from
each part of the cause. Every part, then, of extension, and every unite of
number has a separate emotion attending it; and though that emotion be not
always agreeable, yet by its conjunction with others, and by its agitating
the spirits to a just pitch, it contributes to the production of
admiration, which is always agreeable. If this be allowed with respect to
extension and number, we can make no difficulty with respect to virtue and
vice, wit and folly, riches and poverty, happiness and misery, and other
objects of that kind, which are always attended with an evident emotion.

The second principle I shall take notice of is that of our adherence to
general rules; which has such a mighty influence on the actions and
understanding, and is able to impose on the very senses. When an object
is found by-experience to be always accompanyed with another; whenever
the first object appears, though changed in very material circumstances;
we naturally fly to the conception of the second, and form an idea of it
in as lively and strong a manner, as if we had infered its existence by
the justest and most authentic conclusion of our understanding. Nothing
can undeceive us, not even our senses, which, instead of correcting this
false judgment, are often perverted by it, and seem to authorize its
errors.

The conclusion I draw from these two principles, joined to the influence
of comparison above-mentioned, is very short and decisive. Every object
is attended with some emotion proportioned to it; a great object with a
great emotion, a small object with a small emotion. A great object,
therefore, succeeding a small one makes a great emotion succeed a small
one. Now a great emotion succeeding a small one becomes still greater,
and rises beyond its ordinary proportion. But as there is a certain
degree of an emotion, which commonly attends every magnitude of a-n
object; when the emotion encreases, we naturally imagine that the object
has likewise encreased. The effect conveys our view to its usual cause, a
certain degree of emotion to a certain magnitude of the object; nor do we
consider, that comparison may change the emotion without changing
anything in the object. Those who are acquainted with the metaphysical
part of optics and know how we transfer the judgments and conclusions of
the understanding to the senses, will easily conceive this whole
operation.

But leaving this new discovery of an impression, that secretly attends
every idea; we must at least allow of that principle, from whence the
discovery arose, that objects appear greater or less by a comparison with
others. We have so many instances of this, that it is impossible we can
dispute its veracity; and it is from this principle I derive the passions
of malice and envy.

It is evident we must receive a greater or less satisfaction or uneasiness
from reflecting on our own condition and circumstances, in proportion as
they appear more or less fortunate or unhappy, in proportion to the
degrees of riches, and power, and merit, and reputation, which we think
ourselves possest of. Now as we seldom judge of objects from their
intrinsic value, but form our notions of them from a comparison with
other objects; it follows, that according as we observe a greater or less
share of happiness or misery in others, we must make an estimate of our
own, and feel a consequent pain or pleasure. The misery of another gives
us a more lively idea of our happiness, and his happiness of our misery.
The former, therefore, produces delight; and the latter uneasiness.

Here then is a kind of pity reverst, or contrary sensations arising in
the beholder, from those which are felt by the person, whom he considers.
In general we may observe, that in all kinds of comparison an object
makes us always receive from another, to which it is compared, a
sensation contrary to what arises from itself in its direct and immediate
survey. A small object makes a great one appear still greater. A great
object makes a little one appear less. Deformity of itself produces
uneasiness; but makes us receive new pleasure by its contrast with a
beautiful object, whose beauty is augmented by it; as on the other hand,
beauty, which of itself produces pleasure, makes us receive a new pain by
the contrast with any thing ugiy, whose deformity it augments. The case,
therefore, must be the same with happiness and misery. The direct survey
of another's pleasure naturally gives us plcasure, and therefore produces
pain when cornpared with our own. His pain, considered in itself, is
painful to us, but augments the idea of our own happiness, and gives us
pleasure.

Nor will it appear strange, that we may feel a reverst sensation from the
happiness and misery of others; since we find the same comparison may
give us a kind of malice against ourselves, and make us rejoice for our
pains, and grieve for our pleasures. Thus the prospect of past pain is
agreeable, when we are satisfyed with our present condition; as on the
other hand our past pleasures give us uneasiness, when we enjoy nothing
at present equal to them. The comparison being the same, as when we
reflect on the sentiments of others, must be attended with the same
effects.

Nay a person may extend this malice against himself, even to his present
fortune, and carry it so far as designedly to seek affliction, and
encrease his pains and sorrows. This may happen upon two occasions.
First, Upon the distress and misfortune of a friend, or person dear to
him. Secondly, Upon the feeling any remorses for a crime, of which he has
been guilty. It is from the principle of comparison that both these
irregular appetites for evil arise. A person, who indulges himself in any
pleasure, while his friend lies under affliction, feels the reflected
uneasiness from his friend more sensibly by a comparison with the
original pleasure, which he himself enjoys. This contrast, indeed, ought
also to inliven the present pleasure. But as grief is here supposed to be
the predominant passion, every addition falls to that side, and is
swallowed up in it, without operating in the least upon the contrary
affection. It is the same case with those penances, which men inflict on
themselves for their past sins and failings. When a. criminal reflects on
the punishment he deserves, the idea of it is magnifyed by a comparison
with his present ease and satisfaction; which forces him, in a manner, to
seek uneasiness, in order to avoid so disagreeable a contrast.

This reasoning will account for the origin of envy as well as of malice.
The only difference betwixt these passions lies in this, that envy is
excited by some present enjoyment of another, which by comparison
diminishes our idea of our own: Whereas malice is the unprovoked desire
of producing evil to another, in order to reap a pleasure from the
comparison. The enjoyment, which is the object of envy, is commonly
superior to our own. A superiority naturally seems to overshade us, and
presents a disagreeable comparison. But even in the case of an
inferiority, we still desire a greater distance, in order to augment,
still more the idea of ourself. When this distance diminishes, the
comparison is less to our advantage; and consequently gives us less
pleasure, and is even disagreeable. Hence arises that species of envy,
which men feel, when they perceive their inferiors approaching or
overtaking them in the pursuits of glory or happiness. In this envy we
may see the effects of comparison twice repeated. A man, who compares
himself to his inferior, receives a pleasure from the comparison: And
when the inferiority decreases by the elevation of the inferior, what
should only have been a decrease of pleasure, becomes a real pain, by a
new comparison with its preceding condition.

It is worthy of observation concerning that envy, which arises from a
superiority in others, that it is not the great disproportion betwixt
ourself and another, which produces it; but on the contrary, our
proximity. A common soldier bears no such envy to his general as to his
sergeant or corporal; nor does an eminent writer meet with so great
jealousy in common hackney scriblers, as in authors, that more nearly
approach him. It may, indeed, be thought, that the greater the
disproportion is, the greater must be the uneasiness from the comparison.
But we may consider on the other hand, that the great disproportion cuts
off the relation, and either keeps us from comparing ourselves with what
is remote from us, or diminishes the effects of the comparison.
Resemblance and proximity always produce a relation of ideas; and where
you destroy these ties, however other accidents may bring two ideas
together; as they have no bond or connecting quality to join them in the
imagination; it is impossible they can remain long united, or have any
considerable influence on each other.

I have observed in considering the nature of ambition, that the great
feel a double pleasure in authority from the comparison of their own
condition with that of their slaves; and that this comparison has a
double influence, because it is natural, and presented by the subject.
When the fancy, in the comparison of objects, passes not easily from the
one object to the other, the action of the mind is, in a great measure,
broke, and the fancy, in considering the second object, begins, as it
were, upon a new footing. The impression, which attends every object,
seems not greater in that case by succeeding a less of the same kind; but
these two impressions are distinct, and produce their distinct effects,
without any communication together. The want of relation in the ideas
breaks the relation of the impressions, and by such a separation prevents
their mutual operation and influence.

To confirm this we may observe, that the proximity in the degree of merit
is not alone sufficient to give rise to envy, but must be assisted by
other relations. A poet is not apt to envy a philosopher, or a poet of a
different kind, of a different nation, or of a different age. All these
differences prevent or weaken the comparison, and consequently the
passion.

This too is the reason, why all objects appear great or little, merely by
a comparison with those of the same species. A mountain neither magnifies
nor diminishes a horse in our eyes; but when a Flemish and a Welsh horse
are seen together, the one appears greater and the other less, than when
viewed apart.

From the same principle we may account for that remark of historians,
that any party in a civil war always choose to call in a foreign enemy at
any hazard rather than submit to their fellow-citizens. Guicciardin
applies this remark to the wars in Italy, where the relations betwixt the
different states are, properly speaking, nothing but of name, language,
and contiguity. Yet even these relations, when joined with superiority,
by making the comparison more natural, make it likewise more grievous,
and cause men to search for some other superiority, which may be attended
with no relation, and by that means may have a less sensible influence on
the imagination. The mind quickly perceives its several advantages and
disadvantages; and finding its situation to be most uneasy, where
superiority is conjoined with other relations, seeks its repose as much
as possible, by their separation, and by breaking that association of
ideas, which renders the comparison so much more natural and efficacious.
When it cannot break the association, it feels a stronger desire to
remove the superiority; and this is the reason why travellers are
commonly so lavish of their praises to the Chinese and Persians, at the
same time, that they depreciate those neighbouring nations, which may
stand upon a foot of rivalship with their native country.

These examples from history and common experience are rich and curious;
but we may find parallel ones in the arts, which are no less remarkable.
should an author compose a treatise, of which one part was serious and
profound, another light and humorous, every one would condemn so strange
a mixture, and would accuse him of the neglect of all rules of art and
criticism. These rules of art are founded on the qualities of human
nature; and the quality of human nature, which requires a consistency in
every performance. is that which renders the mind incapable of passing in
a moment from one passion and disposition to a quite different one. Yet
this makes us not blame Mr Prior for joining his Alma and his Solomon in
the same volume; though that admirable poet has succeeded perfectly well
in the gaiety of the one, as well as in the melancholy of the other. Even
supposing the reader should peruse these two compositions without any
interval, he would feel little or no difficulty in the change of
passions: Why, but because he considers these performances as entirely
different, and by this break in the ideas, breaks the progress of the
affections, and hinders the one from influencing or contradicting the
other?

An heroic and burlesque design, united in one picture, would be
monstrous; though we place two pictures of so opposite a character in the
same chamber, and even close by each other, without any scruple or
difficulty.

In a word, no ideas can affect each other, either by comparison, or by
the passions they separately produce, unless they be united together by
some relation, which may cause an easy transition of the ideas, and
consequently of the emotions or impressions, attending the ideas; and may
preserve the one impression in the passage of the imagination to the
object of the other. This principle is very remarkable, because it is
analogous to what we have observed both concerning the understanding and
the passions. Suppose two objects to be presented to me, which are not
connected by any kind of relation. Suppose that each of these objects
separately produces a passion; and that these two passions are in
themselves contrary: We find from experience, that the want of relation
in the objects or ideas hinders the natural contrariety of the passions,
and that the break in the transition of the thought removes the
affections from each other, and prevents their opposition. It is the same
case with comparison; and from both these phaenomena we may safely
conclude, that the relation of ideas must forward the transition of
impressions; since its absence alone is able to prevent it, and to
separate what naturally should have operated upon each other. When the
absence of an object or quality re moves any usual or natural effect, we
may certalnly conclude that its presence contributes to the production of
the effect.



SECT. IX  OF THE MIXTURE OF BENEVOLENCE AND ANGER
            WITH COMPASSION AND MALICE


Thus we have endeavoured to account for pity and malice. Both these
affections arise from the imagination, according to the light, in which
it places its object. When our fancy considers directly the sentiments of
others, and enters deep into them, it makes us sensible of all the
passions it surveys, but in a particular manner of grief or sorrow. On
the contrary, when we compare the sentiments of others to our own, we
feel a sensation directly opposite to the original one, viz. a joy from
the grief of others, and a grief from their joy. But these are only the
first foundations of the affections of pity and malice. Other passions
are afterwards confounded with them. There is always a mixture of love or
tenderness with pity, and of hatred or anger with malice. But it must be
confessed, that this mixture seems at first sight to be contradictory to
my system. For as pity is an uneasiness, and malice a joy, arising from
the misery of others, pity should naturally, as in all other cases,
produce hatred; and malice, love. This contradiction I endeavour to
reconcile, after the following manner.

In order to cause a transition of passions, there is required a double
relation of impressions and ideas, nor is one relation sufficient to
produce this effect. But that we may understand the full force of this
double relation, we must consider, that it is not the present sensation
alone or momentary pain or pleasure, which determines the character of
any passion, but the whole bent or tendency of it from the beginning to
the end. One impression may be related to another, not only when their
sensations are resembling, as we have all along supposed in the preceding
cases; but also when their im pulses or directions are similar and
correspondent. This cannot take place with regard to pride and humility;
because these are only pure sensations, without any direction or tendency
to action. We are, therefore, to look for instances of this peculiar
relation of impressions only in such affections, as are attended with a
certain appetite or desire; such as those of love and hatred,

Benevolence or the appetite, which attends love, is a desire of the
happiness of the person beloved, and an aversion to his misery; as anger
or the appetite, which attends hatred, is a desire of the misery of the
person hated, and an aversion to his happiness. A desire, therefore, of
the happiness of another, and aversion to his misery, are similar to
benevolence; and a desire of his misery and aversion to his happiness are
correspondent to anger. Now pity is a desire of happiness to another, and
aversion to his misery; as malice is the contrary appetite. Pity, then,
is related to benevolence; and malice to anger: And as benevolence has
been already found to be connected with love, by a natural and original
quality, and anger with hatred; it is by this chain the passions of pity
and malice are connected with love and hatred.

This hypothesis is founded on sufficient experience. A man, who from any
motives has entertained a resolution of performing an action, naturally
runs into every other view or motive, which may fortify that resolution,
and give it authority and influence on the mind. To confirm us in any
design, we search for motives drawn from interest, from honour, from
duty. What wonder, then, that pity and benevolence, malice, and anger,
being the same desires arising from different principles, should so
totally mix together as to be undistinguishable? As to the connexion
betwixt benevolence and love, anger and hatred, being original and
primary, it admits of no difficulty.

We may add to this another experiment, viz, that benevolence and anger,
and consequently love and hatred, arise when our happiness or misery have
any dependance on the happiness or misery of another person, without any
farther relation. I doubt not but this experiment will appear so singular
as to excuse us for stopping a moment to consider it.

Suppose, that two persons of the same trade should seek employment in a
town, that is not able to maintain both, it is plain the success of one is
perfectly incompatible with that of the other, and that whatever is for
the interest of either is contrary to that of his rival, and so vice
versa. Suppose again, that two merchants, though living in different parts
of the world, should enter into co-partnership together, the advantage or
loss of one becomes immediately the advantage or loss of his partner, and
the same fortune necessarily attends both. Now it is evident, that in the
first case, hatred always follows upon the contrariety of interests; as
in the second, love arises from their union. Let us consider to what
principle we can ascribe these passions.

It is plain they arise not from the double relations of impressions and
ideas, if we regard only the present sensation. For takeing the first
case of rivalship; though the pleasure and advantage of an antagonist
necessarily causes my pain and loss, yet to counter-ballance this, his
pain and loss causes my pleasure and advantage; and supposing him to be
unsuccessful, I may by this means receive from him a superior degree of
satisfaction. In the same manner the success of a partner rejoices me,
but then his misfortunes afflict me in an equal proportion; and it is easy
to imagine, that the latter sentiment may in many cases preponderate. But
whether the fortune of a rival or partner be good or bad, I always hate
the former and love the latter.

This love of a partner cannot proceed from the relation or connexion
betwixt us; in the same manner as I love a brother or countryman. A rival
has almost as close a relation to me as a partner. For as the pleasure of
the latter causes my pleasure, and his pain my pain; so the pleasure of
the former causes my pain, and his pain my pleasure. The connexion, then,
of cause and effect is the same in both cases; and if in the one case,
the cause and effect have a farther relation of resemblance, they have
that of contrariety in the other; which, being also a species of
resemblance, leaves the matter pretty equal.

The only explication, then, we can give of this phaenomenon is derived
from that principle of a parallel direction above-mentioned. Our concern
for our own interest gives us a pleasure in the pleasure, and a pain in
the pain of a partner, after the same manner as by sympathy we feel a
sensation correspondent to those, which appear in any person, who is
present with us. On the other hand, the same concern for our interest
makes us feel a pain in the pleasure, and a pleasure in the pain of a
rival; and in short the same contrariety of sentiments as arises from
comparison and malice. Since, therefore, a parallel direction of the
affections, proceeding from interest, can give rise to benevolence or
anger, no wonder the same parallel direction, derived from sympathy and
from comparison, should have the same effect.

In general we may observe, that it is impossible to do good to others,
from whatever motive, without feeling some touches of kindness and
good-will towards them; as the injuries we do, not only cause hatred in
the person, who suffers them, but even in ourselves. These phaenomena,
indeed, may in part be accounted for from other principles.

But here there occurs a considerable objection, which it will be necessary
to examine before we proceed any farther. I have endeavoured to prove,
that power and riches, or poverty and meanness; which give rise to love
or hatred, without producing any original pleasure or uneasiness; operate
upon us by means of a secondary sensation derived from a sympathy with
that pain or satisfaction, which they produce in the person, who
possesses them. From a sympathy with his pleasure there arises love; from
that with his uneasiness, hatred. But it is a maxim, which I have just now
established, and which is absolutely necessary to the explication of the
phaenomena of pity and malice, that it is not the present sensation or
momentary pain or pleasure, which determines the character of any
passion, but the general bent or tendency of it from the beginning to the
end. For this reason, pity or a sympathy with pain produces love, and
that because it interests us in the fortunes of others, good or bad, and
gives us a secondary sensation correspondent to the primary; in which it
has the same influence with love and benevolence. Since then this rule
holds good in one case, why does it not prevail throughout, and why does
sympathy in uneasiness ever produce any passion beside good-will and
kindness? Is it becoming a philosopher to alter his method of reasoning,
and run from one principle to its contrary, according to the particular
phaenomenon, which he would explain?

I have mentioned two different causes, from which a transition of passion
may arise, viz, a double relation of ideas and impressions, and what is
similar to it, a conformity in the tendency and direction of any two
desires, which arise from different principles. Now I assert, that when a
sympathy with uneasiness is weak, it produces hatred or contempt by the
former cause; when strong, it produces love or tenderness by the latter.
This is the solution of the foregoing difficulty, which seems so urgent;
and this is a principle founded on such evident arguments, that we ought
to have established it, even though it were not necessary to the
explication of any phaenomenon.

It is certain, that sympathy is not always limited to the present moment,
but that we often feel by communication the pains and pleasures of
others, which are not in being, and which we only anticipate by the force
of imagination. For supposing I saw a person perfectly unknown to me,
who, while asleep in the fields, was in danger of being trod under foot
by horses, I should immediately run to his assistance; and in this I
should be actuated by the same principle of sympathy, which makes me
concerned for the present sorrows of a stranger. The bare mention of this
is sufficient. Sympathy being nothing but a lively idea converted into an
impression, it is evident, that, in considering the future possible or
probable condition of any person, we may enter into it with so vivid a
conception as to make it our own concern; and by that means be sensible.
of pains and pleasures, which neither belong to ourselves, nor at the
present instant have any real existence.

But however we may look forward to the future in sympathizing with any
person, the extending of our sympathy depends in a great measure upon our
sense of his present condition. It is a great effort of imagination, to
form such lively ideas even of the present sentiments of others as to
feel these very sentiments; but it is impossible we coued extend this
sympathy to the future, without being aided by some circumstance in the
present, which strikes upon us in a lively manner. When the present
misery of another has any strong influence upon me, the vivacity of the
conception is not confined merely to its immediate object, but diffuses
its influence over all the related ideas, and gives me a lively notion of
all the circumstances of that person, whether past, present, or future;
possible, probable or certain. By means of this lively notion I am
interested in them; take part with them; and feel a sympathetic motion in
my breast, conformable to whatever I imagine in his. If I diminish the
vivacity of the first conception, I diminish that of the related ideas;
as pipes can convey no more water than what arises at the fountain. By
this diminution I destroy the future prospect, which is necessary to
interest me perfectly in the fortune of another. I may feel the present
impression, but carry my sympathy no farther, and never transfuse the
force of the first conception into my ideas of the related objects. If it
be another's misery, which is presented in this feeble manner, I receive
it by communication, and am affected with all the passions related to it:
But as I am not so much interested as to concern myself in his good
fortune, as well as his bad, I never feel the extensive sympathy, nor the
passions related to it.

Now in order to know what passions are related to these different kinds
of sympathy, we must consider, that benevolence is an original pleasure
arising from the pleasure of the person beloved, and a pain proceeding
from his pain: From which correspondence of impressions there arises a
subsequent desire of his pleasure, and aversion to his pain. In order,
then, to make a passion run parallel with benevolence, it is requisite we
should feel these double impressions, correspondent to those of the
person, whom we consider; nor is any one of them alone sufficient for
that purpose. When we sympathize only with one impression, and that a
painful one, this sympathy is related to anger and to hatred, upon
account of the uneasiness it conveys to us. But as the extensive or
limited sympathy depends upon the force of the first sympathy; it
follows, that the passion of love or hatred depends upon the same
principle. A strong impression, when communicated, gives a double
tendency of the passions; which is related to benevolence and love by a
similarity of direction; however painful the first impression might have
been. A weak impression, that is painful, is related to anger and hatred
by the resemblance of sensations. Benevolence, therefore, arises from a
great degree of misery, or any degree strongly sympathized with: Hatred
or contempt from a small degree, or one weakly sympathized with; which is
the principle I intended to prove and explain.

Nor have we only our reason to trust to for this principle, but also
experience. A certain degree of poverty produces contempt; but a degree
beyond causes compassion and good-will. We may under-value a peasant or
servant; but when the misery of a beggar appears very great, or is
painted in very lively colours, we sympathize with him in his
afflictions; and feel in our heart evident touches of pity and
benevolence. The same object causes contrary passions according to its
different degrees. The passions, therefore, must depend upon principles,
that operate in such certain degrees, according to my hypothesis. The
encrease of the sympathy has evidently the same effect as the encrease of
the misery.

A barren or desolate country always seems ugly and disagreeable, and
commonly inspires us with contempt for the inhabitants. This deformity,
however, proceeds in a great measure from a sympathy with the
inhabitants, as has been already observed; but it is only a weak one, and
reaches no farther than the immediate sensation, which is disagreeable.
The view of a city in ashes conveys benevolent sentiments; because we
there enter so deep into the interests of the miserable inhabitants, as
to wish for their prosperity, as well as feel their adversity.

But though the force of the impression generally produces pity and
benevolence, it is certain, that by being carryed too far it ceases to
have that effect. This, perhaps, may be worth our notice. When the
uneasiness is either small in itself, or remote from us, it engages not
the imagination, nor is able to convey an equal concern for the future
and contingent good, as for the present and real evil Upon its acquiring
greater force, we become so interested in the concerns of the person, as
to be sensible both of his good and had fortune; and from that compleat
sympathy there arises pity and benevolence. But it will easily be
imagined, that where the present evil strikes with more than ordinary
force, it may entirely engage our attention, and prevent that double
sympathy, above-mentioned. Thus we find, that though every one, but
especially women, are apt to contract a kindness for criminals, who go to
the scaffold, and readily imagine them to be uncommonly handsome and
wellshaped; yet one, who is present at the cruel execution of the rack,
feels no such tender emotions; but is in a manner overcome with horror,
and has no leisure to temper this uneasy sensation by any opposite
sympathy.

But the instance, which makes the most clearly for my hypothesis, is that
wherein by a change of the objects we separate the double sympathy even
from a midling degree of the passion; in which case we find, that pity,
instead of producing love and tenderness as usual, always gives rise to
the contrary affection. When we observe a person in misfortunes, we are
affected with pity and love; but the author of that misfortune becomes
the object of our strongest hatred, and is the more detested in
proportion to the degree of our compassion. Now for what reason should
the same passion of pity produce love to the person, who suffers the
misfortune, and hatred to the person, who causes it; unless it be because
in the latter case the author bears a relation only to the misfortune;
whereas in considering the sufferer we carry our view on every side, and
wish for his prosperity, as well as are sensible of his affliction?

I. shall just observe, before I leave the present subject, that this
phaenomenon of the double sympathy, and its tendency to cause love, may
contribute to the production of the kindness, which we naturally bear our
relations and acquaintance. Custom and relation make us enter deeply into
the sentiments of others; and whatever fortune we suppose to attend them,
is rendered present to us by the imagination, and operates as if
originally our own. We rejoice in their pleasures, and grieve for their
sorrows, merely from the force of sympathy. Nothing that concerns them is
indifferent to us; and as this correspondence of sentiments is the
natural attendant of love, it readily produces that affection.



SECT. X  OF RESPECT AND CONTEMPT


There now remains only to explain the passion of respect and contempt,
along with the amorous affection, in. order to understand all the
passions which have any mixture of love or hatred. Let us begin with
respect and contempt.

In considering the qualities and circumstances of others, we may either
regard them as they really are in themselves; or may make a comparison
betwixt them and our own qualities and circumstances; or may join these
two methods of consideration. The good qualities of others, from the
first point of view, produce love; from the second, humility; and from
the third, respect; which is a mixture of these two passions. Their bad
qualities, after the same manner, cause either hatred, or pride, or
contempt, according to the light in which we survey them.

That there is a mixture of pride in contempt, and of humility in respect,
is, I think, too evident, from their very feeling or appearance, to
require any particular proof. That this mixture arises from a tacit
comparison of the person contemned or respected with ourselves is no less
evident. The same man may cause either respect, love, or contempt by his
condition and talents, according as the person, who considers him, from
his inferior becomes his equal or superior. In changing the point of
view, though the object may remain the same, its proportion to ourselves
entirely alters; which is the cause of an alteration in the passions.
These passions, therefore, arise from our observing the proportion; that
is, from a comparison.

I have already observed, that the mind has a much stronger propensity to
pride than to humility, and have endeavoured, from the principles of
human nature, to assign a cause for this phaenomenon. Whether my
reasoning be received or not, the phaenomenon is undisputed, and appears
in many instances. Among the rest, it is the reason why there is a much
greater mixture of pride in contempt, than of humility in respect, and
why we are more elevated with the view of one below us, than mortifyed
with the presence of one above us. Contempt or scorn has so strong a
tincture of pride, that there scarce is any other passion discernable:
Whereas in esteem or respect, love makes a more considerable ingredient
than humility. The passion of vanity is so prompt, that it rouzes at the
least call; while humility requires a stronger impulse to make it exert
itself.

But here it may reasonably be asked, why this mixture takes place only in
some cases, and appears not on every occasion. All those objects, which
cause love, when placed on another person, are the causes of pride, when
transfered to ourselves; and consequently ought to be causes of humility,
as well as love, while they belong to others, and are only compared to
those, which we ourselves possess. In like manner every quality, which,
by being directly considered, produces hatred, ought always to give rise
to pride by comparison, and by a mixture of these passions of hatred and
pride ought to excite contempt or scorn. The difficulty then is, why any
objects ever cause pure love or hatred, and produce not always the mixt
passions of respect and contempt.

I have supposed all along, that the passions of love and pride, and those
of humility and hatred are similar in their sensations, and that the two
former are always agreeable, and the two latter painful. But though this
be universally true, it is observable, that the two agreeable, as well as
the two painful passions, have some difference, and even contrarieties,
which distinguish them. Nothing invigorates and exalts the mind equally
with pride and vanity; though at the same time love or tenderness is
rather found to weaken and infeeble it. The same difference is observable
betwixt the uneasy passions. Anger and hatred bestow a new force on all
our thoughts and actions; while humility and shame deject and discourage
us. Of these qualities of the passions, it will be necessary to form a
distinct idea. Let us remember, that pride and hatred invigorate the
soul; and love and humility infeeble it.

From this it follows, that though the conformity betwixt love and hatred
in the agreeableness of their sensation makes them always be excited by
the same objects, yet this other contrariety is the reason, why they are
excited in very different degrees. Genius and learning are pleasant and
magnificent objects, and by both these circumstances are adapted to pride
and vanity; but have a relation to love by their pleasure only. Ignorance
and simplicity are disagreeable and mean, which in the same manner gives
them a double connexion with humility, and a single one with hatred. We
may, therefore, consider it as certain, that though the same object always
produces love and pride, humility and hatred, according to its different
situations, yet it seldom produces either the two former or the two
latter passions, in the same proportion.

It is here we must seek for a solution of the difficulty above-mentioned,
why any object ever excites pure love or hatred, and does not always
produce respect or contempt, by a mixture of humility or pride. No
quality in another gives rise to humility by comparison, unless it would
have produced pride by being placed in ourselves; and vice versa no
object excites pride by comparison, unless it would have produced
humility by the direct survey. This is evident, objects always produce by
comparison a sensation directly contrary to their original one. Suppose,
therefore, an object to be presented, which is peculiarly fitted to
produce love, but imperfectly to excite pride; this object, belonging to
another, gives rise directly to a great degree of love, but to a small
one of humility by comparison; and consequently that latter passion is
scarce felt in the compound, nor is able to convert the love into
respect. This is the case with good nature, good humour, facility,
generosity, beauty, and many other qualities. These have a peculiar
aptitude to produce love in others; but not so great a tendency to excite
pride in ourselves: For which reason the view of them, as belonging to
another person, produces pure love, with but a small mixture of humility
and respect. It is easy to extend the same reasoning to the opposite
passions.

Before we leave this subject, it may not be amiss to account for a pretty
curious phaenomenon, viz, why we commonly keep at a distance such as we
contemn, and allow not our inferiors to approach too near even in place
and situation. It has already been observed, that almost every kind of
idea is attended with some emotion, even the ideas of number and
extension, much more those of such objects as are esteemed of consequence
in life, and fix our attention. It is not with entire indifference we can
survey either a rich man or a poor one, but must feel some faint touches
at least, of respect in the former case, and of contempt in the latter.
These two passions are contrary to each other; but in order to make this
contrariety be felt, the objects must be someway related; otherwise the
affections are totally separate and distinct, and never encounter. The
relation takes place wherever the persons become contiguous; which is a
general reason why we are uneasy at seeing such disproportioned objects,
as a rich man and a poor one, a nobleman and a porter, in that situation.

This uneasiness, which is common to every spectator, must be more
sensible to the superior; and that because the near approach of the
inferior is regarded as .a piece of illbreeding, and shews that he is not
sensible of the disproportion, and is no way affected by it. A sense of
superiority in another breeds in all men an inclination to keep
themselves at a distance from him, and determines them to redouble the
marks of respect and reverence, when they are obliged to approach him;
and where they do not observe that conduct, it is a proof they are not
sensible of his superiority. From hence too it proceeds, that any great
difference in the degrees of any quality is called a distance by a common
metaphor, which, however trivial it may appear, is founded on natural
principles of the imagination. A great difference inclines us to produce
a distance. The ideas of distance and difference are, therefore,
connected together. Connected ideas are readily taken for each other; and
this is in general the source of the metaphor, as we shall have occasion
to observe afterwards.



SECT. XI  OF THE AMOROUS PASSION, OR LOVE BETWIXT THE SEXES


Of all the compound passions, which proceed from a mixture of love and
hatred with other affections, no one better deserves our attention, than
that love, which arises betwixt the sexes, as well on account of its
force and violence, as those curious principles of philosophy, for which
it affords us an uncontestable argument. It is plain, that this affection,
in its most natural state, is derived from the conjunction of three
different impressions or passions, viz. The pleasing sensation arising
from beauty; the bodily appetite for generation; and a generous kindness
or good-will. The origin of kindness from beauty may be explained from
the foregoing reasoning. The question is how the bodily appetite is
excited by it.

The appetite of generation, when confined to a certain degree, is
evidently of the pleasant kind, and has a strong connexion with, all the
agreeable emotions. Joy, mirth. vanity, and kindness are all incentives
to this desire; as well as music, dancing, wine, and good cheer. On the
other hand, sorrow, melancholy, poverty, humility are destructive of it.
From this quality it is easily conceived why it should be connected with
the sense of beauty.

But there is another principle that contributes to the same effect. I
have observed that the parallel direction of the desires is a real
relation, and no less than a resemblance in their sensation, produces a
connexion among them. That we may fully comprehend the extent of this
relation, we must consider, that any principal desire may be attended
with subordinate ones, which are connected with it, and to which if other
desires are parallel, they are by that means related to the principal
one. Thus hunger may oft be considered as the primary inclination of the
soul, and the desire of approaching the meat as the secondary one; since
it is absolutely necessary to the satisfying that appetite. If an object,
therefore, by any separate qualities, inclines us to approach the meat,
it naturally encreases our appetite; as on the contrary, whatever
inclines us to set our victuals at a distance, is contradictory to
hunger, and diminishes our inclination to them. Now it is plain that
beauty has the first effect, and deformity the second: Which is the
reason why the former gives us a keener appetite for our victuals, and
the latter is sufficient to disgust us at the most savoury dish. that
cookery has invented. All this is easily applicable to the appetite for
generation.

From these two relations, viz, resemblance and a parallel desire, there
arises such a connexion betwixt the sense of beauty, the bodily appetite,
and benevolence, that they become in a manner inseparable: And we find
from experience that it is indifferent which of them advances first; since
any of them is almost sure to be attended with the related affections.
One, who is inflamed with lust, feels at least a momentary kindness
towards the object of it, and at the same time fancies her more beautiful
than ordinary; as there are many, who begin with kindness and esteem for
the wit and merit of the person, and advance from that to the other
passions. But the most common species of love is that which first arises
from beauty, and afterwards diffuses itself into kindness and into the
bodily appetite. Kindness or esteem, and the appetite to generation, are
too remote to unite easily together. The one is, perhaps, the most
refined passion of the soul; the other the most gross and vulgar. The
love of beauty is placed in a just medium betwixt them, and partakes of
both their natures: From whence it proceeds, that it is so singularly
fitted to produce both.

This account of love is not peculiar to my system, but is unavoidable on
any hypothesis. The three affections, which compose this passion, are
evidently distinct, and has each of them its distinct object. It is
certain, therefore, that it is only by their relation they produce each
other. But the relation of passions is not alone sufficient. It is
likewise necessary, there should be a relation of ideas. The beauty of one
person never inspires us with love for another. This then is a sensible
proof of the double relation of impressions and ideas. From one instance
so evident as this we may form a judgment of the rest.

This may also serve in another view to illustrate what I have insisted on
concerning the origin of pride and humility, love and hatred. I have
observed, that though self be the object of the first set of passions, and
some other person of the second, yet these objects cannot alone be the
causes of the passions; as having each of them a relation to two contrary
affections, which must from the very first moment destroy each other.
Here then is the situation of the mind, as I have already described it.
It has certain organs naturally fitted to produce a passion; that
passion, when produced, naturally turns the view to a certain object. But
this not being sufficient to produce the passion, there is required some
other emotion, which by a double relation of impressions and ideas may
set these principles in action, and bestow on them their first impulse.
This situation is still more remarkable with regard to the appetite of
generation. Sex is not only the object, but also the cause of the
appetite. We not only turn our view to it, when actuated by that
appetite; but the reflecting on it suffices to excite the appetite. But
as this cause loses its force by too great frequency, it is necessary it
should be quickened by some new impulse; and that impulse we find to
arise from the beauty of the person; that is, from a double relation of
impressions and ideas. Since this double relation is necessary where an
affection has both a distinct cause, and object, how much more so, where
it has only a distinct object, without any determinate cause?



SECT. XII  OF THE LOVE AND HATRED OF ANIMALS


But to pass from the passions of love and hatred, and from their mixtures
and compositions, as they appear m man, to the same affections, as they
display themselves in brutes; we may observe, not only that love and
hatred are common to the whole sensitive creation, but likewise that
their causes, as above-explained, are of so simple a nature, that they
may easily be supposed to operate on mere animals. There is no force of
reflection or penetration required. Every thing is conducted by springs
and principles, which are not peculiar to man, or any one species of
animals. The conclusion from this is obvious in favour of the foregoing
system.

Love in animals, has not for its only object animals of the same species,
but extends itself farther, and comprehends almost every sensible and
thinking being. A dog naturally loves a man above his own species, and
very commonly meets with a return of affection.

As animals are but little susceptible either of the pleasures or pains of
the imagination, they can judge of objects only by the sensible good or
evil, which they produce, and from that must regulate their affections
towards them. Accordingly we find, that by benefits or injuries we
produce their love or hatred; and that by feeding and cherishing any
animal, we quickly acquire his affections; as by beating and abusing him
we never fail to draw on us his enmity and ill-will.

Love in beasts is not caused so much by relation, as in our species; and
that because their thoughts are not so active as to trace relations,
except in very obvious instances. Yet it is easy to remark, that on some
occasions it has a considerable influence upon them. Thus acquaintance,
which has the same effect as relation, always produces love in animals
either to men or to each other. For the same reason any likeness among
them is the source of affection. An ox confined to a park with horses,
will naturally join their company, if I may so speak, but always leaves
it to enjoy that of his own species, where he has the choice of both.

The affection of parents to their young proceeds from a peculiar instinct
in animals, as well as in our species.

It is evident, that sympathy, or the communication of passions, takes
place among animals, no less than among men. Fear, anger, courage, and
other affections are frequently communicated from one animal to another,
without their knowledge of that cause, which produced the original
passion. Grief likewise is received by sympathy; and produces almost all
the same consequences, and excites the same emotions as in our species.
The howlings and lamentations of a dog produce a sensible concern in his
fellows. And it is remarkable, that though almost all animals use in play
the same member, and nearly the same action as in fighting; a lion, a
tyger, a cat their paws; an ox his horns; a dog his teeth; a horse his
heels: Yet they most carefully avoid harming their companion, even though
they have nothing to fear from his resentment; which is an evident proof
of the sense brutes have of each other's pain and pleasure.

Every one has observed how much more dogs are animated when they hunt in
a pack, than when they pursue their game apart; and it is evident this can
proceed from nothing but from sympathy. It is also well known to hunters,
that this effect follows in a greater degree, and even in too .great a
degree, where two packs, that are strangers to each other, are joined
together. We might, perhaps, be at a loss to explain this phaenomenon, if
we had not experience of a similar in ourselves.

Envy and malice are passions very remarkable in animals. They are perhaps
more common than pity; as requiring less effort of thought and
imagination.




PART III  OF THE WILL AND DIRECT PASSIONS



SECT. I  OF LIBERTY AND NECESSITY


We come now to explain the direct passions, or the impressions, which
arise immediately from good or evil, from pain or pleasure. Of this kind
are, desire and aversion, grief and joy, hope and fear.

Of all the immediate effects of pain and pleasure, there is none more
remarkable than the WILL; and though properly speaking, it be not
comprehended among the passions, yet as the full understanding of its
nature and properties, is necessary to the explanation of them, we shall
here make it the subject of our enquiry. I desire it may be observed,
that by the will, I mean nothing but the internal impression we feel and
are conscious of, when we knowingly give rise to any new motion of our
body, or new perception of our mind. This impression, like the preceding
ones of pride and humility, love and hatred, it is impossible to define,
and needless to describe any farther; for which reason we shall cut off
all those definitions and distinctions, with which philosophers are wont
to perplex rather than dear up this question; and entering at first upon
the subject, shall examine that long disputed question concerning liberty
and necessity; which occurs so naturally in treating of the will.

It is universally acknowledged, that the operations of external bodies are
necessary, and that in the communication of their motion, in their
attraction, and mutual cohesion, there are nor the least traces of
indifference or liberty. Every object is determined by an absolute fate
toa certain degree and direction of irs motion, and can no more depart
from that precise line, in which it moves, than it can convert itself
into an angel, or spirit, or any superior substance. The actions,
therefore, of matter are to be regarded as instances of necessary
actions; and whatever is in this respect on the same footing with matter,
must be acknowledged to be necessary. That we may know whether this be
the case with the actions of the mind, we shall begin with examining
matter, and considering on what the idea of a necessity in its operations
are founded, and why we conclude one body or action to be the infallible
cause of another.

It has been observed already, that in no single instance the ultimate
connexion of any objects is discoverable, either by our senses or reason,
and that we can never penetrate so far into the essence and construction
of bodies, as to perceive the principle, on which their mutual influence
depends. It is their constant union alone, with which we are acquainted;
and it is from the constant union the necessity arises. If objects had nor
an uniform and regular conjunction with each other, we should never
arrive at any idea of cause and effect; and even after all, the
necessity, which enters into that idea, is nothing but a determination of
the mind to pass from one object to its usual attendant, and infer the
existence of one from that of the other. Here then are two particulars,
which we are to consider as essential to necessity, viz, the constant
union and the inference of the mind; and wherever we discover these we
must acknowledge a necessity. As the actions of matter have no necessity,
but what is derived from these circumstances, and it is not by any
insight into the essence of bodies we discover their connexion, the
absence of this insight, while the union and inference remain, will
never, in any case, remove the necessity. It is the observation of the
union, which produces the inference; for which reason it might be thought
sufficient, if we prove a constant union in the actions of the mind, in
order to establish the inference, along with the necessity of these
actions. But that I may bestow a greater force on my reasoning, I shall
examine these particulars apart, and shall first prove from experience
that our actions have a constant union with our motives, tempers, and
circumstances, before I consider the inferences we draw from it.

To this end a very slight and general view of the common course of human
affairs will be sufficient. There is no light, in which we can take them,
that does nor confirm this principle. Whether we consider mankind
according to the difference of sexes, ages, governments, conditions, or
methods of education; the same uniformity and regular operation of
natural principles are discernible. Uke causes still produce like
effects; in the same manner as in the mutual action of the elements and
powers of nature.

There are different trees, which regularly produce fruit, whose relish is
different from each other; and this regularity will be admitted as an
instance of necessity and causes in external bodies. But are the products
of Guienne and of Champagne more regularly different than the sentiments,
actions, and passions of the two sexes, of which the one are
distinguished by their force and maturity, the other by their delicacy
and softness?

Are the changes of our body from infancy to old age more regular and
certain than those of our mind and conduct? And would a man be more
ridiculous, who would expect that an infant of four years old will raise
a weight of three hundred pound, than one, who from a person of the same
age. would look for a philosophical reasoning, or a prudent and
well-concerted action?

We must certainly allow, that the cohesion of the parts of matter arises
from natural and necessary principles, whatever difficulty we may find in
explaining them: And for a reason we must allow, that human society is
founded on like principles; and our reason in the latter case, is better
than even that in the former; because we not only observe, that men
always seek society, but can also explain the principles, on which this
universal propensity is founded. For is it more certain, that two flat
pieces of marble will unite together, than that two young savages of
different sexes will copulate? Do the children arise from this copulation
more uniformly, than does the parents care for their safety and
preservation? And after they have arrived at years of discretion by the
care of their parents, are the inconveniencies attending their separation
more certain than their foresight of these inconveniencies and their care
of avoiding them by a close union and confederacy?

The skin, pores, muscles, and nerves of a day-labourer are different from
those of a man of quality: So are his sentiments, actions and manners.
The different stations of life influence the whole fabric, external and
internal; and different stations arise necessarily, because uniformly,
from the necessary and uniform principles of human nature. Men cannot
live without society, and cannot be associated without government.
Government makes a distinction of property, and establishes the different
ranks of men. This produces industry, traffic, manufactures, law-suits,
war, leagues, alliances, voyages, travels, cities, fleets, ports, and all
those other actions and objects, which cause such a diversity, and at the
same time maintain such an uniformity in human life.

Should a traveller, returning from a far country, tell us, that he had
seen a climate in the fiftieth degree of northern latitude, where all the
fruits ripen and come to perfection in the winter, and decay in the
summer, after the same manner as in England they are produced and decay
in the contrary seasons, he would find few so credulous as to believe
him. I am apt to think a travellar would meet with as little credit, who
should inform us of people exactly of the same character with those in
Plato's republic on the one hand, or those in Hobbes's Leviathan on the
other. There is a general course of nature in human actions, as well as
in the operations of the sun and the climate. There are also characters
peculiar to different nations and particular persons, as well as common
to mankind. The knowledge of these characters is founded on the
observation of an uniformity in the actions, that flow from them; and
this uniformity forms the very essence of necessity.

I can imagine only one way of eluding this argument, which is by denying
that uniformity of human actions, on which it is founded. As long as
actions have a constant union and connexion with the situation and temper
of the agent, however we may in words refuse to acknowledge the
necessity, we really allow the thing. Now some may, perhaps, find a
pretext to deny this regular union and connexion. For what is more
capricious than human actions? What more inconstant than the desires of
man? And what creature departs more widely, not only from right reason,
but from his own character and disposition? An hour, a moment is
sufficient to make him change from one extreme to another, and overturn
what cost the greatest pain and labour to establish. Necessity is regular
and certain. Human conduct is irregular and uncertain. The one,
therefore, proceeds not from the other.

To this I reply, that in judging of the actions of men we must proceed
upon the same maxims, as when we reason concerning external objects. When
any phaenomena are constantly and invariably conjoined together, they
acquire such a connexion in the imagination, that it passes from one to
the other, without any doubt or hesitation. But below this there are many
inferior degrees of evidence and probability, nor does one single
contrariety of experiment entirely destroy all our reasoning. The mind
ballances the contrary experiments, and deducting the inferior from the
superior, proceeds with that degree of assurance or evidence, which
remains. Even when these contrary experiments are entirely equal, we
remove not the notion of causes and necessity; but supposing that the
usual contrariety proceeds from the operation of contrary and concealed
causes, we conclude, that the chance or indifference lies only in our
judgment on account of our imperfect knowledge, not in the things
themselves, which are in every case equally necessary, though to
appearance not equally constant or certain. No union can be more constant
and certain, than that of some actions with some motives and characters;
and if in other cases the union is uncertain, it is no more than what
happens in the operations of body, nor can we conclude any thing from the
one irregularity, which will not follow equally from the other.

It is commonly allowed that mad-men have no liberty. But were we to judge
by their actions, these have less regularity and constancy than the
actions of wise-men, and consequently are farther removed from necessity.
Our way of thinking in this particular is, therefore, absolutely
inconsistent; but is a natural consequence of these confused ideas and
undefined terms, which we so commonly make use of in our reasonings,
especially on the present subject.

We must now shew, that as the union betwixt motives and actions has the
same constancy, as that in any natural operations, so its influence on
the understanding is also the same, in determining us to infer the
existence of one from that of another. If this shall appear, there is no
known circumstance, that enters into the connexion and production of the
actions of matter, that is not to be found in all the operations of the
mind; and consequently we cannot, without a manifest absurdity, attribute
necessity to the one, and refuse into the other.

There is no philosopher, whose judgment is so riveted to this fantastical
system of liberty, as not to acknowledge the force of moral evidence, and
both in speculation and practice proceed upon it, as upon a reasonable
foundation. Now moral evidence is nothing but a conclusion concerning the
actions of men, derived from the consideration of their motives, temper
and situation. Thus when we see certain characters or figures described
upon paper, we infer that the person, who produced them, would affirm
such facts, the death of Caesar, the success of Augustus, the cruelty of
Nero; and remembering many other concurrent testimonies we conclude, that
those facts were once really existant, and that so many men, without any
interest, would never conspire to deceive us; especially since they must,
in the attempt, expose themselves to the derision of all their
contemporaries, when these facts were asserted to be recent and
universally known. The same kind of reasoning runs through politics, war,
commerce, economy, and indeed mixes itself so entirely in human life,
that it is impossible to act or subsist a moment without having recourse
to it. A prince, who imposes a tax upon his subjects, expects their
compliance. A general, who conducts an army, makes account of a certain
degree of courage. A merchant looks for fidelity and skill in his factor
or super-cargo. A man, who gives orders for his dinner, doubts not of the
obedience of his servants. In short, as nothing more nearly interests us
than our own actions and those of others, the greatest part of our
reasonings is employed in judgments concerning them. Now I assert, that
whoever reasons after this manner, does ipso facto believe the actions of
the will to arise from necessity, and that he knows not what he means,
when he denies it.

All those objects, of which we call the one cause and the other effect,
considered in themselves, are as distinct and separate from each other,
as any two things in nature, nor can we ever, by the most accurate survey
of them, infer the existence of the one from that of the other. It is only
from experience and the observation of their constant union, that we are
able to form this inference; and even after all, the inference is nothing
but the effects of custom on the imagination. We must not here be content
with saying, that the idea of cause and effect arises from objects
constantly united; but must affirm, that it is the very same with the idea
of those objects, and that the necessary connexion is not discovered by a
conclusion of the understanding, but is merely a perception of the mind.
Wherever, therefore, we observe the same union, and wherever the union
operates in the same manner upon the belief and opinion, we have the idea
of causes and necessity, though perhaps we may avoid those expressions.
Motion in one body in all past instances, that have fallen under our
observation, is followed upon impulse by motion in another. It is
impossible for the mind to penetrate farther. From this constant union it
forms the idea of cause and effect, and by its influence feels the
necessity. As there is the same constancy, and the same influence in what
we call moral evidence, I ask no more. What remains can only be a dispute
of words.

And indeed, when we consider how aptly natural and moral evidence cement
together, and form only one chain of argument betwixt them, we shall make
no scruple to allow, that they are of the same nature, and derived from
the same principles. A prisoner, who has neither money nor interest,
discovers the impossibility of his escape, as well from the obstinacy of
the goaler, as from the walls and bars with which he is surrounded; and
in all attempts for his freedom chuses rather to work upon the stone and
iron of the one, than upon the inflexible nature of the other. The same
prisoner, when conducted to the scaffold, foresees his death as certainly
from the constancy and fidelity of his guards as from the operation of
the ax or wheel. His mind runs along a certain train of ideas: The
refusal of the soldiers to consent to his escape, the action of the
executioner; the separation of the head and body; bleeding, convulsive
motions, and death. Here is a connected chain of natural causes and
voluntary actions; but the mind feels no difference betwixt them in
passing from one link to another; nor is less certain of the future event
than if it were connected with the present impressions of the memory and
senses by a train of causes cemented together by what we are pleased to
call a physical necessity. The same experienced union has the same effect
on the mind, whether the united objects be motives, volitions and
actions; or figure and motion. We may change the names of things; but
their nature and their operation on the understanding never change.

I dare be positive no one will ever endeavour to refute these reasonings
otherwise than by altering my definitions, and assigning a different
meaning to the terms of cause, and effect, and necessity, and liberty,
and chance. According to my definitions, necessity makes an essential
part of causation; and consequently liberty, by removing necessity,
removes also causes, and is the very same thing with chance. As chance is
commonly thought to imply a contradiction, and is at least directly
contrary to experience, there are always the same arguments against
liberty or free-will. If any one alters the definitions, I cannot pretend
to argue with him, until I know the meaning he assigns to these terms.



SECT. II  THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUed


I believe we may assign the three following reasons for the prevalance of
the doctrine of liberty, however absurd it may be in one sense, and
unintelligible in any other. First, After we have performed any action;
though we confess we were influenced by particular views and motives; it
is difficult for us to persuade ourselves we were governed by necessity,
and that it was utterly impossible for us to have acted otherwise; the
idea of necessity seeming to imply something of force, and violence, and
constraint, of which we are not sensible. Few are capable of
distinguishing betwixt the liberty of spontaniety, as it is called in the
schools, and the liberty of indifference; betwixt that which is opposed
to violence, and that which means a negation of necessity and causes. The
first is even the most common sense of the word; and as it is only that
species of liberty, which it concerns us to preserve, our thoughts have
been principally turned towards it, and have almost universally
confounded it with the other.

Secondly, There is a false sensation or experience even of the liberty of
indifference; which is regarded as an argument for its real existence.
The necessity of any action, whether of matter or of the mind, is not
properly a quality in the agent, but in any thinking or intelligent
being, who may consider the action, and consists in the determination of
his thought to infer its existence from some preceding objects: As
liberty or chance, on the other hand, is nothing but the want of that
determination, and a certain looseness, which we feel in passing or not
passing from the idea of one to that of the other. Now we may observe,
that though in reflecting on human actions we seldom feel such a looseness
or indifference, yet it very commonly happens, that in performing the
actions themselves we are sensible of something like it: And as all
related or resembling objects are readily taken for each other, this has
been employed as a demonstrative or even an intuitive proof of human
liberty. We feel that our actions are subject to our will on most
occasions, and imagine we feel that the will itself is subject to
nothing; because when by a denial of it we are provoked to try, we feel
that it moves easily every way, and produces an image of itself even on
that side, on which it did not settle. This image or faint motion, we
persuade ourselves, coued have been compleated into the thing itself;
because, should that be denyed, we find, upon a second trial, that it
can. But these efforts are all in vain; and whatever capricious and
irregular actions we may perform; as the desire of showing our liberty is
the sole motive of our actions; we can never free ourselves from the
bonds of necessity. We may imagine we feel a liberty within ourselves;
but a spectator can commonly infer our actions from our motives and
character; and even where he cannot, he concludes in general, that he
might, were he perfectly acquainted with every circumstance of our
situation and temper, and the most secret springs of our complexion and
disposition. Now this is the very essence of necessity, according to the
foregoing doctrine.

A third reason why the doctrine of liberty has generally been better
received in the world, than its antagonist, proceeds from religion, which
has been very unnecessarily interested in this question. There is no
method of reasoning more common, and yet none more blameable, than in
philosophical debates to endeavour to refute any hypothesis by a pretext
of its dangerous consequences to religion and morality. When any opinion
leads us into absurdities, it is certainly false; but it is not certain an
opinion is false, because it is of dangerous consequence. Such topics,
therefore, ought entirely to be foreborn, as serving nothing to the
discovery of truth, but only to make the person of an antagonist odious.
This I observe in general, without pretending to draw any advantage from
it. I submit myself frankly to an examination of this kind, and dare
venture to affirm, that the doctrine of necessity, according to my
explication of it, is not only innocent, but even advantageous to
religion and morality.

I define necessity two ways, conformable to the two definitions of cause,
of which it makes an essential part. I place it either in the constant
union and conjunction of like objects, or in the inference of the mind
from the one to the other. Now necessity, in both these senses, has
universally, though tacitely, in the schools, in the pulpit, and in common
life, been allowed to belong to the will of man, and no one has ever
pretended to deny, that we can draw inferences concerning human actions,
and that those inferences are founded on the experienced union of like
actions with like motives and circumstances. The only particular in which
any one can differ from me, is either, that perhaps he will refuse to
call this necessity. But as long as the meaning is understood, I hope the
word can do no harm. Or that he will maintain there is something else in
the operations of matter. Now whether it be so or not is of no
consequence to religion, whatever it may be to natural philosophy. I may
be mistaken in asserting, that we have no idea of any other connexion in
the actions of body, and shall be glad to be farther instructed on that
head: But sure I am, I ascribe nothing to the actions of the mind, but
what must readily be allowed of. Let no one, therefore, put an invidious
construction on my words, by saying simply, that I assert the necessity
of human actions, and place them on the same footing with the operations
of senseless matter. I do not ascribe to the will that unintelligible
necessity, which is supposed to lie in matter. But I ascribe to matter,
that intelligible quality, call it necessity or not, which the most
rigorous orthodoxy does or must allow to belong to the will. I change,
therefore, nothing in the received systems, with regard to the will, but
only with regard to material objects.

Nay I shall go farther, and assert, that this kind of necessity is so
essential to religion and morality, that without it there must ensue an
absolute subversion of both, and that every other supposition is entirely
destructive to all laws both divine and human. It is indeed certain, that
as all human laws are founded on rewards and punishments, it is supposed
as a fundamental principle, that these motives have an influence on the
mind, and both produce the good and prevent the evil actions. We may give
to this influence what name we please; but as it is usually conjoined with
the action, common sense requires it should be esteemed a cause, and be
booked upon as an instance of that necessity, which I would establish.

This reasoning is equally solid, when applied to divine laws, so far as
the deity is considered as a legislator, and is supposed to inflict
punishment and bestow rewards with a design to produce obedience. But I
also maintain, that even where he acts not in his magisterial capacity,
but is regarded as the avenger of crimes merely on account of their
odiousness and deformity, not only it is impossible, without the necessary
connexion of cause and effect in human actions, that punishments coued be
inflicted compatible with justice and moral equity; but also that it
coued ever enter into the thoughts of any reasonable being to inflict
them. The constant and universal object of hatred or anger is a person or
creature endowed with thought and consciousness; and when any criminal or
injurious actions excite that passion, it is only by their relation to the
person or connexion with him. But according to the doctrine of liberty or
chance, this connexion is reduced to nothing, nor are men more
accountable for those actions, which are designed and premeditated, than
for such as are the most casual and accidental. Actions are by their very
nature temporary and perishing; and where they proceed not from some
cause in the characters and disposition of the person, who performed
them, they infix not themselves upon him, and can neither redound to his
honour, if good, nor infamy, if evil. The action itself may be blameable;
it may be contrary to all the rules of morality and religion: But the
person is not responsible for it; and as it proceeded from nothing in
him, that is durable or constant, and leaves nothing of that nature
behind it, it is impossible he can, upon its account, become the object of
punishment or vengeance. According to the hypothesis of liberty,
therefore, a man is as pure and untainted, after having committed the
most horrid crimes, as at the first moment of his birth, nor is his
character any way concerned in his actions; since they are not derived
from it, and the wickedness of the one can never be used as a proof of
the depravity of the other. It is only upon the principles of necessity,
that a person acquires any merit or demerit from his actions, however the
common opinion may incline to the contrary.

But so inconsistent are men with themselves, that though they often
assert, that necessity utterly destroys all merit and demerit either
towards mankind or superior powers, yet they continue still to reason upon
these very principles of necessity in all their judgments concerning this
matter. Men are not blamed for such evil actions as they perform
ignorantly and casually, whatever may be their consequences. Why? but
because the causes of these actions are only momentary, and terminate in
them alone. Men are less blamed for such evil actions, as they perform
hastily and unpremeditately, than for such as proceed from thought and
deliberation. For what reason? but because a hasty temper, though a
constant cause in the mind, operates only by intervals, and infects not
the whole character. Again, repentance wipes off every crime, especially
if attended with an evident reformation of life and manners. How is this
to be accounted for? But by asserting that actions render a person
criminal, merely as they are proofs of criminal passions or principles in
the mind; and when by any alteration of these principles they cease to be
just proofs, they likewise cease to be criminal. But according to the
doctrine of liberty or chance they never were just proofs, and
consequently never were criminal.

Here then I turn to my adversary, and desire him to free his own system
from these odious consequences before he charge them upon others. Or if
he rather chuses, that this question should be decided by fair arguments
before philosophers, than by declamations before the people, let him
return to what I have advanced to prove that liberty and chance are
synonimous; and concerning the nature of moral evidence and the
regularity of human actions. Upon a review of these reasonings, I cannot
doubt of an entire victory; and therefore having proved, that all actions
of the will have particular causes, I proceed to explain what these
causes are, and how they operate.



SECT. III  OF THE INFLUENCING MOTIVES OF THE WILL


Nothing is more usual in philosophy, and even in common life, than to
talk of the combat of passion and reason, to give the preference to
reason, and assert that men are only so far virtuous as they conform
themselves to its dictates. Every rational creature, it is said, is
obliged to regulate his actions by reason; and if any other motive or
principle challenge the direction of his conduct, he ought to oppose it,
till it be entirely subdued, or at least brought to a conformity with
that superior principle. On this method of thinking the greatest part of
moral philosophy, antient and modern, seems to be founded; nor is there
an ampler field, as well for metaphysical arguments, as popular
declamations, than this supposed pre-eminence of reason above passion.
The eternity, invariableness, and divine origin of the former have been
displayed to the best advantage: The blindness, unconstancy, and
deceitfulness of the latter have been as strongly insisted on. In order
to shew the fallacy of all this philosophy, I shall endeavour to prove
first, that reason alone can never be a motive to any action of the will;
and secondly, that it can never oppose passion in the direction of the
will.

The understanding exerts itself after two different ways, as it judges
from demonstration or probability; as it regards the abstract relations
of our ideas, or those relations of objects, of which experience only
gives us information. I believe it scarce will be asserted, that the
first species of reasoning alone is ever the cause of any action. As its
proper province is the world of ideas, and as the will always places us
in that of realities, demonstration and volition seem, upon that account,
to be totally removed, from each other. Mathematics, indeed, are useful
in all mechanical operations, and arithmetic in almost every art and
profession: But it is not of themselves they have any influence: Mechanics
are the art of regulating the motions of bodies to some designed end or
purpose; and the reason why we employ arithmetic in fixing the
proportions of numbers, is only that we may discover the proportions of
their influence and operation. A merchant is desirous of knowing the sum
total of his accounts with any person: Why? but that he may learn what
sum will have the same effects in paying his debt, and going to market,
as all the particular articles taken together. Abstract or demonstrative
reasoning, therefore, never influences any of our actions, but only as it
directs our judgment concerning causes and effects; which leads us to the
second operation of the understanding.

It is obvious, that when we have the prospect of pain or pleasure from any
object, we feel a consequent emotion of aversion or propensity, and are
carryed to avoid or embrace what will give us this uneasines or
satisfaction. It is also obvious, that this emotion rests not here, but
making us cast our view on every side, comprehends whatever objects are
connected with its original one by the relation of cause and effect. Here
then reasoning takes place to discover this relation; and according as
our reasoning varies, our actions receive a subsequent variation. But
it is evident in this case that the impulse arises not from reason, but is
only directed by it. It is from the prospect of pain or pleasure that the
aversion or propensity arises towards any object: And these emotions
extend themselves to the causes and effects of that object, as they are
pointed out to us by reason and experience. It can never in the least
concern us to know, that such objects are causes, and such others
effects, if both the causes and effects be indifferent to us. Where the
objects themselves do not affect us, their connexion can never give them
any influence; and it is plain, that as reason is nothing but the
discovery of this connexion, it cannot be by its means that the objects
are able to affect us.

Since reason alone can never produce any action, or give rise to
volition, I infer, that the same faculty is as incapable of preventing
volition, or of disputing the preference with any passion or emotion.
This consequence is necessary. It is impossible reason coued have the
latter effect of preventing volition, but by giving an impulse in a
contrary direction to our passion; and that impulse, had it operated
alone, would have been able to produce volition. Nothing can oppose or
retard the impulse of passion, but a contrary impulse; and if this
contrary impulse ever arises from reason, that latter faculty must have
an original influence on the will, and must be able to cause, as well as
hinder any act of volition. But if reason has no original influence, it is
impossible it can withstand any principle, which has such an efficacy, or
ever keep the mind in suspence a moment. Thus it appears, that the
principle, which opposes our passion, cannot be the same with reason, and
is only called so in an improper sense. We speak not strictly and
philosophically when we talk of the combat of passion and of reason.
Reason is, and ought only to be the slave of the passions, and can never
pretend to any other office than to serve and obey them. As this opinion
may appear somewhat extraordinary, it may not be improper to confirm it
by some other considerations.

A passion is an original existence, or, if you will, modification of
existence, and contains not any representative quality, which renders it
a copy of any other existence or modification. When I am angry, I am
actually possest with the passion, and in that emotion have no more a
reference to any other object, than when I am thirsty, or sick, or more
than five foot high. It is impossible, therefore, that this passion can be
opposed by, or be contradictory to truth and reason; since this
contradiction consists in the disagreement of ideas, considered as
copies, with those objects, which they represent

What may at first occur on this head, is, that as nothing can be contrary
to truth or reason, except what has a reference to it, and as the
judgments of our understanding only have this reference, it must follow,
that passions can be contrary to reason only so far as they are
accompanyed with some judgment or opinion. According to this principle,
which is so obvious and natural, it is only in two senses, that any
affection can be called unreasonable. First, When a passion, such as hope
or fear, grief or joy, despair or security, is founded on the supposition
or the existence of objects, which really do not exist. Secondly, When in
exerting any passion in action, we chuse means insufficient for the
designed end, and deceive ourselves in our judgment of causes and
effects. Where a passion is neither founded on false suppositions, nor
chuses means insufficient for the end, the understanding can neither
justify nor condemn it. It is not contrary to reason to prefer the
destruction of the whole world to the scratching of my finger. It is not
contrary to reason for me to chuse my total ruin, to prevent the least
uneasiness of an Indian or person wholly unknown to me. It is as little
contrary to reason to prefer even my own acknowledgeed lesser good to my
greater, and have a more ardent affection for the former than the latter.
A trivial good may, from certain circumstances, produce a desire superior
to what arises from the greatest and most valuable enjoyment; nor is
there any thing more extraordinary in this, than in mechanics to see one
pound weight raise up a hundred by the advantage of its situation. In
short, a passion must be accompanyed with some false judgment. in order
to its being unreasonable; and even then it is not the passion, properly
speaking, which is unreasonable, but the judgment.

The consequences are evident. Since a passion can never, in any sense, be
called unreasonable, but when founded on a false supposition. or when it
chuses means insufficient for the designed end, it is impossible, that
reason and passion can ever oppose each other, or dispute for the
government of the will and actions. The moment we perceive the falshood
of any supposition, or the insufficiency of any means our passions yield
to our reason without any opposition. I may desire any fruit as of an
excellent relish; but whenever you convince me of my mistake, my longing
ceases. I may will the performance of certain actions as means of
obtaining any desired good; but as my willing of these actions is only
secondary, and founded on the supposition, that they are causes of the
proposed effect; as soon as I discover the falshood of that supposition,
they must become indifferent to me.

It is natural for one, that does not examine objects with a strict
philosophic eye, to imagine, that those actions of the mind are entirely
the same, which produce not a different sensation, and are not
immediately distinguishable to the feeling and perception. Reason, for
instance, exerts itself without producing any sensible emotion; and
except in the more sublime disquisitions of philosophy, or in the
frivolous subtilties of the school, scarce ever conveys any pleasure or
uneasiness. Hence it proceeds, that every action of the mind, which
operates with the same calmness and tranquillity, is confounded with
reason by all those, who judge of things from the first view and
appearance. Now it is certain, there are certain calm desires and
tendencies, which, though they be real passions, produce little emotion in
the mind, and are more known by their effects than by the immediate
feeling or sensation. These desires are of two kinds; either certain
instincts originally implanted in our natures, such as benevolence and
resentment, the love of life, and kindness to children; or the general
appetite to good, and aversion to evil, considered merely as such. When
any of these passions are calm, and cause no disorder in the soul, they
are very readily taken for the determinations of reason, and are supposed
to proceed from the same faculty, with that, which judges of truth and
falshood. Their nature and principles have been supposed the same,
because their sensations are not evidently different.

Beside these calm passions, which often determine the will, there are
certain violent emotions of the same kind, which have likewise a great
influence on that faculty. When I receive any injury from another, I
often feel a violent passion of resentment, which makes me desire his
evil and punishment, independent of all considerations of pleasure and
advantage to myself. When I am immediately threatened with any grievous
ill, my fears, apprehensions, and aversions rise to a great height, and
produce a sensible emotion.

The common error of metaphysicians has lain in ascribing the direction of
the will entirely to one of these principles, and supposing the other to
have no influence. Men often act knowingly against their interest: For
which reason the view of the greatest possible good does not always
influence them. Men often counter-act a violent passion in prosecution of
their interests and designs: It is not therefore the present uneasiness
alone, which determines them. In general we may observe, that both these
principles operate on the will; and where they are contrary, that either
of them prevails, according to the general character or present
disposition of the person. What we call strength of mind, implies the
prevalence of the calm passions above the violent; though we may easily
observe, there is no man so constantly possessed of this virtue, as never
on any occasion to yield to the sollicitations of passion and desire.
From these variations of temper proceeds the great difficulty of deciding
concerning the actions and resolutions of men, where there is any
contrariety of motives and passions.



SECT. IV  OF THE CAUSES OF THE VIOLENT PASSIONS


There is not-in philosophy a subject of more nice speculation than this
of the different causes and effects of the calm and violent passions.
It is evident passions influence not the will in proportion to their
violence, or the disorder they occasion in the temper; but on the
contrary, that when a passion has once become a settled principle of
action, and is the predominant inclination of the soul, it commonly
produces no longer any sensible agitation. As repeated custom and its own
force have made every thing yield to it, it directs the actions and
conduct without that opposition and emotion, which so naturally attend
every momentary gust of passion. We must, therefore, distinguish betwixt
a calm and a weak passion; betwixt a violent and a strong one. But
notwithstanding this, it is certain, that when we would govern a man, and
push him to any action, it will commonly be better policy to work upon the
violent than the calm passions, and rather take him by his inclination,
than what is vulgarly called his reason. We ought to place the object in
such particular situations as are proper to encrease the violence of the
passion. For we may observe, that all depends upon the situation of the
object, and that a variation in this particular will be able to change
the calm and the violent passions into each other. Both these kinds of
passions pursue good, and avoid evil; and both of them are encreased or
diminished by the encrease or diminution of the good or evil. But herein
lies the difference betwixt them: The same good, when near, will cause a
violent passion, which, when remote, produces only a calm one. As this
subject belongs very properly to the present question concerning the
will, we shall here examine it to the bottom, and shall consider some of
those circumstances and situations of objects, which render a passion
either calm or violent.

It is a remarkable property of human nature, that any emotion, which
attends a passion, is easily converted into it, though in their natures
they be originally different from, and even contrary to each other. It is
true; in order to make a perfect union among passions, there is always
required a double relation of impressions and ideas; nor is one relation
sufficient for that purpose. But though this be confirmed by undoubted
experience, we must understand it with its proper limitations, and must
regard the double relation, as requisite only to make one passion produce
another. When two passions are already produced by their separate causes,
and are both present in the mind, they readily mingle and unite, though
they have but one relation, and sometimes without any. The predominant
passion swallows up the inferior, and converts it into itself. The
spirits, when once excited, easily receive a change in their direction;
and it is natural to imagine this change will come from the prevailing
affection. The connexion is in many respects closer betwixt any two
passions, than betwixt any passion and indifference.

When a person is once heartily in love, the little faults and caprices of
his mistress, the jealousies and quarrels, to which that commerce is so
subject; however unpleasant and related to anger and hatred; are yet
found to give additional force to the prevailing passion. It is a common
artifice of politicians, when they would affect any person very much by a
matter of fact, of which they intend to inform him, first to excite his
curiosity; delay as long as possible the satisfying it; and by that means
raise his anxiety and impatience to the utmost, before they give him a
full insight into the business. They know that his curiosity will
precipitate him into the passion they design to raise, and assist the
object in its influence on the mind. A soldier advancing to the battle,
is naturally inspired with courage and confidence, when he thinks on his
friends and fellow-soldiers; and is struck with fear and terror, when he
reflects on the enemy. Whatever new emotion, therefore, proceeds from the
former naturally encreases the courage; as the same emotion, proceeding
from the latter, augments the fear; by the relation of ideas, and the
conversion of the inferior emotion into the predominant. Hence it is that
in martial discipline, the uniformity and lustre of our habit, the
regularity of our figures and motions, with all the pomp and majesty of
war, encourage ourselves and allies; while the same objects in the enemy
strike terror into us, though agreeable and beautiful in themselves.

Since passions, however independent, are naturally transfused into each
other, if they are both present at the same time; it follows, that when
good or evil is placed in such a situation, as to cause any particular
emotion, beside its direct passion of desire or aversion, that latter
passion must acquire new force and violence.

This happens, among other cases, whenever any object excites contrary
passions. For it is observable that an opposition of passions commonly
causes a new emotion in the spirits, and produces more disorder, than the
concurrence of any two affections of equal force. This new emotion is
easily converted into the predominant passion, and encreases its
violence, beyond the pitch it would have arrived at had it met with no
opposition. Hence we naturally desire what is forbid, and take a pleasure
in performing actions, merely because they are unlawful. The notion of
duty, when opposite to the passions, is seldom able to overcome them; and
when it fails of that effect, is apt rather to encrease them, by
producing an opposition in our motives and principles. The same effect
follows whether the opposition arises from internal motives or external
obstacles. The passion commonly acquires new force and violence in both
cases.

The efforts, which the mind makes to surmount the obstacle, excite the
spirits and inliven the passion.

Uncertainty has the same influence as opposition. The agitation of the
thought; the quick turns it makes from one view to another; the variety
of passions, which succeed each other, according to the different views;
All these produce an agitation in the mind, and transfuse themselves into
the predominant passion.

There is not in my opinion any other natural cause, why security
diminishes the passions, than because it removes that uncertainty, which
encreases them. The mind, when left to itself, immediately languishes;
and in order to preserve its ardour, must be every moment supported by a
new flow of passion. For the same reason, despair, though contrary to
security, has a like influence.

It is certain nothing more powerfully animates any affection, than to
conceal some part of its object by throwing it into a kind of shade,
which at the same time that it chews enough to pre-possess us in favour
of the object, leaves still some work for the imagination. Besides that
obscurity is always attended with a kind of uncertainty; the effort,
which the fancy makes to compleat the idea, rouzes the spirits, and gives
an additional force to the passion.

As despair and security, though contrary to each other, produce the same
effects; so absence is observed to have contrary effects, and in
different circumstances either encreases or diminishes our affections.
The Duc de La Rochefoucault has very well observed, that absence destroys
weak passions, but encreases strong; as the wind extinguishes a candle,
but blows up a fire. Long absence naturally weakens our idea, and
diminishes the passion: But where the idea is so strong and lively as to
support itself, the uneasiness, arising from absence, encreases the
passion and gives it new force and violence.



SECT. V  OF THE EFFECTS OF CUSTOM


But nothing has a greater effect both to encrease and diminish our
passions, to convert pleasure into pain, and pain into pleasure, than
custom and repetition. Custom has two original effects upon the mind, in
bestowing a facility in the performance of any action or the conception
of any object; and afterwards a tendency or inclination towards it; and
from these we may account for all its other effects, however
extraordinary.

When the soul applies itself to the performance of any action, or the
conception of any object, to which it is not accustomed, there is a
certain unpliableness in the faculties, and a difficulty of the spirit's
moving in their new direction. As this difficulty excites the spirits,
it is the source of wonder, surprize, and of all the emotions, which arise
from novelty; and is in itself very agreeable, like every thing, which
inlivens the mind to a moderate degree. But though surprize be agreeable
in itself, yet as it puts the spirits in agitation, it not only augments
our agreeable affections, but also our painful, according to the foregoing
principle, that every emotion, which precedes or attends a passion, is
easily converted into it. Hence every thing, that is new, is most
affecting, and gives us either more pleasure or pain, than what, strictly
speaking, naturally belongs to it. When it often returns upon us, the
novelty wears off; the passions subside; the hurry of the spirits is
over; and we survey the objects with greater tranquillity.

By degrees the repetition produces a facility of the human mind, and an
infallible source of pleasure, where the facility goes not beyond a
certain degree. And here it is remarkable that the pleasure, which arises
from a moderate facility, has not the same tendency with that which
arises from novelty, to augment the painful, as well as the agreeable
affections. The pleasure of facility does not so much consist in any
ferment of the spirits, as in their orderly motion; which will sometimes
be so powerful as even to convert pain into pleasure, and give us a
relish in time what at first was most harsh and disagreeable.

But again, as facility converts pain into pleasure, so it often converts
pleasure into pain, when it is too great, and renders the actions of the
mind so faint and languid, that they are no longer able to interest and
support it. And indeed, scarce any other objects become disagreeable
through custom; but such as are naturally attended with some emotion or
affection, which is destroyed by the too frequent repetition. One can
consider the clouds, and heavens, and trees, and stones, however
frequently repeated, without ever feeling any aversion. But when the fair
sex, or music, or good cheer, or any thing, that naturally ought to be
agreeable, becomes indifferent, it easily produces the opposite
affection.

But custom not only gives a facility to perform any action, but likewise
an inclination and tendency towards it, where it is not entirely
disagreeable, and can never be the object of inclination. And this is the
reason why custom encreases all active habits, but diminishes passive,
according to the observation of a late eminent philosopher. The facility
takes off from the force of the passive habits by rendering the motion of
the spirits faint and languid. But as in the active, the spirits are
sufficiently supported of themselves, the tendency of the mind gives them
new force, and bends them more strongly to the action.



SECT. VI  OF THE INFLUENCE OF THE IMAGINATION ON THE PASSIONS


It is remarkable, that the imagination and affections have close union
together, and that nothing, which affects the former, can be entirely
indifferent to the latter. Wherever our ideas of good or evil acquire a
new vivacity, the passions become more violent; and keep pace with the
imagination in all its variations. Whether this proceeds from the
principle above-mentioned, that any attendant emotion is easily converted
into the predominant, I shall not determine. It is sufficient for my
present purpose, that we have many instances to confirm this influence of
the imagination upon the passions.

Any pleasure, with which we are acquainted, affects us more than any
other, which we own to be superior, but of whose nature we are wholly
ignorant. Of the one we can form a particular and determinate idea: The
other we conceive under the general notion of pleasure; and it is certain,
that the more general and universal any of our ideas are, the less
influence they have upon the imagination. A general idea, though it be
nothing but a particular one considered in a certain view, is commonly
more obscure; and that because no particular idea, by which we represent
a general one, is ever fixed or determinate, but may easily be changed
for other particular ones, which will serve equally in the
representation.

There is a noted passage in the history of Greece, which may serve for
our present purpose. Themistocles told the Athenians, that he had formed
a design, which would be highly useful to the public, but which it was
impossible for him to communicate to them without ruining the execution,
since its success depended entirely on the secrecy with which it should
be conducted. The Athenians, instead of granting him full power to act as
he thought fitting, ordered him to communicate his design to Aristides,
in whose prudence they had an entire confidence, and whose opinion they
were resolved blindly to submit to. The design of Themistocles was
secretly to set fire to the fleet of all the Grecian commonwealths, which
was assembled in a neighbouring port, and which being once destroyed
would give the Athenians the empire of the sea without any rival
Aristides returned to the assembly, and told them, that nothing coued be
more advantageous than the design of Themistocles but at the same time
that nothing coued be more unjust: Upon which the people unanimously
rejected the project.

A late celebrated historian [Mons. Rollin {Charles Rollin,
HISTOIRE ANCIENNE.(Paris 1730-38)}.] admires this passage of antient
history, as one of the most singular that is any where to be met.

"Here," says he, "they are not philosophers, to whom it is easy in their
schools to establish the finest maxims and most sublime rules of
morality, who decide that interest ought never to prevail above justice.
It is a whole people interested in the proposal. which is made to them,
who consider it as of importance to the public good, and who
notwithstanding reject it unanimously, and without hesitation, merely
because it is contrary to justice."

For my part I see nothing so extraordinary in this proceeding of the
Athenians. The same reasons, which render it so easy for philosophers to
establish these sublime maxims, tend, in part, to diminish the merit of
such a conduct in that people. Philosophers never ballance betwixt profit
and honesty, because their decisions are general, and neither their
passions nor imaginations are interested in the objects. And though in the
present case the advantage was immediate to the Athenians, yet as it was
known only under the general notion of advantage, without being conceived
by any particular idea, it must have had a less considerable influence on
their imaginations, and have been a less violent temptation, than if they
had been acquainted with all its circumstances: Otherwise it is difficult
to conceive, that a whole people, unjust and violent as men commonly are,
should so unanimously have adhered to justice, and rejected any
considerable advantage.

Any satisfaction, which we lately enjoyed, and of which the memory is
fresh and recent, operates on the will with more violence, than another
of which the traces are decayed, and almost obliterated. From whence does
this proceed, but that the memory in the first case assists the fancy.
and gives an additional force and vigour to its conceptions? The image of
the past pleasure being strong and violent, bestows these qualities on
the idea of the future pleasure, which is connected with it by the
relation of resemblance.

A pleasure, which is suitable to the way of life, in which we are
engaged, excites more our desires and appetites than another, which is
foreign to it. This phaenomenon may be explained from the same principle.

Nothing is more capable of infusing any passion into the mind, than
eloquence, by which objects are represented in their strongest and most
lively colours. We may of ourselves acknowledge, that such an object is
valuable, and such another odious; but until an orator excites the
imagination, and gives force to these ideas, they may have but a feeble
influence either on the will or the affections.

But eloquence is not always necessary. The bare opinion of another,
especially when inforced with passion, will cause an idea of good or evil
to have an influence upon us, which would otherwise have been entirely
neglected. This proceeds from the principle of sympathy or communication;
and sympathy, as I have already observed, is nothing but the conversion
of an idea into an impression by the force of imagination.

It is remarkable, that lively passions commonly attend a lively
imagination. In this respect, as well as others, the force of the passion
depends as much on the temper of the person, as the nature or situation
of the object.

I have already observed, that belief is nothing but a lively idea related
to a present impression. This vivacity is a requisite circumstance to the
exciting all our passions, the calm as well as the violent; nor has a
mere fiction of the imagination any considerable influence upon either of
them. It is too weak to take hold of the mind, or be attended with
emotion.



SECT. VII  OF CONTIGUITY AND DISTANCE IN SPACE AND TIME


There is an easy reason, why every thing contiguous to us, either in
space or time, should be conceived with a peculiar force and vivacity,
and excel every other object, in its influence on the imagination.
Ourself is intimately present to us, and whatever is related to self must
partake of that quality. But where an object is so far removed as to have
lost the advantage of this relation, why, as it is farther removed, its
idea becomes still fainter and more obscure, would, perhaps, require a
more particular examination.

It is obvious, that the imagination can never totally forget the points of
space and time, in which we are existent; but receives such frequent
advertisements of them from the passions and senses, that however it may
turn its attention to foreign and remote objects, it is necessitated
every moment to reflect on the present. IOt is also remarkable, that in
the conception of those objects, which we regard as real and existent, we
take them in their proper order and situation, and never leap from one
object to another, which is distant from it, without running over, at
least in a cursory manner, all those objects, which are interposed
betwixt them. When we reflect, therefore, on any object distant from
ourselves, we are obliged not only to reach it at first by passing through
all the intermediate space betwixt ourselves and the object, but also to
renew our progress every moment; being every moment recalled to the
consideration of ourselves and our present situation. It is easily
conceived, that this interruption must weaken the idea by breaking the
action of the mind, and hindering the conception from being so intense
and continued, as when we reflect on a nearer object. The fewer steps we
make to arrive at the object, and the smoother the road is, this
diminution of vivacity is less sensibly felt, but still may be observed
more or less in proportion to the degrees of distance and difficulty.

Here then we are to consider two kinds of objects, the contiguous and
remote; of which the former, by means of their relation to ourselves,
approach an impression in force and vivacity; the latter by reason of the
interruption in our manner of conceiving them, appear in a weaker and
more imperfect light. This is their effect on the imagination. If my
reasoning be just, they must have a proportionable effect on the will and
passions. Contiguous objects must have an influence much superior to the
distant and remote. Accordingly we find in common life, that men are
principally concerned about those objects, which are not much removed
either in space or time, enjoying the present, and leaving what is afar
off to the care of chance and fortune. Talk to a man of his condition
thirty years hence, and he will not regard you. Speak of what is to
happen tomorrow, and he will lend you attention. The breaking of a mirror
gives us more concern when at home, than the burning of a house, when
abroad, and some hundred leagues distant.

But farther; though distance both in space and time has a considerable
effect on the imagination, and by that means on the will and passions,
yet the consequence of a removal in space are much inferior to those of a
removal in time. Twenty years are certainly but a small distance of time
in comparison of what history and even the memory of some may inform them
of, and yet I doubt if a thousand leagues, or even the greatest distance
of place this globe can admit of, will so remarkably weaken our ideas,
and diminish our passions. A West-Indian merchant will tell you, that he
is not without concern about what passes in Jamaica; though few extend
their views so far into futurity, as to dread very remote accidents.

The cause of this phaenomenon must evidently lie in the different
properties of space and time. Without having recourse to metaphysics, any
one may easily observe, that space or extension consists of a number of
co-existent parts disposed in a certain order, and capable of being at
once present to the sight or feeling. On the contrary, time or succession,
though it consists likewise of parts, never presents to us more
than one at once; nor is it possible for any two of them ever to be
co-existent. These qualities of the objects have a suitable effect on the
imagination. The parts of extension being susceptible of an union to the
senses, acquire an union in the fancy; and as the appearance of one part
excludes not another, the transition or passage of the thought through the
contiguous parts is by that means rendered more smooth and easy. On the
other hand, the incompatibility of the parts of time in their real
existence separates them in the imagination, and makes it more difficult
for that faculty to trace any long succession or series of events. Every
part must appear single and alone, nor can regularly have entrance into
the fancy without banishing what is supposed to have been immediately
precedent. By this means any distance in time causes a greater
interruption in the thought than an equal distance in space, and
consequently weakens more considerably the idea, and consequently the
passions; which depend in a great measure, on the imagination, according
to my system.

There is another phaenomenon of a like nature with the foregoing, viz,
the superior effects of the same distance in futurity above that in the
past. This difference with respect to the will is easily accounted for.
As none of our actions can alter the past, it is not strange it should
never determine the will. But with respect to the passions the question
is yet entire, and well worth the examining.

Besides the propensity to a gradual progression through the points of space
and time, we have another peculiarity in our method of thinking, which
concurs in producing this phaenomenon. We always follow the succession of
time in placing our ideas, and from the consideration of any object pass
more easily to that, which follows immediately after it, than to that
which went before it. We may learn this, among other instances, from the
order, which is always observed in historical narrations. Nothing but an
absolute necessity can oblige an historian to break the order of time,
and in his narration give the precedence to an event, which was in
reality posterior to another.

This will easily be applied to the question in hand, if we reflect on
what I have before observed, that the present situation of the person is
always that of the imagination, and that it is from thence we proceed to
the conception of any distant object. When the object is past, the
progression of the thought in passing to it from the present is contrary
to nature, as proceeding from one point of time to that which is
preceding, and from that to another preceding, in opposition to the
natural course of the succession. On the other hand, when we turn our
thought to a future object, our fancy flows along the stream of time, and
arrives at the object by an order, which seems most natural, passing
always from one point of time to that which is immediately posterior to
it. This easy progression of ideas favours the imagination, and makes it
conceive its object in a stronger and fuller light, than when we are
continually opposed in our passage, and are obliged to overcome the
difficulties arising from the natural propensity of the fancy. A small
degree of distance in the past has, therefore, a greater effect, in
interupting and weakening the conception, than a much greater in the
future. From this effect of it on the imagination is derived its
influence on the will and passions.

There is another cause, which both contributes to the same effect, and
proceeds from the same quality of the fancy, by which we are determined
to trace the succession of time by a similar succession of ideas. When
from the present instant we consider two points of time equally distant
in the future and in the past, it is evident, that, abstractedly
considered, their relation to the present is almost equal. For as the
future will sometime be present, so the past was once present. If we
coued, therefore, remove this quality of the imagination, an equal
distance in the past and in the future, would have a similar influence.
Nor is this only true, when the fancy remains fixed, and from the present
instant surveys the future and the past; but also when it changes its
situation, and places us in different periods of time. For as on the one
hand, in supposing ourselves existent in a point of time interposed
betwixt the present instant and the future object, we find the future
object approach to us, and the past retire, and become more distant: so
on the other hand, in supposing ourselves existent in a point of time
interposed betwixt the present and the past, the past approaches to us,
and the future becomes more distant. But from the property of the fancy
above-mentioned we rather chuse to fix our thought on the point of time
interposed betwixt the present and the future, than on that betwixt the
present and the past. We advance, rather than retard our existence; and
following what seems the natural succession of time, proceed from past to
present, and from present to future. By which means we conceive the
future as flowing every moment nearer us, and the past as retiring. An
equal distance, therefore, in the past and in the future, has not the
same effect on the imagination; and that because we consider the one as
continually encreasing, and the other as continually diminishing. The
fancy anticipates the course of things, and surveys the object in that
condition, to which it tends, as well as in that, which is regarded as
the present.



SECT. VIII  THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUed


Thus we have accounted for three phaenomena, which seem pretty
remarkable. Why distance weakens the conception and passion: Why distance
in time has a greater effect than that in space: And why distance in past
time has still a greater effect than that in future. We must now consider
three phaenomena, which seem to be, in a manner, the reverse of these:
Why a very great distance encreases our esteem and admiration for an
object; Why such a distance in time encreases it more than that in space:
And a distance in past time more than that in future. The curiousness of
the subject will, I hope, excuse my dwelling on it for some time.

To begin with the first phaenomenon, why a great distance encreases our
esteem and admiration for an object; it is evident that the mere view and
contemplation of any greatness, whether successive or extended, enlarges
the soul, and give it a sensible delight and pleasure. A wide plain, the
ocean, eternity, a succession of several ages; all these are entertaining
objects, and excel every thing, however beautiful, which accompanies not
its beauty with a suitable greatness. Now when any very distant object is
presented to the imagination, we naturally reflect on the interposed
distance, and by that means, conceiving something great and magnificent,
receive the usual satisfaction. But as the fancy passes easily from one
idea to another related to it, and transports to the second all the
passions excited by the first, the admiration, which is directed to the
distance, naturally diffuses itself over the distant object. Accordingly
we find, that it is not necessary the object should be actually distant
from us, in order to cause our admiration; but that it is sufficient, if,
by the natural association of ideas, it conveys our view to any
considerable distance. A great traveller, though in the same chamber, will
pass for a very extraordinary person; as a Greek medal, even in our
cabinet, is always esteemed a valuable curiosity. Here the object, by a
natural transition, conveys our views to the distance; and the
admiration, which arises from that distance, by another natural
transition, returns back to the object.

But though every great distance produces an admiration for the distant
object, a distance in time has a more considerable effect than that in
space. Antient busts and inscriptions are more valued than Japan tables:
And not to mention the Greeks and Romans, it is certain we regard with
more veneration the old Chaldeans and Egyptians, than the modem Chinese
and Persians, and bestow more fruitless pains to dear up the history and
chronology of the former, than it would cost us to make a voyage, and be
certainly informed of the character, learning and government of the
latter. I shall be obliged to make a digression in order to explain this
phaenomenon.

It is a quality very observable in human nature, that any opposition,
which does not entirely discourage and intimidate us, has rather a
contrary effect, and inspires us with a more than ordinary grandeur and
magnanimity. In collecting our force to overcome the opposition, we
invigorate the soul, and give it an elevation with which otherwise it
would never have been acquainted. Compliance, by rendering our strength
useless, makes us insensible of it: but opposition awakens and employs it.

This is also true in the universe. Opposition not only enlarges the soul;
but the soul, when full of courage and magnanimity, in a manner seeks
opposition.


SPUMANTEMQUE DARI PECORA INTER INERTIA VOTIS
OPTAT APRUM, AUT FULVUM DESCENDERE MONTE LEONEM.

[And, among the tamer beasts, [he] longs to be granted, in answer to his
prayers, a slavering boar, or to have a tawny lion come down from the
mountain.]


Whatever supports and fills the passions is agreeable to us; as on the
contrary, what weakens and infeebles them is uneasy. As opposition has
the first effect, and facility the second, no wonder the mind, in certain
dispositions, desires the former, and is averse to the latter.

These principles have an effect on the imagination as well as on the
passions. To be convinced of this we need only consider the influence of
heights and depths on that faculty. Any great elevation of place
communicates a kind of pride or sublimity of imagination, and gives a
fancyed superiority over those that lie below; and, vice versa, a sublime
and strong imagination conveys the idea of ascent and elevation. Hence it
proceeds, that we associate, in a manner, the idea of whatever is good
with that of height, and evil with low. ness. Heaven is supposed to be
above, and hell below. A noble genius is called an elevate and sublime
one. ATQUE UDAM SPERNIT HUMUM FUGIENTE PENNA. [Spurns the dank soil in
winged flight.] On the contrary, a vulgar and trivial conception is
stiled indifferently low or mean. Prosperity is denominated ascent, and
adversity descent. Kings and princes are supposed to be placed at the top
of human affairs; as peasants and day-labourers are said to be in the
lowest stations. These methods of thinking, and of expressing ourselves,
are not of so little consequence as they may appear at first sight.

It is evident to common sense, as well as philosophy, that there is no
natural nor essential difference betwixt high and low, and that this
distinction arises only from the gravitation of matter, which produces a
motion from the one to the other. The very same direction, which in this
part of the globe is called ascent, is denominated descent in our
antipodes; which can proceed from nothing but the contrary tendency of
bodies. Now it is certain, that the tendency of bodies, continually
operating upon our senses, must produce, from custom, a like tendency in
the fancy, and that when we consider any object situated in an ascent,
the idea of its weight gives us a propensity to transport it from the
place, in which it is situated, to the place immediately below it, and so
on, until we come to the ground, which equally stops the body and our
imagination. For a like reason we feel a difficulty in mounting, and pass
not without a kind of reluctance from the inferior to that which is
situated above it; as if our ideas acquired a kind of gravity from their
objects. As a proof of this, do we not find, that the facility, which is
so much studyed in music and poetry, is called the fail or cadency of the
harmony or period; the idea of facility communicating to us that of
descent, in the same manner as descent produces a facility?

Since the imagination, therefore, in running from low to high, finds an
opposition in its internal qualities and principles, and since the soul,
when elevated with joy and courage, in a manner seeks opposition, and
throws itself with alacrity into any scene of thought or action, where
its courage meets with matter to nourish and employ it; it follows, that
everything, which invigorates and inlivens the soul, whether by touching
the passions or imagination. naturally conveys to the fancy this
inclination for ascent, and determines it to run against the natural
stream of its thoughts and conceptions. This aspiring progress of the
imagination suits the present disposition of the mind; and the
difficulty, instead of extinguishing its vigour and alacrity, has the
contrary affect, of sustaining and encreasing it. Virtue, genius, power,
and riches are for this reason associated with height and sublimity; as
poverty, slavery, and folly are conjoined with descent and lowness. Were
the case the same with us as Milton represents it to be with the angels,
to whom descent is adverse, and who cannot sink without labour and
compulsion, this order of things would be entirely inverted; as appears
hence, that the very nature of ascent and descent is derived from the
difficulty and propensity, and consequently every one of their effects
proceeds from that origin.

All this is easily applied to the present question, why a considerable
distance in time produces a greater veneration for the distant objects
than a like removal in space. The imagination moves with more difficulty
in passing from one portion of time to another, than in a transition
through the parts of space; and that because space or extension appears
united to our senses, while time or succession is always broken and
divided. This difficulty, when joined with a small distance, interrupts
and weakens the fancy: But has a contrary effect in a great removal. The
mind, elevated by the vastness of its object, is still farther elevated
by the difficulty of the conception; and being obliged every moment to
renew its efforts in the transition from one part of time to another,
feels a more vigorous and sublime disposition, than in a transition
through the parts of space, where the ideas flow along with easiness and
facility. In this disposition, the imagination, passing, as is usual,
from the consideration of the distance to the view of the distant
objects, gives us a proportionable veneration for it; and this is the
reason why all the relicts of antiquity are so precious in our eyes, and
appear more valuable than what is brought even from the remotest parts of
the world.

The third phaenomenon I have remarked will be a full confirmation of
this. It is not every removal in time, which has the effect of producing
veneration and esteem. We are not apt to imagine our posterity will excel
us, or equal our ancestors. This phaenomenon is the more remarkable,
because any distance in futurity weakens not our ideas so much as an
equal removal in the past. Though a removal in the past, when very great,
encreases our passions beyond a like removal in the future, yet a small
removal has a greater influence in diminishing them.

In our common way of thinking we are placed in a kind of middle station
betwixt the past and future; and as our imagination finds a kind of
difficulty in running along the former, and a facility in following the
course of the latter, the difficulty conveys the notion of ascent, and
the facility of the contrary. Hence we imagine our ancestors to be, in a
manner, mounted above us, and our posterity to lie below us. Our fancy
arrives not at the one without effort, but easily reaches the other:
Which effort weakens the conception, where the distance is small; but
enlarges and elevates the imagination, when attended with a suitable
object. As on the other hand, the facility assists the fancy in a small
removal, but takes off from its force when it contemplates any
considerable distance.

It may not be improper, before we leave this subject of the will, to
resume, in a few words, all that has been said concerning it, in order to
set the whole more distinctly before the eyes of the reader. What we
commonly understand by passion is a violent and sensible emotion of mind,
when any good or evil is presented, or any object, which, by the original
formation of our faculties, is fitted to excite an appetite. By reason we
mean affections of the very same kind with the former; but such as
operate more calmly, and cause no disorder in the temper: Which
tranquillity leads us into a mistake concerning them, and causes us to
regard them as conclusions only of our intellectual faculties. Both the
causes and effects of these violent and calm passions are pretty
variable, and depend, in a great measure, on the peculiar temper and
disposition of every individual. Generally speaking, the violent passions
have a more powerful influence on the will; though it is often found, that
the calm ones, when corroborated by reflection, and seconded by
resolution, are able to controul them in their most furious movements.
What makes this whole affair more uncertain, is, that a calm passion may
easily be changed into a violent one, either by a change of temper, or of
the circumstances and situation of the object, as by the borrowing of
force from any attendant passion, by custom, or by exciting the
imagination. Upon the whole, this struggle of passion and of reason, as
it is called, diversifies human life, and makes men so different not only
from each other, but also from themselves in different times. Philosophy
can only account for a few of the greater and more sensible events of
this war; but must leave all the smaller and more delicate revolutions,
as dependent on principles too fine and minute for her comprehension.



SECT. IX  OF THE DIRECT PASSIONS


It is easy to observe, that the passions, both direct and indirect, are
founded on pain and pleasure, and that in order to produce an affection
of any kind, it is only requisite to present some good or evil. Upon the
removal of pain and pleasure there immediately follows a removal of love
and hatred, pride and humility, desire and aversion, and of most of our
reflective or secondary impressions.

The impressions, which arise from good and evil most naturally, and with
the least preparation are the direct passions of desire and aversion,
grief and joy, hope and fear, along with volition. The mind by an
original instinct tends to unite itself with the good, and to avoid the
evil, though they be conceived merely in idea, and be considered as to
exist in any future period of time.

But supposing that there is an immediate impression of pain or pleasure,
and that arising from an object related to ourselves or others, this does
not prevent the propensity or aversion, with the consequent emotions, but
by concurring with certain dormant principles of the human mind, excites
the new impressions of pride or humility, love or hatred. That
propensity, which unites us to the object, or separates us from it, still
continues to operate, but in conjunction with the indirect passions,
which arise from a double relation of impressions and ideas.

These indirect passions, being always agreeable or uneasy, give in their
turn additional force to the direct passions, and encrease our desire and
aversion to the object. Thus a suit of fine cloaths produces pleasure
from their beauty; and this pleasure produces the direct passions, or the
impressions of volition and desire. Again, when these cloaths are
considered as belonging to ourself, the double relation conveys to us the
sentiment of pride, which is an indirect passion; and the pleasure, which
attends that passion, returns back to the direct affections, and gives
new force to our desire or volition, joy or hope.

When good is certain or probable, it produces joy. When evil is in the
same situation there arises GRIEF or SORROW.

When either good or evil is uncertain, it gives rise to FEAR or HOPE,
according to the degrees of uncertainty on the one side or the other.

DESIRE arises from good considered simply, and AVERSION is derived from
evil. The WILL exerts itself, when either the good or the absence of the
evil may be attained by any action of the mind or body.

Beside good and evil, or in other words, pain and pleasure, the direct
passions frequently arise from a natural impulse or instinct, which is
perfectly unaccountable. Of this kind is the desire of punishment to our
enemies, and of happiness to our friends; hunger, lust, and a few other
bodily appetites. These passions, properly speaking, produce good and
evil, and proceed not from them, like the other affections.

None of the direct affections seem to merit our particular attention,
except hope and fear, which we shall here endeavour to account for. It is
evident that the very same event, which by its certainty would produce
grief or joy, gives always rise to fear or hope, when only probable and
uncertain. In order, therefore, to understand the reason why this
circumstance makes such a considerable difference, we must reflect on
what I have already advanced in the preceding book concerning the nature
of probability.

Probability arises from an opposition of contrary chances or causes, by
which the mind is not allowed to fix on either side, but is incessantly
tost from one to another, and at one moment is determined to consider an
object as existent, and at another moment as the contrary. The
imagination or understanding, call it which you please, fluctuates
betwixt the opposite views; and though perhaps it may be oftener turned to
the one side than the other, it is impossible for it, by reason of the
opposition of causes or chances, to rest on either. The pro and con of
the question alternately prevail; and the mind, surveying the object in
its opposite principles, finds such a contrariety as utterly destroys all
certainty and established opinion.

Suppose, then, that the object, concerning whose reality we are doubtful,
is an object either of desire or aversion, it is evident, that, according
as the mind turns itself either to the one side or the other, it must
feel a momentary impression of joy or sorrow. An object, whose existence
we desire, gives satisfaction, when we reflect on those causes, which
produce it; and for the same reason excites grief or uneasiness from the
opposite consideration: So that as the understanding, in all probable
questions, is divided betwixt the contrary points of view, the affections
must in the same manner be divided betwixt opposite emotions.

Now if we consider the human mind, we shall find, that with regard to the
passions, it is not the nature of a wind-instrument of music, which in
running over all the notes immediately loses the sound after the breath
ceases; but rather resembles a string-instrument, where after each stroke
the vibrations still retain some sound, which gradually and insensibly
decays. The imagination is extreme quick and agile; but the passions are
slow and restive: For which reason, when any object is presented, that
affords a variety of views to the one, and emotions to the other; though
the fancy may change its views with great celerity; each stroke will not
produce a clear and distinct note of passion, but the one passion will
always be mixt and confounded with the other. According as the
probability inclines to good or evil, the passion of joy or sorrow
predominates in the composition: Because the nature of probability is to
cast a superior number of views or chances on one side; or, which is the
same thing, a superior number of returns of one passion; or since the
dispersed passions are collected into one, a superior degree of that
passion. That is, in other words, the grief and joy being intermingled
with each other, by means of the contrary views of the imagination,
produce by their union the passions of hope and fear.

Upon this head there may be started a very curious question concerning
that contrariety of passions, which is our present subject. It is
observable, that where the objects of contrary passions are presented at
once, beside the encrease of the predominant passion (which has been
already explained, and commonly arises at their first shock or
rencounter) it sometimes happens, that both the passions exist
successively, and by short intervals; sometimes, that they destroy each
other, and neither of them takes place; and sometimes that both of them
remain united in the mind. It may, therefore, be asked, by what theory we
can explain these variations, and to what general principle we can reduce
them.

When the contrary passions arise from objects entirely different, they
take place alternately, the want of relation in the ideas separating the
impressions from each other, and preventing their opposition. Thus when a
man is afflicted for the loss of a law-suit, and joyful for the birth of
a son, the mind running from the agreeable to the calamitous object, with
whatever celerity it may perform this motion, can scarcely temper the one
affection with the other, and remain betwixt them in a state of
indifference.

It more easily attains that calm situation, when the same event is of a
mixt nature, and contains something adverse and something prosperous in
its different circumstances. For in that case, both the passions,
mingling with each other by means of the relation, become mutually
destructive, and leave the mind in perfect tranquility.

But suppose, in the third place, that the object is not a compound of
good or evil, but is considered as probable or improbable in any degree;
in that case I assert, that the contrary passions will both of them be
present at once in the soul, and instead of destroying and tempering each
other, will subsist together, and produce a third impression or affection
by their union. Contrary passions are not capable of destroying each
other, except when their contrary movements exactly rencounter, and are
opposite in their direction, as well as in the sensation they produce.
This exact rencounter depends upon the relations of those ideas, from
which they are derived, and is more or less perfect, according to the
degrees of the relation. In the case of probability the contrary chances
are so far related, that they determine concerning the existence or
non-existence of the same object. But this relation is far from being
perfect; since some of the chances lie on the side of existence, and
others on that of non-existence; which are objects altogether
incompatible. It is impossible by one steady view to survey the opposite
chances, and the events dependent on them; but it is necessary, that the
imagination should run alternately from the one to the other. Each view
of the imagination produces its peculiar passion, which decays away by
degrees, and is followed by a sensible vibration after the stroke. The
incompatibility of the views keeps the passions from shocking in a direct
line, if that expression may be allowed; and yet their relation is
sufficient to mingle their fainter emotions. It is after this manner that
hope and fear arise from the different mixture of these opposite passions
of grief and joy, and from their imperfect union and conjunction.

Upon the whole, contrary passions succeed each other alternately, when
they arise from different objects: They mutually destroy each other, when
they proceed from different parts of the same: And they subsist both of
them. and mingle together, when they are derived from the contrary and
incompatible chances or possibilities, on which any one object depends.
The influence of the relations of ideas is plainly seen in this whole
affair. If the objects of the contrary passions be totally different, the
passions are like two opposite liquors in different bottles, which have
no influence on each other. If the objects be intimately connected, the
passions are like an alcali and an acid, which, being mingled, destroy
each other. If the relation be more imperfect, and consists in the
contradictory views of the same object, the passions are like oil and
vinegar, which, however mingled, never perfectly unite and incorporate.

As the hypothesis concerning hope and fear carries its own evidence along
with it, we shall be the more concise in our proofs. A few strong
arguments are better than many weak ones.

The passions of fear and hope may arise when the chances are equal on
both sides, and no superiority can be discovered in the one above the
other. Nay, in this situation the passions are rather the strongest, as
the mind has then the least foundation to rest upon, and is tossed with
the greatest uncertainty. Throw in a superior degree of probability to
the side of grief, you immediately see that passion diffuse itself over
the composition, and tincture it into fear. Encrease the probability, and
by that means the grief, the fear prevails still more and more, till at
last it runs insensibly, as the joy continually diminishes, into pure
grief. After you have brought it to this situation, diminish the grief,
after the same manner that you encreased it; by diminishing the
probability on that side, and you'll see the passion clear every moment,
until it changes insensibly into hope; which again runs, after the same
manner, by slow degrees, into joy, as you encrease that part of the
composition by the encrease of the probability. Are not these as plain
proofs, that the passions of fear and hope are mixtures of grief and joy,
as in optics it is a proof, that a coloured ray of the sun passing through
a prism, is a composition of two others, when, as you diminish or encrease
the quantity of either, you find it prevail proportionably more or less
in the composition? I am sure neither natural nor moral philosophy admits
of stronger proofs.

Probability is of two kinds, either when the object is really in itself
uncertain, and to be determined by chance; or when, though the object be
already certain, yet it is uncertain to our judgment, which finds a number
of proofs on each side of the question. Both these kinds of probabilities
cause fear and hope; which can only proceed from that property, in which
they agree, viz, the uncertainty and fluctuation they bestow on the
imagination by that contrariety of views, which is common to both.

It is a probable good or evil, that commonly produces hope or fear;
because probability, being a wavering and unconstant method of surveying
an object, causes naturally a like mixture and uncertainty of passion.
But we may observe, that wherever from other causes this mixture can be
produced, the passions of fear and hope will arise, even though there be
no probability; which must be allowed to be a convincing proof of the
present hypothesis. We find that an evil, barely conceived as possible,
does sometimes produce fear; especially if the evil be very great. A man
cannot think of excessive pains and tortures without trembling, if he be
in the least danger of suffering them. The smallness of the probability
is compensated by the greatness of the evil; and the sensation is equally
lively, as if the evil were more probable. One view or glimpse of the
former, has the same effect as several of the latter.

But they are not only possible evils, that cause fear, but even some
allowed to be impossible; as when we tremble on the brink of a precipice,
though we know ourselves to be in perfect security, and have it in our
choice whether we wili advance a step farther. This proceeds from the
immediate presence of the evil, which influences the imagination in the
same manner as the certainty of it would do; but being encountered by the
reflection on our security, is immediately retracted, and causes the same
kind of passion, as when from a contrariety of chances contrary passions
are produced.

Evils, that are certain, have sometimes the same effect in producing
fear, as the possible or impossible. Thus a man in a strong prison
well-guarded, without the least means of escape, trembles at the thought
of the rack, to which he is sentenced. This happens only when the certain
evil is terrible and confounding; in which case the mind continually
rejects it with horror, while it continually presses in upon the thought.
The evil is there flxed and established, but the mind cannot endure to
fix upon it; from which fluctuation and uncertainty there arises a
passion of much the same appearance with fear.

But it is not only where good or evil is uncertain, as to its existence,
but also as to its kind, that fear or hope arises. Let one be told by a
person, whose veracity he cannot doubt of, that one of his sons is
suddenly killed, it is evident the passion this event would occasion,
would not settle into pure grief, till he got certain information, which
of his sons he had lost. Here there is an evil certain, but the kind of
it uncertain. Consequently the fear we feel on this occasion is without
the least mixture of joy, and arises merely from the fluctuation of the
fancy betwixt its objects. And though each side of the question produces
here the same passion, yet that passion cannot settle, but receives from
the imagination a tremulous and unsteady motion, resembling in its cause,
as well as in its sensation, the mixture and contention of grief and joy.

From these principles we may account for a phaenomenon in the passions,
which at first sight seems very extraordinary, viz, that surprize is apt
to change into fear, and every thing that is unexpected affrights us. The
most obvious conclusion from this is, that human nature is in general
pusillanimous; since upon the sudden appearance of any object. we
immediately conclude it to be an evil, and without waiting till we can
examine its nature, whether it be good or bad, are at first affected with
fear. This I say is the most obvious conclusion; but upon farther
examination we shall find that the phaenomenon is otherwise to be
accounted for. The suddenness and strangeness of an appearance naturally
excite a commotion in the mind, like every thing for which we are not
prepared, and to which we are not accustomed. This commotion, again,
naturally produces a curiosity or inquisitiveness, which being very
violent, from the strong and sudden impulse of the object, becomes
uneasy, and resembles in its fluctuation and uncertainty, the sensation
of fear or the mixed passions of grief and joy. This image of fear
naturally converts into the thing itself, and gives us a real
apprehension of evil, as the mind always forms its judgments more from
its present disposition than from the nature of its objects.

Thus all kinds of uncertainty have a strong connexion with fear, even
though they do not cause any opposition of passions by the opposite views
and considerations they present to us. A person, who has left his friend
in any malady, will feel more anxiety upon his account, than if he were
present, though perhaps he is not only incapable of giving him assistance,
but likewise of judging of the event of his sickness. In this case, though
the principal object of the passion, viz, the life or death of his
friend, be to him equally uncertain when present as when absent; yet
there are a thousand little circumstances of his friend's situation and
condition, the knowledge of which fixes the idea, and prevents that
fluctuation and uncertainty so near allyed to fear. Uncertainty is,
indeed, in one respect as near allyed to hope as to fear, since it makes
an essential part in the composition of the former passion; but the
reason, why it inclines not to that side, is, that uncertainty alone is
uneasy, and has a reladon of impressions to the uneasy passions.

It is thus our uncertainty concerning any minute circumstance relating to
a person encreases our apprehensions of his death or misfortune. Horace
has remarked this phaenomenon.


UT ASSIDENS IMPLUMI BUS PULLUS AVIS
SERPENTIUM ALLAPSUS TIRNET,
MAGIS RELICTIS; NON, UT ADSIT, AUXILI
LATURA PLUS PRESENTIBUS.

[As a bird, watching over her fledgelings, is more afraid of their being
attacked by snakes if she were to leave them even though, were she to
stay, she would not be any more capable of helping them, when they were
with her.]


But this principle of the connexion of fear with uncertainty I carry
farther, and observe that any doubt produces that passion, even though it
presents nothing to us on any side but what is good and desireable. A
virgin, on her bridalnight goes to bed full of fears and apprehensions,
though she expects nothing but pleasure of the highest kind, and what she
has long wished for. The newness and greatness of the event, the
confusion of wishes and joys so embarrass the mind, that it knows not on
what passion to fix itself; from whence arises a fluttering or
unsettledness of the spirits. which being, in some degree, uneasy, very
naturally degenerates into fear.

Thus we still find, that whatever causes any fluctuation or mixture of
passions, with any degree of uneasiness, always produces fear, or at
least a passion so like it, that they are scarcely to be distinguished.

I have here confined myself to the examination of hope and fear in their
most simple and natural situation, without considering all the variations
they may receive from the mixture of different views and reflections.
Terror, consternation, astonishment, anxiety, and other passions of that
kind, are nothing but different species and degrees of fear. It is easy to
imagine how a different situation of the object, or a different turn of
thought, may change even the sensation of a passion; and this may in
general account for all the particular sub-divisions of the other
affections, as well as of fear. Love may shew itself in the shape of
tenderness, friendship, intimacy, esteem, good-will, and in many other
appearances; which at the bottom are the same affections; and arise from
the same causes, though with a small variation, which it is not necessary
to give any particular account of. It is for this reason I have all along
confined myself to the principal passion.

The same care of avoiding prolixity is the reason why I wave the
examination of the will and direct passions, as they appear in animals;
since nothing is more evident, than that they are of the same nature, and
excited by the same causes as in human creatures. I leave this to the
reader's own observation; desiring him at the same time to consider the
additional force this bestows on the present system.



SECT. X  OF CURIOSITY, OR THE LOVE OF TRUTH


But methinks we have been not a little inattentive to run over so many
different parts of the human mind, and examine so many passions, without
taking once into the consideration that love of truth, which was the
first source of all our enquiries. Twill therefore be proper, before we
leave this subject, to bestow a few reflections on that passion, and shew
its origin in human nature. It is an affection of so peculiar a kind, that
it would have been impossible to have treated of it under any of those
heads, which we have examined, without danger of obscurity and confusion.

Truth is of two kinds, consisting either in the discovery of the
proportions of ideas, considered as such, or in the conformity of our
ideas of objects to their real existence. It is certain, that the former
species of truth, is not desired merely as truth, and that it is not the
justness of our conclusions, which alone gives the pleasure. For these
conclusions are equally just, when we discover the equality of two bodies
by a pair of compasses, as when we learn it by a mathematical
demonstration; and though in the one case the proofs be demonstrative, and
in the other only sensible, yet generally speaking, the mind acquiesces
with equal assurance in the one as in the other. And in an arithmetical
operation, where both the truth and the assurance are of the same nature,
as in the most profound algebraical problem, the pleasure is very
inconsiderable, if rather it does not degenerate into pain: Which is an
evident proof, that the satisfaction, which we sometimes receive from the
discovery of truth, proceeds not from it, merely as such, but only as
endowed with certain qualities.

The first and most considerable circumstance requisite to render truth
agreeable, is the genius and capacity, which is employed in its invention
and discovery. What is easy and obvious is never valued; and even what is
in itself difficult, if we come to the knowledge of it without
difficulty, and without any stretch of thought or judgment, is but little
regarded. We love to trace the demonstrations of mathematicians; but
should receive small entertainment from a person, who should barely
inform us of the proportions of lines and angles, though we reposed the
utmost confidence both in his judgment and veracity. In this case it is
sufficient to have ears to learn the truth. We never are obliged to fix
our attention or exert our genius; which of all other exercises of the
mind is the most pleasant and agreeable.

But though the exercise of genius be the principal source of that
satisfaction we receive from the sciences, yet I doubt, if it be alone
sufficient to give us any considerable enjoyment. The truth we discover
must also be of some importance. It is easy to multiply algebraical
problems to infinity, nor is there any end in the discovery of the
proportions of conic sections; though few mathematicians take any pleasure
in these researches, but turn their thoughts to what is more useful and
important. Now the question is, after what manner this utility and
importance operate upon us? The difficulty on this head arises from
hence, that many philosophers have consumed their time, have destroyed
their health, and neglected their fortune, in the search of such truths,
as they esteemed important and useful to the world, though it appeared
from their whole conduct and behaviour, that they were not endowed with
any share of public spirit, nor had any concern for the interests of
mankind. Were they convinced, that their discoveries were of no
consequence, they would entirely lose all relish for their studies, and
that though the consequences be entirely indifferent to them; which seems
to be a contradiction.

To remove this contradiction, we must consider, that there are certain
desires and inclinations, which go no farther than the imagination, and
are rather the faint shadows and images of passions, than any real
affections. Thus, suppose a man, who takes a survey of the fortifications
of any city; considers their strength and advantages, natural or
acquired; observes the disposition and contrivance of the bastions,
ramparts, mines, and other military works; it is plain, that in proportion
as all these are fitted to attain their ends he will receive a suitable
pleasure and satisfaction. This pleasure, as it arises from the utility,
not the form of the objects, can be no other than a sympathy with the
inhabitants, for whose security all this art is employed; though it is
possible, that this person, as a stranger or an enemy, may in his heart
have no kindness for them, or may even entertain a hatred against them.

It may indeed be objected, that such a remote sympathy is a very slight
foundation for a passion, and that so much industry and application, as
we frequently observe in philosophers, can never be derived from so
inconsiderable an original. But here I return to what I have already
remarked, that the pleasure of study conflicts chiefly in the action of
the mind, and the exercise of the genius and understanding in the
discovery or comprehension of any truth. If the importance of the truth
be requisite to compleat the pleasure, it is not on account of any
considerable addition, which of itself it brings to our enjoyment, but
only because it is, in some measure, requisite to fix our attention. When
we are careless and inattentive, the same action of the understanding has
no effect upon us, nor is able to convey any of that satisfaction, which
arises from it, when we are in another disposition.

But beside the action of the mind, which is the principal foundation of
the pleasure, there is likewise required a degree of success in the
attainment of the end, or the discovery of that truth we examine. Upon
this head I shall make a general remark, which may be useful on many
occasions, viz, that where the mind pursues any end with passion; though
that passion be not derived originally from the end, but merely from the
action and pursuit; yet by the natural course of the affections, we
acquire a concern for the end itself, and are uneasy under any
disappointment we meet with in the pursuit of it. This proceeds from the
relation and parallel direction of the passions above-mentioned.

To illustrate all this by a similar instance, I shall observe, that there
cannot be two passions more nearly resembling each other, than those of
hunting and philosophy, whatever disproportion may at first sight appear
betwixt them. It is evident, that the pleasure of hunting conflicts in the
action of the mind and body; the motion, the attention, the difficulty,
and the uncertainty. It is evident likewise, that these actions must be
attended with an idea of utility, in order to their having any effect
upon us. A man of the greatest fortune, and the farthest removed from
avarice, though he takes a pleasure in hunting after patridges and
pheasants, feels no satisfaction in shooting crows and magpies; and that
because he considers the first as fit for the table, and the other as
entirely useless. Here it is certain, that the utility or importance of
itself causes no real passion, but is only requisite to support the
imagination; and the same person, who over-looks a ten times greater
profit in any other subject, is pleased to bring home half a dozen
woodcocks or plovers, after having employed several hours in hunting
after them. To make the parallel betwixt hunting and philosophy more
compleat, we may observe, that though in both cases the end of our action
may in itself be despised, yet in the heat of the action we acquire such
an attention to this end, that we are very uneasy under any
disappointments, and are sorry when we either miss our game, or fall into
any error in our reasoning.

If we want another parallel to these affections, we may consider the
passion of gaming, which affords a pleasure from the same principles as
hunting and philosophy. It has been remarked, that the pleasure of gaming
arises not from interest alone; since many leave a sure gain for this
entertainment: Neither is it derived from the game alone; since the same
persons have no satisfaction, when they play for nothing: But proceeds
from both these causes united, though separately they have no effect. It
is here, as in certain chymical preparations, where the mixture of two
clear and transparent liquids produces a third, which is opaque and
coloured..

The interest, which we have in any game, engages our attention, without
which we can have no enjoyment, either in that or in any other action.
Our attention being once engaged, the difficulty, variety, and sudden
reverses of fortune, still farther interest us; and it is from that
concern our satisfaction arises. Human life is so tiresome a scene, and
men generally are of such indolent dispositions, that whatever amuses
them, though by a passion mixt with pain, does in the main give them a
sensible pleasure. And this pleasure is here encreased by the nature of
the objects, which being sensible, and of a narrow compass, are entered
into with facility, and are agreeable to the imagination.

The same theory, that accounts for the love of truth in mathematics and
algebra. may be extended to morals, politics, natural philosophy, and
other studies, where we consider not the other abstract relations of
ideas, but their real connexions and existence. But beside the love of
knowledge, which displays itself in the sciences, there is a certain
curiosity implanted in human nature, which is a passion derived from a
quite different principle. Some people have an insatiable desire of
knowing the actions and circumstances of their neighbours, though their
interest be no way concerned in them, and they must entirely depend on
others for their information; in which case there is no room for study or
application. Let us search for the reason of this phaenomenon.

It has been proved at large, that the influence of belief is at once to
inliven and infix any idea in the imagination, and prevent all kind of
hesitation and uncertainty about it. Both these circumstances are
advantageous. By the vivacity of the idea we interest the fancy, and
produce, though in a lesser degree, the same pleasure, which arises from a
moderate passion. As the vivacity of the idea gives pleasure, so its
certainty prevents uneasiness, by fixing one particular idea in the mind,
and keeping it from wavering in the choice of its objects. It is a quality
of human nature, which is conspicuous on many occasions, and is common
both to the mind and body, that too sudden and violent a change is
unpleasant to us, and that however any objects may in themselves be
indifferent, yet their alteration gives uneasiness. As it is the nature of
doubt to cause a variation in the thought, and transport us suddenly from
one idea to another, it must of consequence be the occasion of pain. This
pain chiefly takes place, where interest, relation, or the greatness and
novelty of any event interests us in it. It is not every matter of fact,
of which we have a curiosity to be informed; neither are they such only
as we have an interest to know. It is sufficient if the idea strikes on us
with such force, and concerns us so nearly, as to give us an uneasiness
in its instability and inconstancy. A stranger, when he arrives first at
any town, may be entirely indifferent about knowing the history and
adventures of the inhabitants; but as he becomes farther acquainted with
them, and has lived any considerable time among them, he acquires the
same curiosity as the natives. When we are reading the history of a
nation, we may have an ardent desire of clearing up any doubt or
difficulty, that occurs in it; but become careless in such researches,
when the ideas of these events are, in a great measure, obliterated.





BOOK III  OF MORALS




PART I  OF VIRTUE AND VICE IN GENERAL



SECT. I  MORAL DISTINCTIONS NOT DERIVed FROM REASON


There is an inconvenience which attends all abstruse reasoning. that it
may silence, without convincing an antagonist, and requires the same
intense study to make us sensible of its force, that was at first
requisite for its invention. When we leave our closet, and engage in the
common affairs of life, its conclusions seem to vanish, like the phantoms
of the night on the appearance of the morning; and it is difficult for us
to retain even that conviction, which we had attained with difficulty.
This is still more conspicuous in a long chain of reasoning, where we
must preserve to the end the evidence of the first propositions, and
where we often lose sight of ail the most received maxims, either of
philosophy or common life. I am not, however, without hopes, that the
present system of philosophy will acquire new force as it advances; and
that our reasonings concerning morals will corroborate whatever has been
said concerning the UNDERSTANDING and the PASSIONS. Morality is a subject
that interests us above all others: We fancy the peace of society to be
at stake in every decision concerning it; and it is evident, that this
concern must make our speculations appear more real and solid, than where
the subject is, in a great measure, indifferent to us. What affects us,
we conclude can never be a chimera; and as our passion is engaged on the
one side or the other, we naturally think that the question lies within
human comprehension; which, in other cases of this nature, we are apt to
entertain some doubt of. Without this advantage I never should have
ventured upon a third volume of such abstruse philosophy, in an age,
wherein the greatest part of men seem agreed to convert reading into an
amusement, and to reject every thing that requires any considerable
degree of attention to be comprehended.

It has been observed, that nothing is ever present to the mind but its
perceptions; and that all the actions of seeing, hearing, judging,
loving, hating, and thinking, fall under this denomination. The mind can
never exert itself in any action, which we may not comprehend under the
term of perception; and consequently that term is no less applicable to
those judgments, by which we distinguish moral good and evil, than to
every other operation of the mind. To approve of one character, to
condemn another, are only so many different perceptions.

Now as perceptions resolve themselves into two kinds, viz. impressions
and ideas, this distinction gives rise to a question, with which we shall
open up our present enquiry concerning morals. WHETHER IT IS BY MEANS OF
OUR IDEAS OR IMPRESSIONS WE DISTINGUISH BETWIXT VICE AND VIRTUE, AND
PRONOUNCE AN ACTION BLAMEABLE OR PRAISEWORTHY? This will immediately cut
off all loose discourses and declamations, and reduce us to something
precise and exact on the present subject.

Those who affirm that virtue is nothing but a conformity to reason; that
there are eternal fitnesses and unfitnesses of things, which are the same
to every rational being that considers them; that the immutable measures
of right and wrong impose an obligation, not only on human creatures, but
also on the Deity himself: All these systems concur in the opinion, that
morality, like truth, is discerned merely by ideas, and by their
juxta-position and comparison. In order, therefore, to judge of these
systems, we need only consider, whether it be possible, from reason
alone, to distinguish betwixt moral good and evil, or whether there must
concur some other principles to enable us to make that distinction,

If morality had naturally no influence on human passions and actions,
it were in vain to take such pains to inculcate it; and nothing would be
more fruitless than that multitude of rules and precepts, with which all
moralists abound. Philosophy is commonly divided into speculative and
practical; and as morality is always comprehended under the latter
division, it is supposed to influence our passions and actions, and to go
beyond the calm and indolent judgments of the understanding. And this is
confirmed by common experience, which informs us, that men are often
governed by their duties, and are detered from some actions by the
opinion of injustice, and impelled to others by that of obligation.

Since morals, therefore, have an influence on the actions and affections,
it follows, that they cannot be derived from reason; and that because
reason alone, as we have already proved, can never have any such
influence. Morals excite passions, and produce or prevent actions. Reason
of itself is utterly impotent in this particular. The rules of morality.
therefore, are not conclusions of our reason.

No one, I believe, will deny the justness of this inference; nor is there
any other means of evading it, than by denying that principle, on which
it is founded. As long as it is allowed, that reason has no influence on
our passions and action, it is in vain to pretend, that morality is
discovered only by a deduction of reason. An active principle can never
be founded on an inactive; and if reason be inactive in itself, it must
remain so in all its shapes and appearances, whether it exerts itself in
natural or moral subjects, whether it considers the powers of external
bodies, or the actions of rational beings.

It would be tedious to repeat all the arguments, by which I have
proved [Book II. Part III. Sect 3.], that reason is perfectly inert, and
can never either prevent or produce any action or affection. it will be
easy to recollect what has been said upon that subject. I shall only
recall on this occasion one of these arguments, which I shall endeavour to
render still more conclusive, and more applicable to the present subject.

Reason is the discovery of truth or falshood. Truth or falshood consists
in an agreement or disagreement either to the real relations of ideas, or
to real existence and matter of fact. Whatever, therefore, is not
susceptible of this agreement or disagreement, is incapable of being true
or false, and can never be an object of our reason. Now it is evident our
passions, volitions, and actions, are not susceptible of any such
agreement or disagreement; being original facts and realities, compleat
in themselves, and implying no reference to other passions, volitions,
and actions. It is impossible, therefore, they can be pronounced either
true or false, and be either contrary or conformable to reason.

This argument is of double advantage to our present purpose. For it
proves DIRECTLY, that actions do not derive their merit from a conformity
to reason, nor their blame from a contrariety to it; and it proves the
same truth more INDIRECTLY, by shewing us, that as reason can never
immediately prevent or produce any action by contradicting or approving
of it, it cannot be the source of moral good and evil, which are found to
have that influence. Actions may be laudable or blameable; but they
cannot be reasonable: Laudable or blameable, therefore, are not the same
with reasonable or unreasonable. The merit and demerit of actions
frequently contradict, and sometimes controul our natural propensities.
But reason has no such influence. Moral distinctions, therefore, are not
the offspring of reason. Reason is wholly inactive, and can never be the
source of so active a principle as conscience, or a sense of morals.

But perhaps it may be said, that though no will or action can be
immediately contradictory to reason, yet we may find such a contradiction
in some of the attendants of the action, that is, in its causes or
effects. The action may cause a judgment, or may be obliquely caused by
one, when the judgment concurs with a passion; and by an abusive way of
speaking, which philosophy will scarce allow of, the same contrariety
may, upon that account, be ascribed to the action. How far this truth or
faishood may be the source of morals, it will now be proper to consider.

It has been observed, that reason, in a strict and philosophical sense,
can have influence on our conduct only after two ways: Either when it
excites a passion by informing us of the existence of something which is
a proper object of it; or when it discovers the connexion of causes and
effects, so as to afford us means of exerting any passion. These are the
only kinds of judgment, which can accompany our actions, or can be said
to produce them in any manner; and it must be allowed, that these
judgments may often be false and erroneous. A person may be affected with
passion, by supposing a pain or pleasure to lie in an object, which has
no tendency to produce either of these sensations, or which produces the
contrary to what is imagined. A person may also take false measures for
the attaining his end, and may retard, by his foolish conduct, instead of
forwarding the execution of any project. These false judgments may be
thought to affect the passions and actions, which are connected with
them, and may be said to render them unreasonable, in a figurative and
improper way of speaking. But though this be acknowledged, it is easy to
observe, that these errors are so far from being the source of all
immorality, that they are commonly very innocent, and draw no manner of
guilt upon the person who is so unfortunate as to fail into them. They
extend not beyond a mistake of fact, which moralists have not generally
supposed criminal, as being perfectly involuntary. I am more to be
lamented than blamed, if I am mistaken with regard to the influence of
objects in producing pain or pleasure, or if I know not the proper means
of satisfying my desires. No one can ever regard such errors as a defect
in my moral character. A fruit, for instance, that is really
disagreeable, appears to me at a distance, and through mistake I fancy it
to be pleasant and delicious. Here is one error. I choose certain means
of reaching this fruit, which are not proper for my end. Here is a second
error; nor is there any third one, which can ever possibly enter into our
reasonings concerning actions. I ask, therefore, if a man, in this
situation, and guilty of these two errors, is to be regarded as vicious
and criminal, however unavoidable they might have been? Or if it be
possible to imagine, that such errors are the sources of all immorality?

And here it may be proper to observe, that if moral distinctions be
derived from the truth or falshood of those judgments, they must take
place wherever we form the judgments; nor will there be any difference,
whether the question be concerning an apple or a kingdom, or whether the
error be avoidable or unavoidable. For as the very essence of morality is
supposed to consist in an agreement or disagreement to reason, the other
circumstances are entirely arbitrary, and can never either bestow on any
action the character of virtuous or vicious, or deprive it of that
character. To which we may add, that this agreement or disagreement, not
admitting of degrees, all virtues and vices would of course be equal.

Should it be pretended, that though a mistake of fact be not criminal, yet
a mistake of right often is; and that this may be the source of
immorality: I would answer, that it is impossible such a mistake can ever
be the original source of immorality, since it supposes a real right and
wrong; that is, a real distinction in morals, independent of these
judgments. A mistake, therefore, of right may become a species of
immorality; but it is only a secondary one, and is founded on some other,
antecedent to it.

As to those judgments which are the effects of our actions, and which,
when false, give occasion to pronounce the actions contrary to truth and
reason; we may observe, that our actions never cause any judgment, either
true or false, in ourselves, and that it is only on others they have such
an influence. It is certain, that an action, on many occasions, may give
rise to false conclusions in others; and that a person, who through a
window sees any lewd behaviour of mine with my neighbour's wife, may be
so simple as to imagine she is certainly my own. In this respect my
action resembles somewhat a lye or falshood; only with this difference,
which is material, that I perform not the action with any intention of
giving rise to a false judgment in another, but merely to satisfy my lust
and passion. It causes, however, a mistake and false judgment by
accident; and the falshood of its effects may be ascribed, by some odd
figurative way of speaking, to the action itself. But still I can see no
pretext of reason for asserting, that the tendency to cause such an error
is the first spring or original source of all immorality.


[Footnote 12.  One might think It were entirely superfluous to prove this,
if a late author [William Wollaston, THE RELIGION OF NATURE DELINEATED
(London 1722)], who has had the good fortune to obtain some reputation,
had not seriously affirmed, that such a falshood is the foundation of all
guilt and moral deformity. That we may discover the fallacy of his
hypothesis, we need only consider, that a false conclusion is drawn from
an action, only by means of an obscurity of natural principles, which
makes a cause be secretly interrupted In its operation, by contrary
causes, and renders the connexion betwixt two objects uncertain and
variable. Now, as a like uncertainty and variety of causes take place,
even in natural objects, and produce a like error in our judgment, if that
tendency to produce error were the very essence of vice and immorality, it
should follow, that even inanimate objects might be vicious and immoral.

One might think It were entirely superfluous to prove this, if a late
author [William Wollaston, THE RELIGION OF NATURE DELINEATED (London
1722)], who has had the good fortune to obtain some reputation, had not
seriously affirmed, that such a falshood is the foundation of all guilt
and moral deformity. That we may discover the fallacy of his hypothesis,
we need only consider, that a false conclusion is drawn from an action,
only by means of an obscurity of natural principles, which makes a cause
be secretly interrupted In its operation, by contrary causes, and renders
the connexion betwixt two objects uncertain and variable. Now, as a like
uncertainty and variety of causes take place, even in natural objects,
and produce a like error in our judgment, if that tendency to produce
error were the very essence of vice and immorality, it should follow,
that even inanimate objects might be vicious and immoral.

It is in vain to urge, that inanimate objects act without liberty and
choice. For as liberty and choice are not necessary to make an action
produce in us an erroneous conclusion, they can be, in no respect,
essential to morality; and I do not readily perceive, upon this system,
how they can ever come to be regarded by it. If the tendency to cause
error be the origin of immorality, that tendency and immorality would in
every case be inseparable.

Add to this, that if I had used the precaution of shutting the windows,
while I indulged myself in those liberties with my neighbour's wife, I
should have been guilty of no immorality; and that because my action,
being perfectly concealed, would have had no tendency to produce any
false conclusion.

For the same reason, a thief, who steals In by a ladder at a window, and
takes all imaginable care to cause no disturbance, is in no respect
criminal. For either he will not be perceived, or if he be, it is
impossible he can produce any error, nor will any one, from these
circumstances, take him to be other than what he really is.

It is well known, that those who are squint-sighted, do very readily cause
mistakes in others, and that we Imagine they salute or are talking to one
person, while they address themselves to anther. Are they therefore, upon
that account, immoral?

Besides, we may easily observe, that in all those arguments there is an
evident reasoning in a circle. A person who takes possession of another's
goods, and uses them as his own, in a manner declares them to be his own;
and this falshood is the source of the immorality of injustice. But is
property, or right, or obligation, intelligible, without an antecedent
morality?

A man that is ungrateful to his benefactor, in a manner affirms, that he
never received any favours from him. But in what manner? Is it because
it is his duty to be grateful? But this supposes, that there is some
antecedent rule of duty and morals. Is it because human nature is
generally grateful, and makes us conclude, that a man who does any harm
never received any favour from the person he harmed? But human nature is
not so generally grateful, as to justify such a conclusion. Or if it
were, is an exception to a general rule in every case criminal, for no
other reason than because it is an exception?

But what may suffice entirely to destroy this whimsical system is, that
it leaves us under the same difficulty to give a reason why truth is
virtuous and falshood vicious, as to account for the merit or turpitude
of any other action. I shall allow, if you please, that all immorality is
derived from this supposed falshood in action, provided you can give me
any plausible reason, why such a falshood is immoral. If you consider
rightly of the matter, you will find yourself in the same difficulty as
at the beginning.

This last argument is very conclusive; because, if there be not an
evident merit or turpitude annexed to this species of truth or falahood,
It can never have any influence upon our actions. For, who ever thought
of forbearing any action, because others might possibly draw false
conclusions from it? Or, who ever performed any, that he might give rise
to true conclusions?]


Thus upon the whole, it is impossible, that the distinction betwixt moral
good and evil, can be made to reason; since that distinction has an
influence upon our actions, of which reason alone is incapable. Reason
and judgment may, indeed, be the mediate cause of an action, by
prompting, or by directing a passion: But it is not pretended, that a
judgment of this kind, either in its truth or falshood, is attended with
virtue or vice. And as to the judgments, which are caused by our
judgments, they can still less bestow those moral qualities on the
actions, which are their causes.

But to be more particular, and to shew, that those eternal immutable
fitnesses and unfitnesses of things cannot be defended by sound
philosophy, we may weigh the following considerations.

If the thought and understanding were alone capable of fixing the
boundaries of right and wrong, the character of virtuous and vicious
either must lie in some relations of objects, or must be a matter of
fact, which is discovered by our reasoning. This consequence is evident.
As the operations of human understanding divide themselves into two
kinds, the comparing of ideas, and the inferring of matter of fact; were
virtue discovered by the understanding; it must be an object of one of
these operations, nor is there any third operation of the understanding.
which can discover it. There has been an opinion very industriously
propagated by certain philosophers, that morality is susceptible of
demonstration; and though no one has ever been able to advance a single
step in those demonstrations; yet it is taken for granted, that this
science may be brought to an equal certainty with geometry or algebra.
Upon this supposition. vice and virtue must consist in some relations;
since it is allowed on all hands, that no matter of fact is capable of
being demonstrated. Let us, therefore, begin with examining this
hypothesis, and endeavour, if possible, to fix those moral qualities,
which have been so long the objects of our fruitless researches. Point
out distinctly the relations, which constitute morality or obligation,
that we may know wherein they consist, and after what manner we must
judge of them.

If you assert, that vice and virtue consist in relations susceptible of
certainty and demonstration, you must confine yourself to those four
relations, which alone admit of that degree of evidence; and in that case
you run into absurdities, from which you will never be able to extricate
yourself. For as you make the very essence of morality to lie in the
relations, and as there is no one of these relations but what is
applicable, not only to an irrational, but also to an inanimate object;
it follows, that even such objects must be susceptible of merit or
demerit. RESEMBLANCE, CONTRARIETY, DEGREES IN QUALITY, and PROPORTIONS IN
QUANTITY AND NUMBER; all these relations belong as properly to matter, as
to our actions, passions, and volitions. It is unquestionable, therefore,
that morality lies not in any of these relations, nor the sense of it in
their discovery.

[Footnote 13.  As a proof, how confused our way of thinking on this
subject commonly is, we may observe, that those who assert, that morality
is demonstrable, do not say, that morality lies in the relations, and that
the relations are distinguishable by reason. They only say, that reason
can discover such an action, In such relations, to be virtuous, and such
another vicious. It seems they thought it sufficient, if they could bring
the word, Relation, into the proposition, without troubling themselves
whether it was to the purpose or not. But here, I think, is plain
argument. Demonstrative reason discovers only relations. But that reason,
according to this hypothesis, discovers also vice and virtue. These moral
qualities, therefore, must be relations. When we blame any action, in any
situation, the whole complicated object, of action and situation, must
form certain relations, wherein the essence of vice consists. This
hypothesis is not otherwise intelligible. For what does reason discover,
when it pronounces any action vicious? Does it discover a relation or a
matter of fact? These questions are decisive, and must not be eluded.]

Should it be asserted, that the sense of morality consists in the
discovery of some relation, distinct from these, and that our enumeration
was not compleat, when we comprehended all demonstrable relations under
four general heads: To this I know not what to reply, till some one be so
good as to point out to me this new relation. It is impossible to refute a
system, which has never yet been explained. In such a manner of fighting
in the dark, a man loses his blows in the air, and often places them
where the enemy is not present.

I must, therefore, on this occasion, rest contented with requiring the
two following conditions of any one that would undertake to clear up this
system. First, As moral good and evil belong only to the actions of the
mind, and are derived from our situation with regard to external objects,
the relations, from which these moral distinctions arise, must lie only
betwixt internal actions, and external objects, and must not be
applicable either to internal actions, compared among themselves, or to
external objects, when placed in opposition to other external objects.
For as morality is supposed to attend certain relations, if these
relations coued belong to internal actions considered singly, it would
follow, that we might be guilty of crimes in ourselves, and independent
of our situation, with respect to the universe: And in like manner, if
these moral relations coued be applied to external objects, it would
follow, that even inanimate beings would be susceptible of moral beauty
and deformity. Now it seems difficult to imagine, that any relation can
be discovered betwixt our passions, volitions and actions, compared to
external objects, which relation might not belong either to these
passions and volitions, or to these external objects, compared among
themselves. But it will be still more difficult to fulfil the second
condition, requisite to justify this system. According to the principles
of those who maintain an abstract rational difference betwixt moral good
and evil, and a natural fitness and unfitness of things, it is not only
supposed, that these relations, being eternal and immutable, are the
same, when considered by every rational creature, but their effects are
also supposed to be necessarily the same; and it is concluded they have no
less, or rather a greater, influence in directing the will of the deity,
than in governing the rational and virtuous of our own species. These two
particulars are evidently distinct. It is one thing to know virtue, and
another to conform the will to it. In order, therefore, to prove, that
the measures of right and wrong are eternal laws, obligatory on every
rational mind, it is not sufficient to shew the relations upon which they
are founded: We must also point out the connexion betwixt the relation
and the will; and must prove that this connexion is so necessary, that in
every well-disposed mind, it must take place and have its influence;
though the difference betwixt these minds be in other respects immense and
infinite. Now besides what I have already proved, that even in human
nature no relation can ever alone produce any action: besides this, I
say, it has been shewn, in treating of the understanding, that there is
no connexion of cause and effect, such as this is supposed to be, which
is discoverable otherwise than by experience, and of which we can pretend
to have any security by the simple consideration of the objects. All
beings in the universe, considered in themselves, appear entirely loose
and independent of each other. It is only by experience we learn their
influence and connexion; and this influence we ought never to extend
beyond experience.

Thus it will be impossible to fulfil the first condition required to the
system of eternal measures of right and wrong; because it is impossible
to shew those relations, upon which such a distinction may be founded:
And it is as impossible to fulfil the second condition; because we cannot
prove A PRIORI, that these relations, if they really existed and were
perceived, would be universally forcible and obligatory.

But to make these general reflections more dear and convincing, we may
illustrate them by some particular instances, wherein this character of
moral good or evil is the most universally acknowledged. Of all crimes
that human creatures are capable of committing, the most horrid and
unnatural is ingratitude, especially when it is committed against
parents, and appears in the more flagrant instances of wounds and death.
This is acknowledged by all mankind, philosophers as well as the people;
the question only arises among philosophers, whether the guilt or moral
deformity of this action be discovered by demonstrative reasoning, or be
felt by an internal sense, and by means of some sentiment, which the
reflecting on such an action naturally occasions. This question will soon
be decided against the former opinion, if we can shew the same relations
in other objects, without the notion of any guilt or iniquity attending
them. Reason or science is nothing but the comparing of ideas, and the
discovery of their relations; and if the same relations have different
characters, it must evidently follow, that those characters are not
discovered merely by reason. To put the affair, therefore, to this trial,
let us chuse any inanimate object, such as an oak or elm; and let us
suppose, that by the dropping of its seed, it produces a sapling below
it, which springing up by degrees, at last overtops and destroys the
parent tree: I ask, if in this instance there be wanting any relation,
which is discoverable in parricide or ingratitude? Is not the one tree
the cause of the other's existence; and the latter the cause of the
destruction of the former, in the same manner as when a child murders his
parent? It is not sufficient to reply, that a choice or will is wanting.
For in the case of parricide, a will does not give rise to any DIFFERENT
relations, but is only the cause from which the action is derived; and
consequently produces the same relations, that in the oak or elm arise
from some other principles. It is a will or choice, that determines a man
to kill his parent; and they are the laws of matter and motion, that
determine a sapling to destroy the oak, from which it sprung. Here then
the same relations have different causes; but still the relations are the
same: And as their discovery is not in both cases attended with a notion
of immorality, it follows, that that notion does not arise from such a
discovery.

But to chuse an instance, still more resembling; I would fain ask any
one, why incest in the human species is criminal, and why the very same
action, and the same relations in animals have not the smallest moral
turpitude and deformity? If it be answered, that this action is innocent
in animals, because they have not reason sufficient to discover its
turpitude; but that man, being endowed with that faculty which ought to
restrain him to his duty, the same action instantly becomes criminal to
him; should this be said, I would reply, that this is evidently arguing
in a circle. For before reason can perceive this turpitude, the turpitude
must exist; and consequently is independent of the decisions of our
reason, and is their object more properly than their effect. According to
this system, then, every animal, that has sense, and appetite, and will;
that is, every animal must be susceptible of all the same virtues and
vices, for which we ascribe praise and blame to human creatures. All the
difference is, that our superior reason may serve to discover the vice or
virtue, and by that means may augment the blame or praise: But still this
discovery supposes a separate being in these moral distinctions, and a
being, which depends only on the will and appetite, and which, both in
thought and reality, may be distinguished from the reason. Animals are
susceptible of the same relations, with respect to each other, as the
human species, and therefore would also be susceptible of the same
morality, if the essence of morality consisted in these relations. Their
want of a sufficient degree of reason may hinder them from perceiving the
duties and obligations of morality, but can never hinder these duties
from existing; since they must antecedently exist, in order to their
being perceived. Reason must find them, and can never produce them. This
argument deserves to be weighed, as being, in my opinion, entirely
decisive.

Nor does this reasoning only prove, that morality consists not in any
relations, that are the objects of science; but if examined, will prove
with equal certainty, that it consists not in any matter of fact, which
can be discovered by the understanding. This is the second part of our
argument; and if it can be made evident, we may conclude, that morality
is not an object of reason. But can there be any difficulty in proving,
that vice and virtue are not matters of fact, whose existence we can
infer by reason? Take any action allowed to be vicious: Wilful murder,
for instance. Examine it in all lights, and see if you can find that
matter of fact, or real existence, which you call vice. In which-ever way
you take it, you find only certain passions, motives, volitions and
thoughts. There is no other matter of fact in the case. The vice entirely
escapes you, as long as you consider the object. You never can find it,
till you turn your reflection into your own breast, and find a sentiment
of disapprobation, which arises in you, towards this action. Here is a
matter of fact; but it is the object of feeling, not of reason. It lies in
yourself, not in the object. So that when you pronounce any action or
character to be vicious, you mean nothing, but that from the constitution
of your nature you have a feeling or sentiment of blame from the
contemplation of it. Vice and virtue, therefore, may be compared to
sounds, colours, heat and cold, which, according to modern philosophy,
are not qualities in objects, but perceptions in the mind: And this
discovery in morals, like that other in physics, is to be regarded as a
considerable advancement of the speculative sciences; though, like that
too, it has little or no influence on practice. Nothing can be more real,
or concern us more, than our own sentiments of pleasure and uneasiness;
and if these be favourable to virtue, and unfavourable to vice, no more
can be requisite to the regulation of our conduct and behaviour.

I cannot forbear adding to these reasonings an observation, which may,
perhaps, be found of some importance. In every system of morality, which
I have hitherto met with, I have always remarked, that the author
proceeds for some time in the ordinary way of reasoning, and establishes
the being of a God, or makes observations concerning human affairs; when
of a sudden I am surprized to find, that instead of the usual copulations
of propositions, is, and is not, I meet with no proposition that is not
connected with an ought, or an ought not. This change is imperceptible;
but is, however, of the last consequence. For as this ought, or ought
not, expresses some new relation or affirmation, it is necessary that it
should be observed and explained; and at the same time that a reason
should be given, for what seems altogether inconceivable, how this new
relation can be a deduction from others, which are entirely different
from it. But as authors do not commonly use this precaution, I shall
presume to recommend it to the readers; and am persuaded, that this small
attention would subvert all the vulgar systems of morality, and let us
see, that the distinction of vice and virtue is not founded merely on the
relations of objects, nor is perceived by reason.



SECT. II  MORAL DISTINCTIONS DERIVed FROM A MORAL SENSE


Thus the course of the argument leads us to conclude, that since vice and
virtue are not discoverable merely by reason, or the comparison of ideas,
it must be by means of some impression or sentiment they occasion, that
we are able to mark the difference betwixt them. Our decisions concerning
moral rectitude and depravity are evidently perceptions; and as all
perceptions are either impressions or ideas, the exclusion of the one is
a convincing argument for the other. Morality, therefore, is more
properly felt than judged of; though this feeling or sentiment is commonly
so soft and gentle, that we are apt to confound it with an idea,
according to our common custom of taking all things for the same, which
have any near resemblance to each other.

The next question is, Of what nature are these impressions, and after
what manner do they operate upon us? Here we cannot remain long in
suspense, but must pronounce the impression arising from virtue, to be
agreeable, and that proceding from vice to be uneasy. Every moments
experience must convince us of this. There is no spectacle so fair and
beautiful as a noble and generous action; nor any which gives us more
abhorrence than one that is cruel and treacherous. No enjoyment. equals
the satisfaction we receive from the company of those we love and esteem;
as the greatest of all punishments is to be obliged to pass our lives
with those we hate or contemn. A very play or romance may afford us
instances of this pleasure, which virtue conveys to us; and pain, which
arises from vice.

Now since the distinguishing impressions, by which moral good or evil is
known, are nothing but particular pains or pleasures; it follows, that in
all enquiries concerning these moral distinctions, it will be sufficient
to shew the principles, which make us feel a satisfaction or uneasiness
from the survey of any character, in order to satisfy us why the
character is laudable or blameable. An action, or sentiment, or character
is virtuous or vicious; why? because its view causes a pleasure or
uneasiness of a particular kind. In giving a reason, therefore, for the
pleasure or uneasiness, we sufficiently explain the vice or virtue. To
have the sense of virtue, is nothing but to feel a satisfaction of a
particular kind from the contemplation of a character. The very feeling
constitutes our praise or admiration. We go no farther; nor do we enquire
into the cause of the satisfaction. We do not infer a character to be
virtuous, because it pleases: But in feeling that it pleases after such a
particular manner, we in effect feel that it is virtuous. The case is the
same as in our judgments concerning all kinds of beauty, and tastes, and
sensations. Our approbation is implyed in the immediate pleasure they
convey to us.

I have objected to the system, which establishes eternal rational
measures of right and wrong, that it is impossible to shew, in the actions
of reasonable creatures, any relations, which are not found in external
objects; and therefore, if morality always attended these relations,
it were possible for inanimate matter to become virtuous or vicious. Now
it may, in like manner, be objected to the present system, that if virtue
and vice be determined by pleasure and pain, these qualities must, in
every case, arise from the sensations; and consequently any object,
whether animate or inanimate, rational or irrational, might become
morally good or evil, provided it can excite a satisfaction or
uneasiness. But though this objection seems to be the very same, it has by
no means the same force, in the one case as in the other. For, first, tis
evident, that under the term pleasure, we comprehend sensations, which
are very different from each other, and which have only such a distant
resemblance, as is requisite to make them be expressed by the same
abstract term. A good composition of music and a bottle of good wine
equally produce pleasure; and what is more, their goodness is determined
merely by the pleasure. But shall we say upon that account, that the wine
is harmonious, or the music of a good flavour? In like manner an
inanimate object, and the character or sentiments of any person may, both
of them, give satisfaction; but as the satisfaction is different, this
keeps our sentiments concerning them from being confounded, and makes us
ascribe virtue to the one, and not to the other. Nor is every sentiment
of pleasure or pain, which arises from characters and actions, of that
peculiar kind, which makes us praise or condemn. The good qualities of an
enemy are hurtful to us; but may still command our esteem and respect.
It is only when a character is considered in general, without reference to
our particular interest, that it causes such a feeling or sentiment, as
denominates it morally good or evil. It is true, those sentiments, from
interest and morals, are apt to be confounded, and naturally run into one
another. It seldom happens, that we do not think an enemy vicious, and
can distinguish betwixt his opposition to our interest and real villainy
or baseness. But this hinders not, but that the sentiments are, in
themselves, distinct; and a man of temper and judgment may preserve
himself from these illusions. In like manner, though it is certain a
musical voice is nothing but one that naturally gives a particular kind of
pleasure; yet it is difficult for a man to be sensible, that the voice of
an enemy is agreeable, or to allow it to be musical. But a person of a
fine ear, who has the command of himself, can separate these feelings,
and give praise to what deserves it.

SECONDLY, We may call to remembrance the preceding system of the
passions, in order to remark a still more considerable difference among
our pains and pleasures. Pride and humility, love and hatred are excited,
when there is any thing presented to us, that both bears a relation to
the object of the passion, and produces a separate sensation related to
the sensation of the passion. Now virtue and vice are attended with these
circumstances. They must necessarily be placed either in ourselves or
others, and excite either pleasure or uneasiness; and therefore must give
rise to one of these four passions; which clearly distinguishes them from
the pleasure and pain arising from inanimate objects, that often bear no
relation to us: And this is, perhaps, the most considerable effect that
virtue and vice have upon the human mind.

It may now be asked in general, concerning this pain or pleasure, that
distinguishes moral good and evil, FROM WHAT PRINCIPLES IS IT DERIVED,
AND WHENCE DOES IT ARISE IN THE HUMAN MIND? To this I reply, first, that
it is absurd to imagine, that in every particular instance, these
sentiments are produced by an original quality and primary constitution.
For as the number of our duties is, in a manner, infinite, it is
impossible that our original instincts should extend to each of them, and
from our very first infancy impress on the human mind all that multitude
of precepts, which are contained in the compleatest system of ethics.
Such a method of proceeding is not conformable to the usual maxims, by
which nature is conducted, where a few principles produce all that
variety we observe in the universe, and every thing is carryed on in the
easiest and most simple manner. It is necessary, therefore, to abridge
these primary impulses, and find some more general principles, upon which
all our notions of morals are founded.

But in the second place, should it be asked, Whether we ought to search
for these principles in nature, or whether we must look for them in some
other origin? I would reply, that our answer to this question depends
upon the definition of the word, Nature, than which there is none more
ambiguous and equivocal. If nature be opposed to miracles, not only the
distinction betwixt vice and virtue is natural, but also every event,
which has ever happened in the world, EXCEPTING THOSE MIRACLES, ON WHICH
OUR RELIGION IS FOUNDED. In saying, then, that the sentiments of vice and
virtue are natural in this sense, we make no very extraordinary
discovery.

But nature may also be opposed to rare and unusual; and in this sense of
the word, which is the common one, there may often arise disputes
concerning what is natural or unnatural; and one may in general affirm,
that we are not possessed of any very precise standard, by which these
disputes can be decided. Frequent and rare depend upon the number of
examples we have observed; and as this number may gradually encrease or
diminish, it will be impossible to fix any exact boundaries betwixt them.
We may only affirm on this head, that if ever there was any thing, which
coued be called natural in this sense, the sentiments of morality
certainly may; since there never was any nation of the world, nor any
single person in any nation, who was utterly deprived of them, and who
never, in any instance, shewed the least approbation or dislike of
manners. These sentiments are so rooted in our constitution and temper,
that without entirely confounding the human mind by disease or madness,
it is impossible to extirpate and destroy them.

But nature may also be opposed to artifice, as well as to what is rare
and unusual; and in this sense it may be disputed, whether the notions of
virtue be natural or not. We readily forget, that the designs, and
projects, and views of men are principles as necessary in their operation
as heat and cold, moist and dry: But taking them to be free and entirely
our own, it is usual for us to set them in opposition to the other
principles of nature. should it, therefore, be demanded, whether the
sense of virtue be natural or artificial, I am of opinion, that it is
impossible for me at present to give any precise answer to this question.
Perhaps it will appear afterwards, that our sense of some virtues is
artificial, and that of others natural. The discussion of this question
will be more proper, when we enter upon an exact detail of each
particular vice and virtue.

[Footnote 14.  In the following discourse natural is also opposed
sometimes to civil, sometimes to moral. The opposition will always
discover the sense, in which it is taken.]

Mean while it may not be amiss to observe from these definitions of
natural and unnatural, that nothing can be more unphilosophical than
those systems, which assert, that virtue is the same with what is
natural, and vice with what is unnatural. For in the first sense of the
word, Nature, as opposed to miracles, both vice and virtue are equally
natural; and in the second sense, as opposed to what is unusual, perhaps
virtue will be found to be the most unnatural. At least it must be owned,
that heroic virtue, being as unusual, is as little natural as the most
brutal barbarity. As to the third sense of the word, it is certain, that
both vice and virtue are equally artificial, and out of nature. For
however it may be disputed, whether the notion of a merit or demerit in
certain actions be natural or artificial, it is evident, that the actions
themselves are artificial, and are performed with a certain design and
intention; otherwise they coued never be ranked under any of these
denominations. It is impossible, therefore, that the character of natural
and unnatural can ever, in any sense, mark the boundaries of vice and
virtue.

Thus we are still brought back to our first position, that virtue is
distinguished by the pleasure, and vice by the pain, that any action,
sentiment or character gives us by the mere view and contemplation. This
decision is very commodious; because it reduces us to this simple
question, Why any action or sentiment upon the general view or survey,
gives a certain satisfaction or uneasiness, in order to shew the origin
of its moral rectitude or depravity, without looking for any
incomprehensible relations and qualities, which never did exist in
nature, nor even in our imagination, by any clear and distinct
conception. I flatter myself I have executed a great part of my present
design by a state of the question, which appears to me so free from
ambiguity and obscurity.




PART II  OF JUSTICE AND INJUSTICE



SECT. I  JUSTICE, WHETHER A NATURAL OR ARTIFICIAL VIRTUE?


I have already hinted, that our sense of every kind of virtue is not
natural; but that there are some virtues, that produce pleasure and
approbation by means of an artifice or contrivance, which arises from the
circumstances and necessity of mankind. Of this kind I assert justice to
be; and shall endeavour to defend this opinion by a short, and, I hope,
convincing argument, before I examine the nature of the artifice, from
which the sense of that virtue is derived.

It is evident, that when we praise any actions, we regard only the motives
that produced them, and consider the actions as signs or indications of
certain principles in the mind and temper. The external performance has
no merit. We must look within to find the moral quality. This we cannot
do directly; and therefore fix our attention on actions, as on external
signs. But these actions are still considered as signs; and the ultimate
object of our praise and approbation is the motive, that produced them.

After the same manner, when we require any action, or blame a person for
not performing it, we always suppose, that one in that situation should
be influenced by the proper motive of that action, and we esteem it
vicious in him to be regardless of it. If we find, upon enquiry, that the
virtuous motive was still powerful over his breast, though checked in its
operation by some circumstances unknown to us, we retract our blame, and
have the same esteem for him, as if he had actually performed the action,
which we require of him.

It appears, therefore, that all virtuous actions derive their merit only
from virtuous motives, and are considered merely as signs of those
motives. From this principle I conclude, that the first virtuous motive,
which bestows a merit on any action, can never be a regard to the virtue
of that action. but must be some other natural motive or principle. To
suppose, that the mere regard to the virtue of the action. may be the
first motive, which produced the action, and rendered it virtuous, is to
reason in a circle. Before we can have such a regard, the action must be
really virtuous; and this virtue must be derived from some virtuous
motive: And consequently the virtuous motive must be different from the
regard to the virtue of the action. A virtuous motive is requisite to
render an action virtuous. An action must be virtuous, before we can have
a regard to its virtue. Some virtuous motive, therefore, must be
antecedent to that regard.

Nor is this merely a metaphysical subtilty; but enters into all our
reasonings in common life, though perhaps we may not be able to place it
in such distinct philosophical terms. We blame a father for neglecting his
child. Why? because it shews a want of natural affection, which is the
duty of every parent. Were not natural affection a duty, the care of
children coued not be a duty; and it were impossible we coued have the
duty in our eye in the attention we give to our offspring. In this case,
therefore, all men suppose a motive to the action distinct from a sense
of duty.

Here is a man, that does many benevolent actions; relieves the
distressed, comforts the afflicted, and extends his bounty even to the
greatest strangers. No character can be more amiable and virtuous. We
regard these actions as proofs of the greatest humanity. This humanity
bestows a merit on the actions. A regard to this merit is, therefore, a
secondary consideration, and derived from the antecedent principle of
humanity, which is meritorious and laudable.

In short, it may be established as an undoubted maxim, THAT NO ACTION CAN
BE VIRTUOUS, OR MORALLY GOOD, UNLESS THERE BE IN HUMAN NATURE SOME MOTIVE
TO PRODUCE IT, DISTINCT FROM THE SENSE OF ITS MORALITY.

But may not the sense of morality or duty produce an action, without any
other motive? I answer, It may: But this is no objection to the present
doctrine. When any virtuous motive or principle is common in human
nature, a person, who feels his heart devoid of that motive, may hate
himself upon that account, and may perform the action without the motive,
from a certain sense of duty, in order to acquire by practice, that
virtuous principle, or at least, to disguise to himself, as much as
possible, his want of it. A man that really feels no gratitude in his
temper, is still pleased to perform grateful actions, and thinks he has,
by that means, fulfilled his duty. Actions are at first only considered
as signs of motives: But it is usual, in this case, as in all others, to
fix our attention on the signs, and neglect, in some measure, the thing
signifyed. But though, on some occasions, a person may perform an action
merely out of regard to its moral obligation, yet still this supposes in
human nature some distinct principles, which are capable of producing the
action, and whose moral beauty renders the action meritorious.

Now to apply all this to the present case; I suppose a person to have
lent me a sum of money, on condition that it be restored in a few days;
and also suppose, that after the expiration of the term agreed on, he
demands the sum: I ask, What reason or motive have I to restore the
money? It will, perhaps, be said, that my regard to justice, and
abhorrence of villainy and knavery, are sufficient reasons for me, if I
have the least grain of honesty, or sense of duty and obligation. And
this answer, no doubt, is just and satisfactory to man in his civilized
state, and when trained up according to a certain discipline and
education. But in his rude and more natural condition, if you are pleased
to call such a condition natural, this answer would be rejected as
perfectly unintelligible and sophistical. For one in that situation would
immediately ask you, WHEREIN CONSISTS THIS HONESTY AND JUSTICE, WHICH YOU
FIND IN RESTORING A LOAN, AND ABSTAINING FROM THE PROPERTY OF OTHERS? It
does not surely lie in the external action. It must, therefore be placed
in the motive, from which the external action is derived. This motive can
never be a regard to the honesty of the action. For it is a plain fallacy
to say, that a virtuous motive is requisite to render an action honest,
and at the same time that a regard to the honesty is the motive of the
action. We can never have a regard to the virtue of an action, unless the
action be antecedently virtuous. No action can be virtuous, but so far as
it proceeds from a virtuous motive. A virtuous motive, therefore, must
precede the regard to the virtue, and it is impossible, that the virtuous
motive and the regard to the virtue can be the same.

It is requisite, then, to find some motive to acts of justice and honesty,
distinct from our regard to the honesty; and in this lies the great
difficulty. For should we say, that a concern for our private interest or
reputation is the legitimate motive to all honest actions; it would
follow, that wherever that concern ceases, honesty can no longer have
place. But it is certain, that self-love, when it acts at its liberty,
instead of engaging us to honest actions, is the source of all injustice
and violence; nor can a man ever correct those vices, without correcting
and restraining the natural movements of that appetite.

But should it be affirmed, that the reason or motive of such actions is
the regard to publick interest, to which nothing is more contrary than
examples of injustice and dishonesty; should this be said, I would
propose the three following considerations, as worthy of our attention.
First, public interest is not naturally attached to the observation of
the rules of justice; but is only connected with it, after an artificial
convention for the establishment of these rules, as shall be shewn more
at large hereafter. Secondly, if we suppose, that the loan was secret,
and that it is necessary for the interest of the person, that the money
be restored in the same manner (as when the lender would conceal his
riches) in that case the example ceases, and the public is no longer
interested in the actions of the borrower; though I suppose there is no
moralist, who will affirm, that the duty and obligation ceases. Thirdly,
experience sufficiently proves, that men, in the ordinary conduct of
life, look not so far as the public interest, when they pay their
creditors, perform their promises, and abstain from theft, and robbery,
and injustice of every kind. That is a motive too remote and too sublime
to affect the generality of mankind, and operate with any force in
actions so contrary to private interest as are frequently those of
justice and common honesty.

In general, it may be affirmed, that there is no such passion in human
minds, as the love of mankind, merely as such, independent of personal
qualities, of services, or of relation to ourseit It is true, there is no
human, and indeed no sensible, creature, whose happiness or misery does
not, in some measure, affect us when brought near to us, and represented
in lively colours: But this proceeds merely from sympathy, and is no
proof of such an universal affection to mankind, since this concern
extends itself beyond our own species. An affection betwixt the sexes is
a passion evidently implanted in human nature; and this passion not only
appears in its peculiar symptoms, but also in inflaming every other
principle of affection, and raising a stronger love from beauty, wit,
kindness, than what would otherwise flow from them. Were there an
universal love among all human creatures, it would appear after the same
manner. Any degree of a good quality would cause a stronger affection
than the same degree of a bad quality would cause hatred; contrary to
what we find by experience. Men's tempers are different, and some have a
propensity to the tender, and others to the rougher, affections: But in
the main, we may affirm, that man in general, or human nature, is nothing
but the object both of love and hatred, and requires some other cause,
which by a double relation of impressions and ideas, may excite these
passions. In vain would we endeavour to elude this hypothesis. There are
no phaenomena that point out any such kind affection to men, independent
of their merit, and every other circumstance. We love company in general;
but it is as we love any other amusement. An Englishman in Italy is a
friend: A Euro paean in China; and perhaps a man would be beloved as
such, were we to meet him in the moon. But this proceeds only from the
relation to ourselves; which in these cases gathers force by being
confined to a few persons.

If public benevolence, therefore, or a regard to the interests of
mankind, cannot be the original motive to justice, much less can private
benevolence, or a regard to the interests of the party concerned, be this
motive. For what if he be my enemy, and has given me just cause to hate
him? What if he be a vicious man, and deserves the hatred of all mankind?
What if he be a miser, and can make no use of what I would deprive him
of? What if he be a profligate debauchee, and would rather receive harm
than benefit from large possessions? What if I be in necessity, and have
urgent motives to acquire something to my family? In all these cases, the
original motive to justice would fail; and consequently the justice
itself, and along with it all property, tight, and obligation.

A rich man lies under a moral obligation to communicate to those in
necessity a share of his superfluities. Were private benevolence the
original motive to justice, a man would not be obliged to leave others in
the possession of more than he is obliged to give them. At least the
difference would be very inconsiderable. Men generally fix their
affections more on what they are possessed of, than on what they never
enjoyed: For this reason, it would be greater cruelty to dispossess a man
of any thing, than not to give it him. But who will assert, that this is
the only foundation of justice?

Besides, we must consider, that the chief reason, why men attach
themselves so much to their possessions is, that they consider them as
their property, and as secured to them inviolably by the laws of society.
But this is a secondary consideration, and dependent on the preceding
notions of justice and property.

A man's property is supposed to be fenced against every mortal, in every
possible case. But private benevolence is, and ought to be, weaker in
some persons, than in others: And in many, or indeed in most persons,
must absolutely fail. Private benevolence, therefore, is not the original
motive of justice.

From all this it follows, that we have no real or universal motive for
observing the laws of equity, but the very equity and merit of that
observance; and as no action can be equitable or meritorious, where it
cannot arise from some separate motive, there is here an evident
sophistry and reasoning in a circle. Unless, therefore, we will allow,
that nature has established a sophistry, and rendered it necessary and
unavoidable, we must allow, that the sense of justice and injustice is
not derived from nature, but arises artificially, though necessarily from
education, and human conventions.

I shall add, as a corollary to this reasoning, that since no action can
be laudable or blameable, without some motives or impelling passions,
distinct from the sense of morals, these distinct passions must have a
great influence on that sense. It is according to their general force in
human nature, that we blame or praise. In judging of the beauty of animal
bodies, we always carry in our eye the oeconomy of a certain species; and
where the limbs and features observe that proportion, which is common to
the species, we pronounce them handsome and beautiful. In like manner we
always consider the natural and usual force of the passions, when we
determine concerning vice and virtue; and if the passions depart very
much from the common measures on either side, they are always disapproved
as vicious. A man naturally loves his children better than his nephews,
his nephews better than his cousins, his cousins better than strangers,
where every thing else is equal. Hence arise our common measures of duty,
in preferring the one to the other. Our sense of duty always follows the
common and natural course of our passions.

To avoid giving offence, I must here observe, that when I deny justice to
be a natural virtue, I make use of the word, natural, only as opposed to
artificial. In another sense of the word; as no principle of the human
mind is more natural than a sense of virtue; so no virtue is more natural
than justice. Mankind is an inventive species; and where an invention is
obvious and absolutely necessary, it may as properly be said to be
natural as any thing that proceeds immediately from original principles,
without the intervention of thought or reflection. Though the rules of
justice be artificial, they are not arbitrary. Nor is the expression
improper to call them Laws of Nature; if by natural we understand what is
common to any species, or even if we confine it to mean what is
inseparable from the species.



SECT. II  OF THE ORIGIN OF JUSTICE AND PROPERTY


We now proceed to examine two questions, viz, CONCERNING THE MANNER, IN
WHICH THE RULES OF JUSTICE ARE ESTABLISHed BY THE ARTIFICE OF MEN; and
CONCERNING THE REASONS, WHICH DETERMINE US TO ATTRIBUTE TO THE OBSERVANCE
OR NEGLECT OF THESE RULES A MORAL BEAUTY AND DEFORMITY. These questions
will appear afterwards to be distinct. We shall begin with the former.

Of all the animals, with which this globe is peopled, there is none
towards whom nature seems, at first sight, to have exercised more cruelty
than towards man, in the numberless wants and necessities, with which she
has loaded him, and in the slender means, which she affords to the
relieving these necessities. In other creatures these two particulars
generally compensate each other. If we consider the lion as a voracious
and carnivorous animal, we shall easily discover him to be very
necessitous; but if we turn our eye to his make and temper, his agility,
his courage, his arms, and his force, we shall find, that his advantages
hold proportion with his wants. The sheep and ox are deprived of all
these advantages; but their appetites are moderate, and their food is of
easy purchase. In man alone, this unnatural conjunction of infirmity, and
of necessity, may be observed in its greatest perfection. Not only the
food, which is required for his sustenance, flies his search and
approach, or at least requires his labour to be produced, but he must be
possessed of cloaths and lodging, to defend him against the injuries of
the weather; though to consider him only in himself, he is provided
neither with arms, nor force, nor other natural abilities, which are in
any degree answerable to so many necessities.

It is by society alone he is able to supply his defects, and raise himself
up to an equality with his fellow-creatures, and even acquire a
superiority above them. By society all his infirmities are compensated;
and though in that situation his wants multiply every moment upon him, yet
his abilities are still more augmented, and leave him in every respect
more satisfied and happy, than it is possible for him, in his savage and
solitary condition, ever to become. When every individual person labours
a-part, and only for himself, his force is too small to execute any
considerable work; his labour being employed in supplying all his
different necessities, he never attains a perfection in any particular
art; and as his force and success are not at all times equal, the least
failure in either of these particulars must be attended with inevitable
ruin and misery. Society provides a remedy for these three
inconveniences. By the conjunction of forces, our power is augmented: By
the partition of employments, our ability encreases: And by mutual
succour we are less exposed to fortune and accidents. It is by this
additional force, ability, and security, that society becomes
advantageous.

But in order to form society, it is requisite not only that it be
advantageous, but also that men be sensible of these advantages; and it is
impossible, in their wild uncultivated state, that by study and
reflection alone, they should ever be able to attain this knowledge. Most
fortunately, therefore, there is conjoined to those necessities, whose
remedies are remote and obscure, another necessity, which having a
present and more obvious remedy, may justly be regarded as the first and
original principle of human society. This necessity is no other than that
natural appetite betwixt the sexes, which unites them together, and
preserves their union, till a new tye takes place in their concern for
their common offspring. This new concern becomes also a principle of
union betwixt the parents and offspring, and forms a more numerous
society; where the parents govern by the advantage of their superior
strength and wisdom, and at the same time are restrained in the exercise
of their authority by that natural affection, which they bear their
children. In a little time, custom and habit operating on the tender
minds of the children, makes them sensible of the advantages, which they
may reap from society, as well as fashions them by degrees for it, by
rubbing off those rough corners and untoward affections, which prevent
their coalition.

For it must be confest, that however the circumstances of human nature
may render an union necessary, and however those passions of lust and
natural affection may seem to render it unavoidable; yet there are other
particulars in our natural temper, and in our outward circumstances,
which are very incommodious, and are even contrary to the requisite
conjunction. Among the former, we may justly esteem our selfishness to be
the most considerable. I am sensible, that generally speaking, the
representations of this quality have been carried much too far; and that
the descriptions, which certain philosophers delight so much to form of
mankind in this particular, are as wide of nature as any accounts of
monsters, which we meet with in fables and romances. So far from
thinking, that men have no affection for any thing beyond themselves, I
am of opinion, that though it be rare to meet with one, who loves any
single person better than himself; yet it is as rare to meet with one, in
whom all the kind affections, taken together, do not overbalance all the
selfish. Consult common experience: Do you not see, that though the whole
expence of the family be generally under the direction of the master of
it, yet there are few that do not bestow the largest part of their
fortunes on the pleasures of their wives, and the education of their
children, reserving the smallest portion for their own proper use and
entertainment. This is what we may observe concerning such as have those
endearing ties; and may presume, that the case would be the same with
others, were they placed in a like situation.

But though this generosity must be acknowledged to the honour of human
nature, we may at the same time remark, that so noble an affection,
instead of fitting men for large societies, is almost as contrary to
them, as the most narrow selfishness. For while each person loves himself
better than any other single person, and in his love to others bears the
greatest affection to his relations and acquaintance, this must
necessarily produce an oppositon of passions, and a consequent opposition
of actions; which cannot but be dangerous to the new-established union.

It is however worth while to remark, that this contrariety of passions
would be attended with but small danger, did it not concur with a
peculiarity in our outward circumstances, which affords it an opportunity
of exerting itself. There are different species of goods, which we are
possessed of; the internal satisfaction of our minds, the external
advantages of our body, and the enjoyment of such possessions as we have
acquired by our industry and good fortune. We are perfectly secure in the
enjoyment of the first. The second may be ravished from us, but can be of
no advantage to him who deprives us of them. The last only are both
exposed to the violence of others, and may be transferred without
suffering any loss or alteration; while at the same time, there is not a
sufficient quantity of them to supply every one's desires and
necessities. As the improvement, therefore, of these goods is the chief
advantage of society, so the instability of their possession, along with
their scarcity, is the chief impediment.

In vain should we expect to find, in uncultivated nature, a remedy to
this inconvenience; or hope for any inartificial principle of the human
mind, which might controul those are remote and obscure, another
necessity, which having a present and more obvious remedy, may justly be
regarded as the first and original principle of human society. This
necessity is no other than that natural appetite betwixt the sexes, which
unites them together, and preserves their union, till a new tye takes
place in their concern for their common offspring. This new concern
becomes also a principle of union betwixt the parents and offspring, and
forms a more numerous society; where the parents govern by the advantage
of their superior strength and wisdom, and at the same time are
restrained in the exercise of their authority by that natural affection,
which they bear their children. In a little time, custom and habit
operating on the tender minds of the children, makes them sensible of the
advantages, which they may reap from society, as well as fashions them by
degrees for it, by rubbing off those rough corners and untoward
affections, which prevent their coalition.

For it must be confest, that however the circumstances of human nature
may render an union necessary, and however those passions of lust and
natural affection may seem to render it unavoidable; yet there are other
particulars in our natural temper, and in our outward circumstances,
which are very incommodious, and are even contrary to the requisite
conjunction. Among the former, we may justly esteem our selfishness to be
the most considerable. I am sensible, that generally speaking, the
representations of this quality have been carried much too far; and that
the descriptions, which certain philosophers delight so much to form of
mankind in this particular, are as wide of nature as any accounts of
monsters, which we meet with in fables and romances. So far from
thinking, that men have no affection for any thing beyond themselves, I
am of opinion, that though it be rare to meet with one, who loves any
single person better than himself; yet it is as rare to meet with one, in
whom all the kind affections, taken together, do not overbalance all the
selfish. Consult common experience: Do you not see, that though the whole
expence of the family be generally under the direction of the master of
it, yet there are few that do not bestow the largest part of their
fortunes on the pleasures of their wives, and the education of their
children, reserving the smallest portion for their own proper use and
entertainment This is what we may observe concerning such as have those
endearing ties; and may presume, that the case would be the same with
others, were they placed in a like situation.

But though this generosity must be acknowledged to the honour of human
nature, we may at the same time remark, that so noble an affection,
instead of fitting men for large societies, is almost as contrary to
them, as the most narrow selfishness. For while each person loves himself
better than any other single person, and in his love to others bears the
greatest affection to his relations and acquaintance, this must
necessarily produce an oppositon of passions, and a consequent opposition
of actions; which cannot but be dangerous to the new-established union.

It is however worth while to remark, that this contrariety of passions
would be attended with but small danger, did it not concur with a
peculiarity in our outward circumstances, which affords it an opportunity
of exerting itself. There are different species of goods, which we are
possessed of; the internal satisfaction of our minds, the external
advantages of our body, and the enjoyment of such possessions as we have
acquired by our industry and good fortune. We are perfectly secure in the
enjoyment of the first. The second may be ravished from us, but can be of
no advantage to him who deprives us of them. The last only are both
exposed to the violence of others, and may be transferred without
suffering any loss or alteration; while at the same time, there is not a
sufficient quantity of them to supply every one's desires and
necessities. As the improvement, therefore, of these goods is the chief
advantage of society, so the instability of their possession, along with
their scarcity, is the chief impediment.

In vain should we expect to find, in uncultivated nature, a remedy to
this inconvenience; or hope for any inartificial principle of the human
mind, which might controul those partial affections, and make us overcome
the temptations arising from our circumstances. The idea of justice can
never serve to this purpose, or be taken for a natural principle, capable
of inspiring men with an equitable conduct towards each other. That
virtue, as it is now understood. would never have been dreamed of among
rude and savage men. For the notion of injury or injustice implies an
immorality or vice committed against some other person: And as every
immorality is derived from some defect or unsoundness of the passions,
and as this defect must be judged of, in a great measure, from the
ordinary course of nature in the constitution of the mind; it will be easy
to know, whether we be guilty of any immorality, with regard to others,
by considering the natural, and usual force of those several affections,
which are directed towards them. Now it appears, that in the original
frame of our mind, our strongest attention is confined to ourselves; our
next is extended to our relations and acquaintance; and it is only the
weakest which reaches to strangers and indifferent persons. This
partiality, then, and unequal affection, must not only have an influence
on our behaviour and conduct in society, but even on our ideas of vice
and virtue; so as to make us regard any remarkable transgression of such
a degree of partiality, either by too great an enlargement, or
contraction of the affections, as vicious and immoral. This we may
observe in our common judgments concerning actions, where we blame a
person, who either centers all his affections in his family, or is so
regardless of them, as, in any opposition of interest, to give the
preference to a stranger, or mere chance acquaintance. From all which it
follows, that our natural uncultivated ideas of morality, instead of
providing a remedy for the partiality of our affections, do rather
conform themselves to that partiality, and give it an additional force
and influence.

The remedy, then, is not derived from nature, but from artifice; or more
e properly speaking, nature provides a remedy in the judgment and
understanding, for what is irregular and incommodious in the affections.
For when men, from their early education in society, have become sensible
of the infinite advantages that result from it, and have besides acquired
a new affection to company and conversation; and when they have observed,
that the principal disturbance in society arises from those goods, which
we call external, and from their looseness and easy transition from one
person to another; they must seek for a remedy by putting these goods, as
far as possible, on the same footing with the fixed and constant
advantages of the mind and body. This can be done after no other manner,
than by a convention entered into by all the members of the society to
bestow stability on the possession of those external goods, and leave
every one in the peaceable enjoyment of what he may acquire by his
fortune and industry. By this means, every one knows what he may safely
possess; and the passions ale restrained in their partial and
contradictory motions. Nor is such a restraint contrary to these
passions; for if so, it coued never be entered into, nor maintained; but
it is only contrary to their heedless and impetuous movement. Instead of
departing from our own interest, or from that of our nearest friends, by
abstaining from the possessions of others, we cannot better consult both
these interests, than by such a convention; because it is by that means
we maintain society, which is so necessary to their well-being and
subsistence, as well as to our own.

This convention is not of the nature of a promise: For even promises
themselves, as we shall see afterwards, arise from human conventions. It
is only a general sense of common interest; which sense all the members
of the society express to one another, and which induces them to regulate
their conduct by certain rules. I observe, that it will be for my
interest to leave another in the possession of his goods, provided he
will act in the same manner with regard to me. He is sensible of a like
interest in the regulation of his conduct. When this common sense of
interest is mutually expressed, and is known to both, it produces a
suitable resolution and behaviour. And this may properly enough be called
a convention or agreement betwixt us, though without the interposition of
a promise; since the actions of each of us have a reference to those of
the other, and are performed upon the supposition, that something is to be
performed on the other part. Two men, who pull the oars of a boat, do it
by an agreement or convention, though they have never given promises to
each other. Nor is the rule concerning the stability of possession the
less derived from human conventions, that it arises gradually, and
acquires force by a slow progression, and. by our repeated experience of
the inconveniences of transgressing it. On the contrary, this experience
assures us still more, that the sense of interest has become common to
all our fellows, and gives us a confidence of the future regularity of
their conduct: And it is only on the expectation of this, that our
moderation and abstinence are founded. In like manner are languages
gradually established by human conventions without any promise. In like
manner do gold and silver become the common measures of exchange, and are
esteemed sufficient payment for what is of a hundred times their value.

After this convention, concerning abstinence from the possessions of
others, is entered into, and every one has acquired a stability in his
possessions, there immediately arise the ideas of justice and injustice;
as also those of property, right, and obligation. The latter are
altogether unintelligible without first understanding the former. Our
property is nothing but those goods, whose constant possession is
established by the laws of society; that is, by the laws of justice.
Those, therefore, who make use of the words property, or right, or
obligation, before they have explained the origin of justice, or even
make use of them in that explication, are guilty of a very gross fallacy,
and can never reason upon any solid foundation. A man's property is some
object related to him. This relation is not natural, but moral, and
founded on justice. It is very preposterous, therefore, to imagine, that
we can have any idea of property, without fully comprehending the nature
of justice, and shewing its origin in the artifice and contrivance of man.
The origin of justice explains that of property. The same artifice gives
rise to both. As our first and most natural sentiment of morals is
founded on the nature of our passions, and gives the preference to
ourselves and friends, above strangers; it is impossible there can be
naturally any such thing as a fixed right or property, while the opposite
passions of men impel them in contrary directions, and are not restrained
by any convention or agreement.

No one can doubt, that the convention for the distinction of property,
and for the stability of possession, is of all circumstances the most
necessary to the establishment of human society, and that after the
agreement for the fixing and observing of this rule, there remains little
or nothing to be done towards settling a perfect harmony and concord. All
the other passions, besides this of interest, are either easily
restrained, or are not of such pernicious consequence, when indulged.
Vanity is rather to be esteemed a social passion, and a bond of union
among men. Pity and love are to be considered in the same light. And as
to envy and revenge, though pernicious, they operate only by intervals,
and are directed against particular persons, whom we consider as our
superiors or enemies. This avidity alone, of acquiring goods and
possessions for ourselves and our nearest friends, is insatiable,
perpetual, universal, and directly destructive of society. There scarce
is any one, who is not actuated by it; and there is no one, who has not
reason to fear from it, when it acts without any restraint, and gives way
to its first and most natural movements. So that upon the whole, we are
to esteem the difficulties in the establishment of society, to be greater
or less, according to those we encounter in regulating and restraining
this passion.

It is certain, that no affection of the human mind has. both a sufficient
force, and a proper direction to counterbalance the love of gain, and
render men fit members of society, by making them abstain from the
possessions of others. Benevolence to strangers is too weak for this
purpose; and as to the other passions, they rather inflame this avidity,
when we observe, that the larger our possessions are, the more ability we
have of gratifying all our appetites. There is no passion, therefore,
capable of controlling the interested affection, but the very affection
itself, by an alteration of its direction. Now this alteration must
necessarily take place upon the least reflection; since it is evident,
that the passion is much better satisfyed by its restraint, than by its
liberty, and that in preserving society, we make much greater advances in
the acquiring possessions, than in the solitary and forlorn condition,
which must follow upon violence and an universal licence. The question,
therefore, concerning the wickedness or goodness of human nature, enters
not in the least into that other question concerning the origin of
society; nor is there any thing to be considered but the degrees of men's
sagacity or folly. For whether the passion of self-interest be esteemed
vicious or virtuous, it is all a case; since itself alone restrains it: So
that if it be virtuous, men become social by their virtue; if vicious,
their vice has the same effect.

Now as it is by establishing the rule for the stability of possession,
that this passion restrains itself; if that rule be very abstruse, and of
difficult invention; society must be esteemed, in a manner, accidental,
and the effect of many ages. But if it be found, that nothing can be more
simple and obvious than that rule; that every parent, in order to
preserve peace among his children, must establish it; and that these
first rudiments of justice must every day be improved, as the society
enlarges: If all this appear evident, as it certainly must, we may
conclude, that it is utterly impossible for men to remain any considerable
time in that savage condition, which precedes society; but that his very
first state and situation may justly be esteemed social. This, however,
hinders not, but that philosophers may, if they please, extend their
reasoning to the supposed state of nature; provided they allow it to be a
mere philosophical fiction, which never had, and never coued have any
reality. Human nature being composed of two principal parts, which are
requisite in all its actions, the affections and understanding; it is
certain, that the blind motions of the former, without the direction of
the latter, incapacitate men for society: And it may be allowed us to
consider separately the effects, that result from the separate operations
of these two component parts of the mind. The same liberty may be
permitted to moral, which is allowed to natural philosophers; and it is
very usual with the latter to consider any motion as compounded and
consisting of two parts separate from each other, though at the same time
they acknowledge it to be in itself uncompounded and inseparable.

This state of nature, therefore, is to be regarded as a mere fiction, not
unlike that of the golden age, which poets have invented; only with this
difference, that the former is described as full of war, violence and
injustice; whereas the latter is pointed out to us, as the most charming
and most peaceable condition, that can possibly be imagined. The seasons,
in that first age of nature, were so temperate, if we may believe the
poets, that there was no necessity for men to provide themselves with
cloaths and houses as a security against the violence of heat and cold.
The rivers flowed with wine and milk: The oaks yielded honey; and nature
spontaneously produced her greatest delicacies. Nor were these the chief
advantages of that happy age. The storms and tempests were not alone
removed from nature; but those more furious tempests were unknown to
human breasts, which now cause such uproar, and engender such confusion.
Avarice, ambition, cruelty, selfishness, were never heard of: Cordial
affection, compassion, sympathy, were the only movements, with which the
human mind was yet acquainted. Even the distinction of mine and thine was
banished from that happy race of mortals, and carryed with them the very
notions of property and obligation, justice and injustice.

This, no doubt, is to be regarded as an idle fiction; but yet deserves
our attention, because nothing can more evidently shew the origin of
those virtues, which are the subjects of our present enquiry. I have
already observed, that justice takes its rise from human conventions; and
that these are intended as a remedy to some inconveniences, which proceed
from the concurrence of certain qualities of the human mind with the
situation of external objects. The qualities of the mind are selfishness
and limited generosity: And the situation of external objects is their
easy change, joined to their scarcity in comparison of the wants and
desires of men. But however philosophers may have been bewildered in
those speculations, poets have been guided more infallibly, by a certain
taste or common instinct, which in most kinds of reasoning goes farther
than any of that art and philosophy, with which we have been yet
acquainted. They easily perceived, if every man had a tender regard for
another, or if nature supplied abundantly all our wants and desires, that
the jealousy of interest, which justice supposes, could no longer have
place; nor would there be any occasion for those distinctions and limits
of property and possession, which at present are in use among mankind.
Encrease to a sufficient degree the benevolence of men, or the bounty of
nature, and you render justice useless, by supplying its place with much
nobler virtues, and more valuable blessings. The selfishness of men is
animated by the few possessions we have, in proportion to our wants; and
it is to restrain this selfishness, that men have been obliged to separate
themselves from the community, and to distinguish betwixt their own goods
and those of others.

Nor need we have recourse to the fictions of poets to learn this; but
beside the reason of the thing, may discover the same truth by common
experience and observation. It is easy to remark, that a cordial affection
renders all things common among friends; and that married people in
particular mutually lose their property, and are unacquainted with the
mine and thine, which are so necessary, and yet cause such disturbance in
human society. The same effect arises from any alteration in the
circumstances of mankind; as when there is such a plenty of any thing as
satisfies all the desires of men: In which case the distinction of
property is entirely lost, and every thing remains in common. This we may
observe with regard to air and water, though the most valuable of all
external objects; and may easily conclude, that if men were supplied with
every thing in the same abundance, or if every one had the same affection
and tender regard for every one as for himself; justice and injustice
would be equally unknown among mankind.

Here then is a proposition, which, I think, may be regarded as certain,
that it is only from the selfishness and confined generosity of men, along
with the scanty provision nature has made for his wants, that justice
derives its origin. If we look backward we shall find, that this
proposition bestows an additional force on some of those observations,
which we have already made on this subject.

First, we may conclude from it, that a regard to public interest, or a
strong extensive benevolence, is not our first and original motive for
the observation of the rules of justice; since it is allowed, that if men
were endowed with such a benevolence, these rules would never have been
dreamt of.

Secondly, we may conclude from the same principle, that the sense of
justice is not founded on reason, or on the discovery of certain
connexions and relations of ideas, which are eternal, immutable, and
universally obligatory. For since it is confest, that such an alteration
as that above-mentioned, in the temper and circumstances of mankind,
would entirely alter our duties and obligations, it is necessary upon the
common system, that the sense of virtue is derived from reason, to shew
the change which this must produce in the relations and ideas. But it is
evident, that the only cause, why the extensive generosity of man, and
the perfect abundance of every thing, would destroy the very idea of
justice, is because they render it useless; and that, on the other hand,
his confined benevolence, and his necessitous condition, give rise to
that virtue, only by making it requisite to the publick interest, and to
that of every individual. Twas therefore a concern for our own, and the
publick interest, which made us establish the laws of justice; and
nothing can be more certain, than that it is not any relation of ideas,
which gives us this concern, but our impressions and sentiments, without
which every thing in nature is perfectly indifferent to us, and can never
in the least affect us. The sense of justice, therefore, is not founded
on our ideas, but on our impressions.

Thirdly, we may farther confirm the foregoing proposition, THAT THOSE
IMPRESSIONS, WHICH GIVE RISE TO THIS SENSE OF JUSTICE, ARE NOT NATURAL TO
THE MIND OF MAN, BUT ARISE FROM ARTIFICE AND HUMAN CONVENTIONS. For since
any considerable alteration of temper and circumstances destroys equally
justice and injustice; and since such an alteration has an effect only by
changing our own and the publick interest; it follows, that the first
establishment of the rules of justice depends on these different
interests. But if men pursued the publick interest naturally, and with a
hearty affection, they would never have dreamed of restraining each other
by these rules; and if they pursued their own interest, without any
precaution, they would run head-long into every kind of injustice and
violence. These rules, therefore, are artificial, and seek their end in
an oblique and indirect manner; nor is the interest, which gives rise to
them, of a kind that coued be pursued by the natural and inartificial
passions of men.

To make this more evident, consider, that though the rules of justice are
established merely by interest, their connexion with interest is somewhat
singular, and is different from what may be observed on other occasions.
A single act of justice is frequently contrary to public interest; and
were it to stand alone, without being followed by other acts, may, in
itself, be very prejudicial to society. When a man of merit, of a
beneficent disposition, restores a great fortune to a miser, or a
seditious bigot, he has acted justly and laudably, but the public is a
real sufferer. Nor is every single act of justice, considered apart, more
conducive to private interest, than to public; and it is easily conceived
how a man may impoverish himself by a signal instance of integrity, and
have reason to wish, that with regard to that single act, the laws of
justice were for a moment suspended in the universe. But however single
acts of justice may be contrary, either to public or private interest,
it is certain, that the whole plan or scheme is highly conducive, or
indeed absolutely requisite, both to the support of society, and the
well-being of every individual. It is impossible to separate the good from
the ill. Property must be stable, and must be fixed by general rules.
Though in one instance the public be a sufferer, this momentary ill is
amply compensated by the steady prosecution of the rule, and by the peace
and order, which it establishes in society. And even every individual
person must find himself a gainer, on ballancing the account; since,
without justice. society must immediately dissolve, and every one must
fall into that savage and solitary condition, which is infinitely worse
than the worst situation that can possibly be supposed in society. When
therefore men have had experience enough to observe, that whatever may be
the consequence of any single act of justice, performed by a single
person, yet the whole system of actions, concurred in by the whole
society, is infinitely advantageous to the whole, and to every part; it
is not long before justice and property take place. Every member of
society is sen sible of this interest: Every one expresses this sense to
his fellows, along with the resolution he has taken of squaring his
actions by it, on condition that others will do the same. No more is
requisite to induce any one of them to perform an act of justice, who has
the first opportunity. This becomes an example to others. And thus
justice establishes itself by a kind of convention or agreement; that is,
by a sense of interest, supposed to be common to all, and where every
single act is performed in expectation that others are to perform the
like. Without such a convention, no one would ever have dreamed, that
there was such a virtue as justice, or have been induced to conform his
actions to it. Taking any single act, my justice may be pernicious in
every respect; and it is only upon the supposition. that others are to
imitate my example, that I can be induced to embrace that virtue; since
nothing but this combination can render justice advantageous, or afford
me any motives to conform my self to its rules.

We come now to the second question we proposed, viz. Why we annex the
idea of virtue to justice, and of vice to injustice. This question will
not detain us long after the principles, which we have already
established, All we can say of it at present will be dispatched in a few
words: And for farther satisfaction, the reader must wait till we come to
the third part of this book. The natural obligation to justice, viz,
interest, has been fully explained; but as to the moral obligation, or
the sentiment of right and wrong, it will first be requisite to examine
the natural virtues, before we can give a full and satisfactory account
of it. After men have found by experience, that their selfishness and
confined generosity, acting at their liberty, totally incapacitate them
for society; and at the same time have observed, that society is
necessary to the satisfaction of those very passions, they are naturally
induced to lay themselves under the restraint of such rules, as may
render their commerce more safe and commodious. To the imposition then,
and observance of these rules, both in general, and in every particular
instance, they are at first induced only by a regard to interest; and
this motive, on the first formation of society, is sufficiently strong
and forcible. But when society has become numerous, and has encreased to
a tribe or nation, this interest is more remote; nor do men so readily
perceive, that disorder and confusion follow upon every breach of these
rules, as in a more narrow and contracted society. But though in our own
actions we may frequently lose sight of that interest, which we have in
maintaining order, and may follow a lesser and more present interest, we
never fail to observe the prejudice we receive, either mediately or
immediately, from the injustice of others; as not being in that case
either blinded by passion, or byassed by any contrary temptation. Nay
when the injustice is so distant from us, as no way to affect our
interest, it still displeases us; because we consider it as prejudicial
to human society, and pernicious to every one that approaches the person
guilty of it. We partake of their uneasiness by sympathy; and as every
thing, which gives uneasiness in human actions, upon the general survey,
is called Vice, and whatever produces satisfaction, in the same manner,
is denominated Virtue; this is the reason why the sense of moral good and
evil follows upon justice and injustice. And though this sense, in the
present case, be derived only from contemplating the actions of others,
yet we fail not to extend it even to our own actions. The general rule
reaches beyond those instances, from which it arose; while at the same
time we naturally sympathize with others in the sentiments they entertain
of us. Thus self-interest is the original motive to the establishment of
justice: but a sympathy with public interest is the source of the moral
approbation, which attends that virtue.

Though this progress of the sentiments be natural, and even necessary, it
is certain, that it is here forwarded by the artifice of politicians, who,
in order to govern men more easily, and preserve peace in human society,
have endeavoured to produce an esteem for justice, and an abhorrence of
injustice. This, no doubt, must have its effect; but nothing can be more
evident, than that the matter has been carryed too far by certain writers
on morals, who seem to have employed their utmost efforts to extirpate
all sense of virtue from among mankind. Any artifice of politicians may
assist nature in the producing of those sentiments, which she suggests to
us, and may even on some occasions, produce alone an approbation or
esteem for any particular action; but it is impossible it should be the
sole cause of the distinction we make betwixt vice and virtue. For if
nature did not aid us in this particular, it would be in vain for
politicians to talk of honourable or dishonourable, praiseworthy or
blameable. These words would be perfectly unintelligible, and would no
more have any idea annexed to them, than if they were of a tongue
perfectly unknown to us. The utmost politicians can perform, is, to
extend the natural sentiments beyond their original bounds; but still
nature must furnish the materials, and give us some notion of moral
distinctions.

As publick praise and blame encrease our esteem for justice; so private
education and instruction contribute to the same effect. For as parents
easily observe, that a man is the more useful, both to himself and
others, the greater degree of probity and honour he is endowed with; and
that those principles have greater force, when custom and education
assist interest and reflection: For these reasons they are induced to
inculcate on their children, from their earliest infancy, the principles
of probity, and teach them to regard the observance of those rules, by
which society is maintained, as worthy and honourable, and their
violation as base and infamous. By this means the sentiments of honour
may take root in their tender minds, and acquire such firmness and
solidity, that they may fall little short of those principles, which are
the most essential to our natures, and the most deeply radicated in our
internal constitution.

What farther contributes to encrease their solidity, is the interest of
our reputation, after the opinion, that a merit or demerit attends
justice or injustice, is once firmly established among mankind. There is
nothing, which touches us more nearly than our reputation, and nothing on
which our reputation more depends than our conduct, with relation to the
property of others. For this reason, every one, who has any regard to his
character, or who intends to live on good terms with mankind, must fix an
inviolable law to himself, never, by any temptation, to be induced to
violate those principles, which are essential to a man of probity and
honour.

I shall make only one observation before I leave this subject, viz, that
though I assert, that in the state of nature, or that imaginary state,
which preceded society, there be neither justice nor injustice, yet I
assert not, that it was allowable, in such a state, to violate the
property of others. I only maintain, that there was no such thing as
property; and consequently coued be no such thing as justice or
injustice. I shall have occasion to make a similar reflection with regard
to promises, when I come to treat of them; and I hope this reflection,
when duly weighed, will suffice to remove all odium from the foregoing
opinions, with regard to justice and injustice.



SECT. III  OF THE RULES WHICH DETERMINE PROPERTY


