


CHAPTER LIX.




Peregrine meets with Mrs. Hornbeck, and is consoled for his Loss--His
Valet-de-chambre is embroiled with her Duenna, whom, however, he
finds means to appease.


Everything having thus resumed its natural channel, they dined
together in great tranquility. In the afternoon, Peregrine, on
pretence of staying at home to write letters, while his companions
were at the coffee-house, ordered a coach to be called, and, with
his valet-de-chambre, who was the only person acquainted with the
present state of his thoughts, set out for the promenade, to which
all the ladies of fashion resort in the evening during the summer
season, in hopes of seeing his fugitive among the rest.

Having made a circuit round the walk, and narrowly observed every
female in the place, he perceived at some distance the livery of
Hornbeck upon a lacquey that stood at the back of a coach; upon
which he ordered his man to reconnoitre the said carriage, while
he pulled up his glasses, that he might not be discovered before
he should have received some intelligence by which he might conduct
himself on this unexpected occasion, that already began to interfere
with the purpose of his coming thither, though it could not dispute
his attention with the idea of his charming unknown.

His Mercury, having made his observations, reported that there
was nobody in the coach but Mrs. Hornbeck and an elderly woman,
who had all the air of a duenna; and that the servant was not the
same footman who had attended them in France. Encouraged by this
information, our hero ordered himself to be driven close up to
that side of their convenience on which his old mistress sat, and
accosted her with the usual salutation. This lady no sooner beheld
her gallant than her cheeks reddened with a double glow, and she
exclaimed, "Dear brother, I am overjoyed to see you! Pray come into
our coach." He took the hint immediately, and, complying with her
request, embraced this new sister with great affection.

Perceiving that her attendant was very much surprised and alarmed
at this unexpected meeting, she, in order to banish her suspicion,
and at the same time give her lover his cue, told him that his
brother (meaning her husband) was gone to the Spa for a few weeks,
by the advice of physicians, on account of his ill state of health;
and that, from his last letter, she had the pleasure to tell him
he was in a fair way of doing well. The young gentleman expressed
his satisfaction at this piece of news; observing, with an air of
fraternal concern, that if his brother had not made too free with
his constitution, his friends in England would have had no occasion to
repine at his absence and want of health, by which he was banished
from his own country and connections. He then asked, with an
affectation of surprise, why she had not accompanied her spouse,
and was given to understand that his tenderness of affection would
not suffer him to expose her to the fatigues of the journey, which
lay among rocks that were almost inaccessible.

The duenna's doubts being eased by this preamble of conversation,
he changed the subject to the pleasures of the place; and, among
other such questions, inquired if she had as yet visited Versailles.
This is a public-house, situated upon the canal, at the distance of
about two miles from town, and accommodated with tolerable gardens,
for the entertainment of company. When she replied in the negative,
he proposed to accompany her thither immediately; but the governante,
who had hitherto sat silent, objected to this proposal; telling
them, in broken English, that as the lady was under her care, she
could not answer to Mr. Hornbeck for allowing her to visit such a
suspicious place. "As for that matter, madam," said the confident
gallant, "give yourself no trouble; the consequences shall be at
my peril; and I will undertake to insure you against my brother's
resentment." So saying, he directed the coachman to the place, and
ordered his own to follow, under the auspices of his valet-de-chambre;
while the old gentlewoman, overruled by his assurance, quietly
submitted to his authority.

Being arrived at the place, he handed the ladies from the coach,
and then, for the first time, observed that the duenna was lame,
a circumstance of which he did not scruple to take the advantage;
for they had scarce alighted, and drunk a glass of wine, when
he advised his sister to enjoy a walk in the garden; and although
the attendant made shift to keep them almost always in view, they
enjoyed a detached conversation, in which Peregrine learned that the
true cause of her being left behind at Brussels, whilst her husband
proceeded to Spa, was his dread of the company and familiarities of
that place, to which his jealousy durst not expose her; and that
she had lived three weeks in a convent at Lisle, from which she
was delivered by his own free motion, because indeed he could no
longer exist without her company; and, lastly, our lover understood
that her governante was a mere dragon, who had been recommended
to him by a Spanish merchant, whose wife she attended to her dying
day; but she very much questioned whether or not her fidelity was
proof enough against money and strong waters. Peregrine assured her
the experiment should be tried before parting; and they agreed to
pass the night at Versailles, provided his endeavours should succeed.

Having exercised themselves in this manner, until his duenna's spirits
were pretty much exhausted, that she might be the be the better
disposed to recruit them with a glass of liqueur, they returned to
their apartment, and the cordial was recommended and received in a
bumper; but as it did not produce such a visible alteration as the
sanguine hopes of Pickle had made him expect, and the old gentlewoman
observed that it began to be late, and that the gates would be shut
in a little time, he filled up a parting glass, and pledged her in
equal quantity. Her blood was too much chilled to be warmed even by
this extraordinary dose, which made immediate innovation in the brain
of our youth, who, in the gaiety of his imagination, overwhelmed
this she-Argus with such profusion of gallantry, that she was more
intoxicated with his expressions than with the spirits she had drunk.
When in the course of toying he dropped a purse into her bosom, she
seemed to forget how the night wore, and, with the approbation of
her charge, assented to his proposal of having something for supper.

This was a great point which our adventurer had gained; and yet
he plainly perceived that the governante mistook his meaning, by
giving herself credit for all the passion he had professed. As this
error could be rectified by no other means than those of plying
her with the bottle, until her distinguishing faculties should be
overpowered, he promoted a quick circulation. She did him justice,
without any manifest signs of inebriation, so long, that his own
eyes began to reel in the sockets, and he found that before his
scheme could be accomplished, he should be effectually unfitted
for all the purposes of love. He therefore had recourse to his
valet-de-chambre, who understood the hint as soon as it was given,
and readily undertook to perform the part of which his master had
played the prelude. This affair being settled to his satisfaction,
and the night at odds with morning, he took an opportunity of
imparting to the ear of this aged dulcinea a kind whisper, importing
a promise of visiting her when his sister should be retired to her
own chamber, and an earnest desire of leaving her door unlocked.

This agreeable intimation being communicated, he conveyed a caution
of the same nature to Mrs. Hornbeck, as he led her to her apartment;
and darkness and silence no sooner prevailed in the house, than
he and his trusted squire set out on their different voyages.
Everything would have succeeded according to their wish, had not
the valet-de-chambre suffered himself to fall asleep at the side of
his inamorata, and, in the agitation of a violent dream, exclaimed
in a voice so unlike that of her supposed adorer, that she
distinguished the difference at once. Waking him with a pinch and
a loud shriek, she threatened to prosecute him for a rape, and
reviled him with all the epithets her rage and disappointment could
suggest.

The Frenchman, finding himself detected, behaved with great temper
and address:  be begged she would compose herself, on account of
her own reputation, which was extremely dear to him; protesting that
he had a most inviolable esteem for her person. His representations
had weight with the duenna, who, upon recollection, comprehended
the whole affair, and thought it would be her interest to bring
matters to an accommodation. She therefore admitted the apologies
of her bed-fellow, provided he would promise to atone by marriage
for the injury she had sustained; and in this particular he set her
heart at ease by repeated vows, which he uttered with surprising
volubility, though without any intention to perform the least title
of their contents.

Peregrine, who had been alarmed by her exclamation, and ran
to the door with a view of interposing according to the emergency
of the case, overhearing the affair thus compromised, returned to
his mistress, who was highly entertained with an account of what
had passed, foreseeing that for the future she should be under no
difficulty or restriction from the severity of her guard.





CHAPTER LX.




Hornbeck is informed of his Wife's Adventure with Peregrine, for
whom he prepares a Stratagem, which is rendered ineffectual by the
Information of Pipes--The Husband is ducked for his Intention, and
our Hero apprehended by the Patrol.


There was another person, however, still ungained; and that was no
other than her footman, whose secrecy our hero attempted to secure
in the morning by a handsome present, which he received with many
professions of gratitude and devotion to his service; yet this
complaisance was nothing but a cloak used to disguise the design he
harboured of making his master acquainted with the whole transaction.
Indeed this lacquey had been hired, not only as a spy upon his
mistress, but also as a check on the conduct of the governante, with
promise of ample reward if ever he should discover any sinister or
suspicious practices in the course of her behaviour.  As for the
footman whom they had brought from England, he was retained in
attendance upon the person of his master, whose confidence he had
lost by advising him to gentle methods of reclaiming his lady, when
her irregularities had subjected her to his wrath.

The Flemish valet, in consequence of the office he had undertaken,
wrote to Hornbeck by the first post, giving an exact detail of the
adventure at Versailles, with such a description of the pretended
brother as left the husband no room to think he could be any other
person than his first dishonourer; and exasperated him to such
a degree, that he resolved to lay an ambush for this invader, and
at once disqualify him from disturbing his repose, by maintaining
further correspondence with his wife.

Meanwhile the lovers enjoyed themselves without restraint, and
Peregrine's plan of inquiry after his dear unknown was for the
present postponed. His fellow-travellers were confounded at his
mysterious motions, which filled the heart of Jolter with anxiety
and terror. This careful conductor was fraught with such experience
of his pupil's disposition, that he trembled with the apprehension
of some sudden accident, and lived in continual alarm, like a man
that walks under the wall of a nodding tower. Nor did he enjoy any
alleviations of his fears, when, upon telling the young gentleman
that the rest of the company were desirous of departing for Antwerp,
he answered, they were at liberty to consult their own inclinations;
but, for his own part, he was resolved to stay in Brussels a few
days longer. By this declaration the governor was confirmed in the
opinion of his having some intrigue upon the anvil. In the bitterness
of his vexation, he took the liberty of signifying his suspicion,
and reminding him of the dangerous dilemmas to which he had been
reduced by his former precipitation.

Peregrine took his caution in good part, and promised to behave
with such circumspection as would screen him from any troublesome
consequences for the future: but, nevertheless, behaved that same
evening in such a manner as plainly showed that his prudence was
nothing else than vain speculation. He had made an appointment
to spend the night, as usual, with Mrs. Hornbeck; and about nine
o'clock hastened to her lodgings, when he was accosted in the
street by his old discarded friend Thomas Pipes, who, without any
other preamble, told him, that for all he had turned him adrift, he
did not choose to see him run full sail into his enemy's harbour,
without giving him timely notice of the danger. "I'll tell you
what," said he; "mayhap you think I want to curry favour, that I
may be taken in tow again; if you do, you have made a mistake in
your reckoning. I am old enough to be laid up, and have to keep my
planks from the weather. But this here is the affair: I have known
you since you were no higher than a marlinspike, and shouldn't care
to see you deprived of your rigging at these years; whereby I am
informed by Hornbeck's man, whom I this afternoon fell in with by
chance, as how his master has got intelligence of your boarding
his wife, and has steered privately into this port with a large
complement of hands, in order, d'ye see, to secure you while you
are under the hatches. Now, if so be as how you have a mind to
give him a salt eel for his supper, here am I, without hope of fee
or reward, ready to stand by you as long as my timbers will stick
together: and if I expect any recompense, may I be bound to eat
oakum and drink bilge-water for life."

Startled at this information, Peregrine examined him upon the
particulars of his discourse with the lacquey; and when he understood
that Hornbeck's intelligence flowed from the canal of his Flemish
footman, he believed every circumstance of Tom's report, thanked
him for his warning, and, after having reprimanded him for his
misbehaviour at Lisle, assured him that it should be his own fault
if ever they should part again. He then deliberated with himself
whether or not he should retort the purpose upon his adversary; but
when he considered that Hornbeck was not the aggressor, and made
that unhappy husband's case his own, he could not help quitting his
intention of revenge; though, in his opinion, it ought to have been
executed in a more honourable manner, and therefore he determined
to chastise him for his want of spirit.  Nothing surely can be
more insolent and unjust than this determination, which induced him
to punish a person for his want of courage to redress the injury
which he himself had done to his reputation and peace; and yet this
barbarity of decision is authorised by the opinion and practice of
mankind.

With these sentiments he returned to the inn, and, putting a pair
of pistols in his pocket, ordered his valet-de-chambre and Pipes
to follow him at a small distance, so as that they should be within
call in case of necessity, and then posted himself within thirty
yards of his dulcinea's door. There he had not been above half an
hour, when he perceived four men take their station on the other
side, with a view, as he guessed, to watch for his going in, that
he might be taken unaware. But when they had tarried a considerable
time in that corner, without reaping the fruits of their expectation,
their leader, persuaded that the gallant had gained admittance by
some secret means, approached the door with his followers, who,
according to the instructions they had received, no sooner saw it
opened, than they rushed in, leaving their employer in the street,
where he thought his person would be least endangered.  Our
adventurer, seeing him all alone, advanced with speed, and clapping
a pistol to his breast, commanded him to follow his footsteps.
without noise, on pain of immediate death.

Terrified at this sudden apparition, Hornbeck obeyed in silence;
and, in a few minutes, they arrived at the quay, where Pickle,
halting, gave him to understand that he was no stranger to his
villainous design; told him, that if he conceived himself injured
by any circumstance of his conduct, he would now give him an
opportunity of resenting the wrong in a manner becoming a man of
honour. "You have a sword about you," said he; "or, if you don't
choose to put the affair on that issue, here is a brace of pistols;
take which you please." Such an address could not fail to disconcert
a man of his character. After some hesitation, he, in a faltering
accent, denied that his design was to mutilate Mr. Pickle, but that
he thought himself entitled to the benefit of the law, by which he
would have obtained a divorce, if he could have procured evidence
of his wife's infidelity; and, with that view, he had employed people
to take advantage of the information he had received. With regard
to this alternative, he declined it entirely, because he could not
see what satisfaction he should enjoy in being shot through the
head, or run through the lungs, by a person who had already wronged
him in an irreparable manner. Lastly, his fear made him propose
that the affair should be left to the arbitration of two creditable
men, altogether unconcerned in the dispute.

To these remonstrances Peregrine replied, in the style of a hot-headed
young man, conscious of his own unjustifiable behaviour, that every
gentleman ought to be a judge of his own honour and therefore he
would submit to the decision of no umpire whatsoever; that he would
forgive his want of courage, which might be a natural infirmity,
but his mean dissimulation he could not pardon. That, as he was
certified of the rascally intent of his ambuscade by undoubted
intelligence, he would treat him, not with a retaliation of his
own treachery, but with such indignity as a scoundrel deserves to
suffer, unless he would make one effort to maintain the character
he assumed in life. So saying, he again presented his pistols,
which being rejected as before, he called his two ministers, and
ordered them to duck him in the canal.

This command was pronounced and executed almost in the same breath,
to the unspeakable terror and disorder of the poor shivering patient,
who, having undergone the immersion, ran about like a drowned rat,
squeaking for assistance and revenge. His cries were overheard by
the patrol, who, chancing to pass that way, took him under their
protection, and, in consequence of his complaint and information,
went in pursuit of our adventurer and his attendants, who were
soon overtaken and surrounded. Rash and inconsiderate as the young
gentleman was, he did not pretend to stand upon the defensive
against a file of musketeers, although Pipes had drawn his cutlass
at their approach, but surrendered himself without opposition,
and was conveyed to the main guard, where the commanding officer,
engaged by his appearance and address, treated him with all imaginable
respect. Hearing the particulars of his adventure, he assured him
that the prince would consider the whole as a tour de jeunesse,
and order him to be released without delay.

Next morning, when this gentleman gave in his report, he made such
a favourable representation of the prisoner, that our hero was on
the point of being discharged, when Hornbeck preferred a complaint,
accusing him of a purposed assassination, and praying that such
punishment should be inflicted upon him as his highness should
think adequate to the nature of the crime. The prince, perplexed
with this petition, in consequence of which he foresaw that he
must disoblige a British subject, sent for the plaintiff, of whom
he had some knowledge, and, in person, exhorted him to drop the
prosecution, which would only serve to propagate his own shame. But
Hornbeck was too much incensed to listen to any proposal of that
kind, and peremptorily demanded justice against the prisoner, whom
he represented as an obscure adventurer, who had made repeated
attempts upon his honour and his life. Prince Charles told him,
that what he had advised was in the capacity of a friend; but, since
he insisted upon his acting as a magistrate, the affair should be
examined, and determined according to the dictates of justice and
truth.

The petitioner being dismissed with this promise, the defendant
was, in his turn, brought before the judge, whose prepossession in
his favour was in a great measure weakened by what his antagonist
had said to the prejudice of his birth and reputation.





CHAPTER LXI.




Peregrine is released--Jolter confounded at his mysterious Conduct--A
Contest happens between the Poet and Painter, who are reconciled
by the Mediation of their Fellow-Travellers.


Our hero, understanding from some expressions which escaped
the prince, that he was considered in the light of a sharper and
assassin, begged that he might have the liberty of sending for
some vouchers, that would probably vindicate his character from
the malicious aspersions of his adversary. This permission being
granted, he wrote a letter to his governor, desiring that he would
bring to him the letters of recommendation which he had received
from the British ambassador at Paris, and such other papers as he
thought conducive to evince the importance of his situation.

The billet was given in charge to one of the subaltern officers
on duty, who carried it to the inn, and demanded to speak with Mr.
Jolter. Pallet, who happened to be at the door when this messenger
arrived, and heard him inquire for the tutor, ran directly to that
gentleman's apartment, and in manifest disorder, told him that a
huge fellow of a soldier, with a monstrous pair of whiskers, and
fur cap as big as a bushel, was asking for him at the door. The
poor governor began to shake at this intimation, though he was
not conscious of having committed anything that could attract the
attention of the state. When the officer appeared at his chamber
door, his confusion increased to such a degree, that his perception
seemed to vanish, and the subaltern repeated the purport of his errand
three times, before he could comprehend his meaning, or venture to
receive the letter which he presented. At length he summoned all
his fortitude, and having perused the epistle, his terror sank into
anxiety. His ingenuous fear immediately suggested, that Peregrine
was confined in a dungeon, for some outrage he had committed. He
ran with great agitation to a trunk, and, taking out a bundle of
papers, followed his conductor, being attended by the painter, to
whom he had hinted his apprehension.

When they passed through the guard, which was under arms, the hearts
of both died within them; and when they came into the presence,
there was such an expression of awful horror on the countenance
of Jolter, that the prince, observing his dismay, was pleased to
encourage him with an assurance that he had nothing to fear. Thus
comforted, he recollected himself so well as to understand his
pupil, when he desired him to produce the ambassador's letters;
some of which being open, were immediately read by his highness,
who was personally acquainted with the writer, and knew several
of the noblemen to whom they were addressed. These recommendations
were so warm, and represented the young gentleman in such an
advantageous light, that the prince, convinced of the injustice his
character had suffered by the misrepresentation of Hornbeck, took
our hero by the hand, asked pardon for the doubts he had entertained
of his honour, declared him from that moment at liberty, ordered
his domestics to be enlarged, and offered him his countenance and
protection as long as he should remain in the Austrian Netherlands.
At the same time, he cautioned him against indiscretion in the
course of his gallantries; and took his word of honour, that he
should drop all measures of resentment against the person of Hornbeck
during his residence in that place.

The delinquent, thus honourably acquitted, thanked the prince
in the most respectful manner for his generosity and candour, and
retired with his two friends, who were amazed and bewildered in
their thoughts at what they had seen and heard, the whole adventure
still remaining without the sphere of their comprehension, which
was not at all enlarged by the unaccountable appearance of Pipes,
who, with the valet-de-chambre, joined them at the castle gate.
Had Jolter been a man of a luxuriant imagination, his brain would
undoubtedly have suffered in the investigation of his pupil's
mysterious conduct, which he strove in vain to unravel; but his
intellects were too solid to be affected by the miscarriage of
his invention; and, as Peregrine did not think proper to make him
acquainted with the cause of his being apprehended, he contented
himself with supposing that there was a lady in the case.

The painter, whose imagination was of a more flimsy texture. formed
a thousand chimerical conjectures, which he communicated to Pickle,
in imperfect insinuations, hoping, by his answers and behaviour,
to discover the truth: but the youth, in order to tantalise him,
eluded all his inquiries, with such appearance of industry and
art, as heightened his curiosity, while it disappointed his aim,
and inflamed him to such a degree of impatience, that his wits began
to be unsettled: then Peregrine was fain to recompose his brain,
by telling him in confidence, that he had been arrested as a spy.
This secret he found more intolerable than his former uncertainty.
He ran from one apartment to another, like a goose in the agonies
of egg-laying, with intention of disburdening this important load;
but Jolter being engaged with the pupil, and all the people of the
house ignorant of the only language he could speak, he was compelled,
with infinite reluctance, to address himself to the doctor, who
was at that time shut up in his own chamber. Having knocked at the
door to no purpose, he peeped through the key-hole, and saw the
physician sitting at a table, with a pen in one hand, and paper
before him, his head reclined upon his other hand, and his eyes fixed
upon the ceiling, as if he had been entranced. Pallet, concluding
that he was under the power of some convulsion, endeavoured to force
the door open, and the noise of his efforts recalled the doctor
from his reverie.

This poetical republican, being so disagreeably disturbed, started
up in a passion, and, opening the door, no sooner perceived who
had interrupted him, than he flung it in his face with great fury,
and cursed him for his impertinent intrusion, which had deprived him
of the most delightful vision that ever regaled the human fancy.
He imagined, as he afterwards imparted to Peregrine, that, as he
enjoyed himself in walking through the flowery plain that borders
on Parnassus, he was met by a venerable sage, whom, by a certain
divine vivacity that lightened from his eyes, he instantly knew to
be the immortal Pindar. He was immediately struck with reverence
and awe, and prostrated himself before the apparition, which, taking
him by the hand, lifted him gently from the ground and, with words
more sweet than the honey of the Hybla bees, told him, that, of
all the moderns, he alone was visited by that celestial impulse
by which he himself had been inspired, when he produced his most
applauded odes.  So saying, he led him up the sacred hill, persuaded
him to drink a copious draught of the waters of the Hippocrene, and
then presented him to the harmonious Nine, who crowned his temples
with a laurel wreath.

No wonder that he was enraged to find himself cut off from such
sublime society. He raved in Greek against the invader, who was so
big with his own purpose, that, unmindful of the disgrace he had
sustained, and disregarding all the symptoms of the physician's
displeasure, he applied his mouth to the door, in an eager tone.
"I'll hold you any wager," said he, "that I guess the true cause
of Mr. Pickle's imprisonment." To this challenge he received no
reply, and therefore repeated it, adding, "I suppose you imagine
he was taken up for fighting a duel, or affronting a nobleman, or
lying with some man's wife, or some such matter: but, egad! you
was never more mistaken in your life; and I'll lay my Cleopatra
against your Homer's head, that in four-and-twenty hours you shan't
light on the true reason."

The favourite of the muses, exasperated at this vexatious perseverance
of the painter, who he imagined had come to tease and insult him,
"I would," said he, "sacrifice a cock to Esculapius, were I assured
that any person had been taken up for extirpating such a troublesome
Goth as you are from the face of the earth. As for your boasted
Cleopatra, which you say was drawn from your own wife, I believe
the copy has as much of the to kalon as the original: but, were
it mine, it should be hung up in the Temple of Cloacina, as the
picture of that goddess; for any other apartment would be disgraced
by its appearance."--"Hark ye, sir," replied Pallet, enraged in his
turn at the contemptuous mention of his darling performance, "you
may make as free with my wife as you think proper, but 'ware my
works; those are the children of my fancy, conceived by the glowing
imagination, and formed by the art of my own hands: and you yourself
are a Goth, and a Turk, and a Tartar, and an impudent pretending
jackanapes, to treat with such disrespect a production which, in
the opinion of all the connoisseurs of the age, will, when finished,
be a masterpiece in its kind, and do honour to human genius and
skill. So I say again and again, and I care not though your friend
Playtor heard me, that you have no more taste than a drayman's horse,
and that those foolish notions of the ancients ought to be drubbed
out of you with a  pod cudgel, that you might learn to treat men
of parts with more veneration. Perhaps you may not always be in
the company of one who will halloo for assistance when you are on
the brink of being chastised for your insolence, as I did, when
you brought upon yourself the resentment of that Scot, who, by the
Lord! would have paid you both scot and lot, as Falstaff says, if
the French officer had not put him in arrest."

The physician, to this declamation, which was conveyed through the
key-hole, answered, that he (the painter) was a fellow so infinitely
below his consideration, that his conscience upbraided him with no
action of his life, except that of choosing such a wretch for his
companion and fellow-traveller. That he had viewed his character
through the medium of good-nature and compassion, which had prompted
him to give Pallet an opportunity of acquiring some new ideas
under his immediate instruction; but he had abused his goodness and
condescension in such a flagrant manner, that he was now determined
to discard him entirely from his acquaintance; and desired him,
for the present, to take himself away, on pain of being kicked for
his presumption.

Pallet was too much incensed to be intimidated by this threat, which
he retorted with great virulence, defying him to come forth, that
it might appear which of them was best skilled in that pedestrian
exercise, which he immediately began to practise against the door
with such thundering application, as reached the ears of Pickle
and his governor, who coming out into the passage, and seeing him
thus employed, asked if he had forgot the chamber-pots of Alost,
that he ventured to behave in such a manner as entitled him to a
second prescription of the same nature.

The doctor, understanding that there was company at hand, opened
the door in a twinkling, and, springing upon his antagonist like
a tiger, a fierce contention would have ensued, to the infinite
satisfaction of our hero, had not Jolter, to the manifest peril
of his own person, interposed, and partly by force, and partly by
exhortations, put a stop to the engagement before it was fairly
begun. After having demonstrated the indecency of such a vulgar
rencontre, betwixt two fellow-citizens in a foreign land, he
begged to know the cause of their dissension, and offered his good
offices towards an accommodation. Peregrine also, seeing the fray
was finished, expressed himself to the same purpose; and the painter,
for obvious reasons, declining an explanation, his antagonist
told the youth what a mortifying interruption he had suffered by
the impertinent intrusion of Pallet, and gave him a detail of the
particulars of his vision, as above recited. The arbiter owned the
provocation was not to be endured; and decreed that the offender
should make some atonement for his transgression. Upon which the
painter observed, that, however he might have been disposed to make
acknowledgments, if the physician had signified his displeasure
like a gentleman, the complainant had now forfeited all claim to
any such concessions, by the vulgar manner in which he had reviled
him and his productions; observing, that, if he (the painter) had
been inclined to retort his slanderous insinuations, the republican's
own works would have afforded ample subject for his ridicule and
censure.

After divers disputes and representations, peace was at length
concluded, on condition, that, for the future, the doctor should
never mention Cleopatra, unless he could say something in her
praise; and that Pallet, in consideration of his having been the
first aggressor, should make a sketch of the physician's vision,
to be engraved and prefixed to the next edition of his odes.





CHAPTER LXII.




The Travellers depart for Antwerp, at which place the Painter gives
a loose to his Enthusiasm.


Our adventurer, baffled in all his efforts to retrieve his lost
Amanda, yielded at length to the remonstrances of his governor
and fellow-travellers, who, out of pure complaisance to him, had
exceeded their intended stay by six days at least; and a couple of
post-chaises, with three riding-horses, being hired, they departed
from Brussels in the morning, dined at Mechlin, and arrived about
eight in the evening at the venerable city of Antwerp. During this
day's journey Pallet was elevated to an uncommon flow of spirits,
with the prospect of seeing the birthplace of Rubens, for whom he
professed an enthusiastic admiration. He swore, that the pleasure
he felt was equal to that of a Mussulman, on the last day of his
pilgrimage to Mecca; and that he already considered himself a native
of Antwerp, being so intimately acquainted with their so justly
boasted citizen, from whom, at certain junctures, he could not
help believing himself derived, because his own pencil adopted the
manner of that great man with surprising facility, and his face
wanted nothing but a pair of whiskers and a beard, to exhibit the
express image of the Fleming's countenance. He told them he was
so proud of this resemblance, that, in order to render it more
striking, he had, at one time of his life, resolved to keep his
face sacred from the razor; and in that purpose had persevered,
notwithstanding the continual reprehensions of Mrs. Pallet, (who,
being then with child), said, his aspect was so hideous, that she
dreaded a miscarriage every hour, until she threatened in plain
terms, to dispute the sanity of his intellects, and apply to the
chancellor for a committee.

The doctor, on this occasion, observed, that a man who is not proof
against the solicitations of a woman, can never expect to make a
great figure in life; that painters and poets ought to cultivate
no wives but the Muses; or, if they are by the accidents of fortune
encumbered with families, they should carefully guard against
that pernicious weakness, falsely honoured with the appellation of
natural affection, and pay no manner of regard to the impertinent
customs of the world. "Granting that you had been for a short time
deemed a lunatic," said he, "you might have acquitted yourself
honourably of that imputation, by some performance that would have
raised your character above all censure. Sophocles himself, that
celebrated tragic poet, who, for the sweetness of his versification,
was styled Melitta, or "the Bee," in his old age, suffered the same
accusation from his own children. who, seeing him neglect his family
affairs, and devote himself entirely to poetry, carried him before
the magistrate, as a man whose intellects were so much impaired by
the infirmities of age, that he was no longer fit to manage his
domestic concerns; upon which the reverend bard produced his tragedy
of Oidipus epi Kolono, as a work he had just finished; which being
perused, instead of being declared unsound of understanding, he
was dismissed with admiration and applause. I wish your beard and
whiskers had been sanctioned by the like authority; though I am
afraid you would have been in the predicament of those disciples of
a certain philosopher, who drank decoctions of cummin seeds, that
their faces might adopt the paleness of their master's complexion,
hoping that, in being as wan, they would be as learned as their
teacher." The painter, stung by this sarcasm, replied, "or like
those virtuosi, who, by repeating Greek, eating sillikicaby, and
pretending to see visions, think they equal the ancients in taste
and genius." The physician retorted, Pallet rejoined, and the
altercation continued until they entered the gates of Antwerp, when
the admirer of Rubens broke forth into a rapturous exclamation,
which put an end to the dispute and attracted the notice of
the inhabitants, many of whom by shrugging up their shoulders and
pointing to their foreheads, gave shrewd indications that they
believed him a poor gentleman disordered in his brain.

They had no sooner alighted at the inn, than this pseudo-enthusiast
proposed to visit the great church, in which he had been informed
some of his master's pieces were to be seen, and was remarkably
chagrined, when he understood that he could not be admitted
till next day. He rose next morning by day-break, and disturbed
his fellow-travellers in such a noisy and clamorous manner, that
Peregrine determined to punish him with some new infliction, and,
while he put on his clothes, actually formed the plan of promoting
a duel between him and the doctor, in the management of which,
he promised himself store of entertainment, from the behaviour of
both.

Being provided with one of those domestics who are always in waiting
to offer their services to strangers on their first arrival, they
were conducted to the house of a gentleman who had an excellent
collection of pictures; and though the greatest part of them were
painted by his favourite artist, Pallet condemned them all by the
lump, because Pickle had told him beforehand that there was not
one performance of Rubens among the number.

The next place they visited was what is called the Academy of
Painting, furnished with a number of paltry pieces, in which our
painter recognised the style of Peter Paul, with many expressions
of admiration, on the same sort of previous intelligence.

From this repository, they went to the great church; and being led
to the tomb of Rubens, the whimsical painter fell upon his knees,
and worshipped with such appearance of devotion, that the attendant,
scandalized at his superstition, pulled him up, observing, with
great warmth, that the person buried in that place was no saint,
but as great a sinner as himself; and that, if he was spiritually
disposed, there was a chapel of the Blessed Virgin, at the distance
of three yards on the right hand, to which he might retire. He
thought it was incumbent upon him to manifest some extraordinary
inspiration, while he resided on the spot where Rubens was born;
and, therefore, his whole behaviour was an affectation of rapture,
expressed in distracted exclamations, convulsive starts, and uncouth
gesticulations. In the midst of this frantic behaviour, he saw an
old Capuchin, with a white beard, mount the pulpit, and hold forth
to the congregation with such violence of emphasis and gesture, as
captivated his fancy; and, bawling aloud, "Zounds! what an excellent
Paul preaching at Athens!" he pulled a pencil and a small memorandum
book from his pocket, and began to take a sketch of the orator,
with great eagerness and agitation, saying "Egad! friend Raphael,
we shall see whether you or I have got the best knack at trumping
up an apostle." This appearance of disrespect gave offence to the
audience, who began to murmur against this heretic libertine; when
one of the priests belonging to the choir, in order to prevent any
ill consequence from their displeasure, came and told him in the
French language, that such liberties were not permitted in their
religion, and advised him to lay aside his implements, lest the
people should take umbrage at his design, and be provoked to punish
him as a profane scoffer at their worship.

The painter, seeing himself addressed by a friar, who, while
he spoke, bowed with great complaisance, imagined that he was a
begging brother come to supplicate his charity; and his attention
being quite engrossed by the design he was making, he patted the
priest's shaven crown with his hand, saying, Oter tems, oter tems,
and then resumed his pencil with great earnestness. The ecclesiastic,
perceiving that the stranger did not comprehend his meaning, pulled
him by the sleeve, and explained himself in the Latin tongue: upon
which Pallet, provoked at his intrusion, cursed him aloud for an
impudent beggarly son of a w--, and, taking out a shilling, flung
it upon the pavement, with manifest signs of indignation.

Some of the common people, enraged to see their religion contemned,
and their priests insulted at the very altar, rose from their
seats, and, surrounding the astonished painter, one of the number
snatched his book from his hand, and tore it into a thousand pieces.
Frightened as he was, he could not help crying "Fire and fagots!
all my favourite ideas are gone to wreck!" and was in danger of
being very roughly handled by the crowd, had not Peregrine stepped
in, and assured them, that he was a poor unhappy gentleman,
who laboured under a transport of the brain. Those who understood
the French language communicated this information to the rest, so
that he escaped without any other chastisement than being obliged
to retire.  And as they could not see the famous Descent from the
Cross till after the service was finished, they were conducted
by their domestic to the house of a painter, where they found a
beggar standing for his picture, and the artist actually employed
in representing a huge louse that crawled upon his shoulder. Pallet
was wonderfully pleased with this circumstance, which he said
was altogether a new thought, and an excellent hint, of which he
would make his advantage: and, in the course of his survey of this
Fleming's performances, perceiving a piece in which two flies were
engaged upon the carcass of a dog half devoured, he ran to his
brother brush, and swore he was worthy of being a fellow-citizen
of the immortal Rubens. He then lamented, with many expressions of
grief and resentment, that he had lost his commonplace book, in
which he had preserved a thousand conceptions of the same sort,
formed by the accidental objects of his senses and imagination;
and took an opportunity of telling his fellow-travellers, that in
execution he had equalled, if not excelled, the two ancient painters
who had vied with each other in the representation of a curtain
and a bunch of grapes; for he had exhibited the image of a certain
object so like to nature, that the bare sight of it set a whole
hog-sty in an uproar.

When he had examined and applauded all the productions of this minute
artist, they returned to the great church, and were entertained
with the view of that celebrated masterpiece of Rubens, in which
he has introduced the portraits of himself and his whole family.
The doors that conceal this capital performance were no sooner
unfolded, than our enthusiast, debarred the use of speech, by
a previous covenant with his friend Pickle, lifted up his hands
and eyes, and putting himself in the attitude of Hamlet, when his
father's ghost appears, adored in silent ecstasy and awe. He even
made a merit of necessity; and, when they had withdrawn from the
place, protested that his whole faculties were swallowed up in love
and admiration. He now professed himself more than ever enamoured
of the Flemish school, raved in extravagant encomiums, and proposed
that the whole company should pay homage to the memory of the divine
Rubens, by repairing forthwith to the house in which he lived, and
prostrating themselves on the floor of his painting-room.

As there was nothing remarkable in the tenement, which had been
rebuilt more than once since the death of that great man, Peregrine
excused himself from complying with the proposal, on pretence of
being fatigued with the circuit they had already performed. Jolter
declined it for the same reason; and the question being put to
the doctor, he refused his company with an air of disdain. Pallet,
piqued at his contemptuous manner, asked, "if he would not go and
see the habitation of Pindoor, provided he was in the city where
that poet lived?" and when the physician observed, that there was
an infinite difference between the men, "That I'll allow," replied
the painter, "for the devil a poet ever lived in Greece or Troy,
that was worthy to clean the pencils of our beloved Rubens." The
physician could not, with any degree of temper and forbearance,
hear this outrageous blasphemy, for which, he said, Pallet's eyes
ought to be picked out by owls; and the dispute arose, as usual,
to such scurrilities of language, and indecency of behaviour, that
passengers began to take notice of their animosity, and Peregrine
was obliged to interpose for his own credit.





CHAPTER LXIII.




Peregrine artfully foments a Quarrel between Pallet and the Physician,
who fight a Duel on the Ramparts.


The painter betook himself to the house of the Flemish Raphael,
and the rest of the company went back to their lodgings; where
the young gentleman, taking the advantage of being alone with the
physician, recapitulated all the affronts he had sustained from
the painter's petulance, aggravating every circumstance of the
disgrace, and advising him, in the capacity of a friend, to take
care of his honour, which could not fail to suffer in the opinion
of the world, if he allowed himself to be insulted with impunity,
by one so much his inferior in every degree of consideration.

The physician assured him, that Pallet had hitherto escaped
chastisement, by being deemed an object unworthy his resentment, and
in consideration of the wretch's family, for which his compassion
was interested; but that repeated injuries would inflame the most
benevolent disposition. And, though he could find no precedent of
duelling among the Greeks and Romans, whom he considered as the
patterns of demeanour, Pallet should no longer avail himself of
his veneration for the ancients, but be punished for the very next
offence he should commit.

Having thus spirited up the doctor to a resolution from which he
could not decently swerve, our adventurer acted the incendiary with
the other party also; giving him to understand, that the physician
treated his character with such contempt, and behaved to him
with such insolence, as no gentleman ought to bear: that, for his
own part, he was every day put out of countenance by their mutual
animosity, which appeared in nothing but vulgar expressions, more
becoming shoe-boys and oyster-women than men of honour and education;
and therefore he should be obliged, contrary to his inclination,
to break off all correspondence with them both, if they would not
fall upon some method to retrieve the dignity of their characters.

These representations would have had little effect upon the timidity
of the painter, who was likewise too much of a Grecian to approve
of single combat, in any other way than that of boxing, an exercise
in which he was well skilled, had they not been accompanied with an
insinuation, that his antagonist was no Hector, and that he might
humble him into any concession, without running the least personal
risk. Animated by this assurance, our second Rubens set the trumpet
of defiance to his mouth, swore he valued not his life a rush,
when his honour was concerned, and entreated Mr. Pickle to be the
bearer of a challenge, which he would instantly commit to writing.

The mischievous fomenter highly applauded this manifestation of
courage, by which he was at liberty to cultivate his friendship
and society, but declined the office of carrying the billet, that
his tenderness of Pallet's reputation might not be misinterpreted
into an officious desire of promoting quarrels. At the same time,
he recommended Tom Pipes, not only as a very proper messenger
on this occasion, but also as a trusty second in the field. The
magnanimous painter took his advice, and, retiring to his chamber,
penned a challenge in these terms:--

     "Sir,--When I am heartily provoked, I fear not the devil
     himself; much less--I will not call you a pedantic coxcomb,
     nor an unmannerly fellow, because these are the hippethets of
     the vulgar; but, remember, such as you are, I nyther love you
     nor fear you; but, on the contrary, expect satisfaction for your
     audacious behaviour to me on divers occasions; and will, this
     evening, in the twilight, meet you on the ramparts with sword
     and pistol, where the Lord have mercy on the soul of one of us,
     for your body shall find no favour with your incensed defier
     till death,
                                      "Layman Pallet."

This resolute defiance, after having been submitted to the perusal,
and honoured with the approbation of our youth, was committed to
the charge of Pipes, who, according to his orders, delivered it
in the afternoon; and brought for answer, that the physician would
attend him at the appointed time and place. The challenger was
evidently discomposed at the unexpected news of this acceptance,
and ran about the house in great disorder, in quest of Peregrine,
to beg his further advice and assistance; but understanding that
the youth was engaged in private with his adversary, he began
to suspect some collusion, and cursed himself for his folly and
precipitation. He even entertained some thoughts of retracting his
invitation, and submitting to the triumph of his antagonist: but
before he would stoop to this opprobrious condescension, he resolved
to try another expedient, which might be the means of saving both
his character and person. In this hope he visited Mr. Jolter, and
very gravely desired he would be so good as to undertake the office
of his second in a duel which he was to fight that evening with
the physician.

The governor, instead of answering his expectation, in expressing
fear and concern, and breaking forth into exclamations of "Good
God!  gentlemen, what d'ye mean? You shall not murder one another
while it is in my power to prevent your purpose. I will go directly
to the governor of the place, who shall interpose his authority";--I
say, instead of these and other friendly menaces of prevention,
Jolter heard the proposal with the most phlegmatic tranquility, and
excused himself from accepting the honour he intended for him, on
account of his character and situation, which would not permit him
to be concerned in any such rencontres. Indeed, this mortifying
reception was owing to a previous hint from Peregrine, who, dreading
some sort of interruption from his governor, had made him acquainted
with his design, and assured him, that the affair should not be
brought to any dangerous issue.

Thus disappointed, the dejected challenger was overwhelmed with
perplexity and dismay; and, in the terrors of death or mutilation,
resolved to deprecate the wrath of his enemy, and conform to any
submission he should propose, when he was accidentally encountered
by our adventurer, who, with demonstrations of infinite satisfaction,
told him in confidence, that the billet had thrown the doctor into
an agony of consternation; that his acceptance of his challenge
was a mere effort of despair, calculated to confound the ferocity
of the sender, and dispose him to listen to terms of accommodation;
that he had imparted the letter to him with fear and trembling, on
pretence of engaging him as a second, but, in reality, with a view
of obtaining his good offices in promoting a reconciliation; "but,
perceiving the situation of his mind," added our hero, "I thought
it would be more for your honour to baffle his expectation, and
therefore I readily undertook the task of attending him to the
field, in full assurance that he will there humble himself before
you, even to prostration. In this security, you may go and prepare
your arms, and bespeak the assistance of Pipes, who will squire
you in the field, while I keep myself up, that our correspondence
may not be suspected by the physician." Pallet's spirits, that were
sunk to dejection, rose at this encouragement to all the insolence
of triumph; he again declared his contempt of danger, and his
pistols being loaded and accommodated with new flints, by his trusty
armour-bearer, he waited, without flinching, for the hour of battle.

On the first approach of twilight, somebody knocked at his door,
and Pipes having opened it at his desire, he heard the voice
of his antagonist pronounce, "Tell Mr. Pallet that I am going to
the place of appointment." The painter was not a little surprised
at this anticipation, which so ill agreed with the information he
had received from Pickle; and his concern beginning to recur, he
fortified himself with a large bumper of brandy, which, however,
did not overcome the anxiety of his thoughts. Nevertheless, he set
out on the expedition with his second, betwixt whom and himself
the following dialogue passed, in their way to the ramparts.

"Mr. Pipes," said the painter, with disordered accent, "methinks
the doctor was in a pestilent hurry with that message of his."--"Ey,
ey," answered Tom, "I do suppose he longs to be foul of you."--"What,"
replied the other, "d'ye think he thirsts after my blood?"--"To
be sure a does," said Pipes, thrusting a large quid of tobacco in
his check, with great deliberation. "If that be the case," cried
Pallet, beginning to shake, "he is no better than a cannibal, and
no Christian ought to fight him on equal footing." Tom observing
his emotion, eyed him with a frown of indignation, saying, "You an't
afraid, are you?"--"God forbid," replied the challenger, stammering
with fear; "what should I be afraid of? The worst he can do is to
take my life, and then he'll be answerable both to God and man for
the murder. Don't you think he will?"--"I think no such matter,"
answered the second; "if so be as how he puts a brace of bullets
through your bows, and kills you fairly, it is no more murder than
if I was to bring down a noddy from the main top-sail yard."

By this time Pallet's teeth chattered with such violence, that he
could scarce pronounce this reply: "Mr. Thomas, you seem to make
very light of a man's life; but I trust in the Almighty. I shall
not be so easily brought down. Sure many a man has fought a duel
without losing his life. Do you imagine that I run such a hazard
of falling by the hand of my adversary?"--"You may or you may not,"
said the unconcerned Pipes, "just as it happens. What then? Death
is a debt that every man owes, according to the song; and if you
set foot to foot, I think one of you must go to pot."--"Foot to
foot!" exclaimed the terrified painter: "that's downright butchery;
and I'll be d-- before I fight any man on earth in such a barbarous
way. What! d'ye take me to be a savage beast?" This declaration he
made while they ascended the ramparts.

His attendant perceiving the physician and his second at the
distance of a hundred paces before them, gave him notice of their
appearance, and advised him to make ready, and behave like a man.
Pallet in vain endeavoured to conceal his panic, which discovered
itself in a universal trepidation of body, and the lamentable tone in
which he answered this exhortation of Pipes, saying, "I do behave
like a man; but you would have me act the part of a brute. Are
they coming this way?" When Tom told him that they had faced about,
and admonished him to advance, the nerves of his arm refused their
office, he could not hold out his pistol, and instead of going
forward, retreated with an insensibility of motion; till Pipes,
placing himself in the rear, set his own back to that of his
principal, and swore he should not budge an inch farther in that
direction.

While the valet thus tutored the painter, his master enjoyed the
terrors of the physician, which were more ridiculous than those
of Pallet, because he was more intent upon disguising them. His
declaration to Pickle in the morning would not suffer him to start
any objections when he received the challenge; and finding that the
young gentleman made no offer of mediating the affair, but rather
congratulated him on the occasion, when he communicated the painter's
billet, all his efforts consisted in oblique hints, and general
reflections upon the absurdity of duelling, which was first introduced
among civilised nations by the barbarous Huns and Longobards. He
likewise pretended to ridicule the use of firearms, which confounded
all the distinctions of skill and address, and deprived a combatant
of the opportunity of signalizing his personal prowess.

Pickle assented to the justness of his observations; but, at the
same time, represented the necessity of complying with the customs
of this world, ridiculous as they were, on which a man's honour and
reputation depend: so that, seeing no hopes of profiting by that
artifice, the republican's agitation became more and more remarkable;
and he proposed, in plain terms, that they should contend in armour,
like the combatants of ancient days; for it was but reasonable that
they should practise the manner of fighting, since they adopted
the disposition of those iron times.

Nothing could have afforded more diversion to our hero than the
sight of two such duellists cased in iron; and he wished that he
had promoted the quarrel in Brussels, where he could have hired
the armour of Charles the Fifth, and the valiant Duke of Parma, for
their accommodation; but as there was no possibility of furnishing
them cap-a-pie at Antwerp, he persuaded him to conform to the
modern use of the sword, and meet the painter on his own terms;
and suspecting that his fear would supply him with other excuses
for declining the combat, he comforted him with some distant
insinuations, to the prejudice of his adversary's courage, which
would, in all probability, evaporate before any mischief could
happen.

Notwithstanding this encouragement, he could not suppress the
reluctance with which he went to the field, and cast many a wishful
look over his left shoulder, to see whether or not his adversary was
at his heels. When, by the advice of his second, he took possession
of the ground, and turned about with his face to the enemy, it was
not so dark, but that Peregrine could perceive the unusual paleness
of his countenance, and the sweat standing in large drops upon his
forehead; nay, there was a manifest disorder in his speech, when he
regretted his want of the pila and parma, with which he would have
made a rattling noise, to astonish his foe, in springing forward,
and singing the hymn to battle, in the manner of the ancients.

In the meantime, observing the hesitation of his antagonist, who,
far from advancing, seemed to recoil, and even struggle with his
second, he guessed the situation of the painter's thoughts, and,
collecting all the manhood that he possessed, seized the opportunity
of profiting by his enemy's consternation. Striking his sword and
pistol together, he advanced in a sort of trot, raising a loud
howl, in which he repeated, in lieu of the Spartan song, part of
the strophe from one of Pindar's Pythia, beginning with ek theon gar
makanoi pasai Broteais aretais, etc. This imitation of the Greeks
had all the desired effect upon the painter, who seeing the physician
running towards him like a fury, with a pistol in his right hand,
which was extended, and hearing the dreadful yell he uttered, and
the outlandish words he pronounced, was seized with a universal
palsy of his limbs. He would have dropped down upon the ground, had
not Pipes supported and encouraged him to stand upon his defence.
The doctor, contrary to his expectation, finding that he had not
flinched from the spot, though he had now performed one half of
his career, put in practice his last effort, by firing his pistol,
the noise of which no sooner reached the ears of the affrighted
painter, than he recommended his soul to God, and roared for mercy
with great vociferation.

The republican, overjoyed at this exclamation, commanded him to
yield, and surrender his arms, on pain of immediate death; upon
which he threw away his pistols and sword, in spite of all the
admonitions and even threats of his second, who left him to his
fate, and went up to his master, stopping his nose with signs of
loathing and abhorrence.

The victor, having won the spolia opima, granted him his life,
on condition that he would on his knees supplicate his pardon,
acknowledge himself inferior to his conqueror in every virtue and
qualification, and promise for the future to merit his favour by
submission and respect. These insolent terms were readily embraced
by the unfortunate challenger, who fairly owned, that he was not
at all calculated for the purposes of war, and that henceforth he
would contend with no weapon but his pencil. He begged with great
humility, that Mr. Pickle would not think the worse of his morals
for this defect of courage, which was a natural infirmity inherited
from his father, and suspend his opinion of his talents, until
he should have an opportunity of contemplating the charms of his
Cleopatra, which would be finished in less than three months.

Our hero observed, with an affected air of displeasure, that no man
could be justly condemned for being subject to the impressions of
fear, and therefore his cowardice might easily be forgiven: but
there was something so presumptuous, dishonest, and disingenuous,
in arrogating a quality to which he knew he had not the smallest
pretension, that he could not forget his misbehaviour all at once,
though he would condescend to communicate with him as formerly, in
hopes of seeking a reformation in his conduct. Pallet protested,
that there was no dissimulation in the case; for he was ignorant
of his own weakness, until his resolution was put to the trial: he
faithfully promised to demean himself, during the remaining part of
the tour, with that conscious modesty and penitence which became
a person in his condition; and, for the present, implored the
assistance of Mr. Pipes, in disembarrassing him from the disagreeable
consequence of his fear.





CHAPTER LXIV.




The Doctor exults in his Victory--They set out for Rotterdam, where
they are entertained by two Dutch Gentlemen in a Yacht, which is
overturned in the Maese, to the manifest hazard of the Painter's
Life--They spend the Evening with their Entertainers, and next Day
visit a Cabinet of Curiosities.


Tom was accordingly ordered to administer to his occasions; and
the conqueror, elated with his success, which he in a great measure
attributed to his manner of attack, and the hymn which he howled,
told Peregrine, that he was now convinced of the truth of what
Pindar sung in these words, ossa de me pephileke Zeus atuzontai boan
Pieridon aionta; for he had no sooner begun to repeat the mellifluent
strains of that divine poet, than the wretch his antagonist was
confounded, and his nerves unstrung.

On their return to the inn, he expatiated on the prudence and
tranquility of his own behaviour, and ascribed the consternation
of Pallet to the remembrance of some crime that lay heavy upon his
conscience; for, in his opinion, a man of virtue and common sense
could not possibly be afraid of death, which is not only the peaceful
harbour that receives him shattered on the tempestuous sea of life,
but also the eternal seal of his fame and glory, which it is no
longer in his power to forfeit and forego. He lamented his fate,
in being doomed to live in such degenerate days, when war is become
a mercenary trade; and ardently wished, that the day would come,
when he should have such an opportunity of signalizing his courage
in the cause of liberty, as that of Marathon, where a handful of
Athenians, fighting for their freedom, defeated the whole strength
of the Persian empire. "Would to heaven!" said he, "my muse were
blessed with an occasion to emulate that glorious testimony on the
trophy in Cyprus, erected by Cimon, for two great victories gained
on the same day over the Persians by sea and land; in which it
is very remarkable, that the greatness of the occasion has raised
the manner of expression above the usual simplicity and modesty of
all other ancient inscriptions." He then repeated it with all the
pomp of declamation, and signified his hope, that the French would
one day invade us with such an army as that which Xerxes led into
Greece, that it might be in his power to devote himself, like
Leonidas, to the freedom of his country.

This memorable combat being thus determined, and everything that
was remarkable in Antwerp surveyed, they sent their baggage down
the Scheldt to Rotterdam, and set out for the same place in a
post-waggon, which that same evening brought them in safety to the
banks of the Maese. They put up at an English house of entertainment,
remarkable for the modesty and moderation of the landlord; and next
morning the doctor went in person to deliver letters of recommendation
to two Dutch gentlemen from one of his acquaintance at Paris. Neither
of them happened to be at home when he called; so that he left a
message at their lodgings, with his address; and in the afternoon,
they waited upon the company, and, after many hospitable professions,
one of the two invited them to spend the evening at his house.

Meanwhile they had provided a pleasure yacht, in which they proposed
to treat them with an excursion upon the Maese. This being almost
the only diversion that place affords, our young gentleman relished
the proposal; and, notwithstanding the remonstrances of Mr. Jolter,
who declined the voyage on account of the roughness of the weather,
they went on board without hesitation, and found a collation
prepared in the cabin. While they tacked to and fro in the river,
under the impulse of a mackerel breeze, the physician expressed
his satisfaction, and Pallet was ravished with the entertainment.
But the wind increasing, to the unspeakable joy of the Dutchmen, who
had now an opportunity of showing their dexterity in the management
of the vessel, the guests found it inconvenient to stand upon deck,
and impossible to sit below, on account of the clouds of tobacco
smoke which rolled from the pipes of their entertainers, in such
volumes as annoyed them even to the hazard of suffocation. This
fumigation, together with the extraordinary motion of the ship,
began to affect the head and stomach of the painter, who begged
earnestly to be set on shore. But the Dutch gentlemen, who had
no idea of his sufferings, insisted, with surprising obstinacy of
regard, upon his staying until he should see an instance of the
skill of the mariners; and, bringing him on deck, commanded the
men to carry the vessel's lee gunwale under water. This nicety of
navigation they instantly performed, to the admiration of Pickle,
the discomposure of the doctor, and terror of Pallet, who blessed
himself from the courtesy of a Dutchman, and prayed to Heaven for
his deliverance.

While the Hollanders enjoyed the reputation of this feat, and the
distress of the painter, at the same time, the yacht was overtaken
by a sudden squall, that overset her in a moment, and flung every
man overboard into the Maese, before they could have the least
warning of their fate, much less time to provide against the
accident. Peregrine, who was an expert swimmer, reached the shore
in safety; the physician, in the agonies of despair, laid fast
hold on the trunk-breeches of one of the men, who dragged him to
the other side; the entertainers landed at the bomb-keys, smoking
their pipes all the way with great deliberation; and the poor
painter must have gone to the bottom, had not he been encountered
by the cable of a ship that lay at anchor near the scene of their
disaster. Though his senses had forsaken him, his hands fastened by
instinct on this providential occurrence, which he held with such
a convulsive grasp, that, when a boat was sent out to bring him
on shore, it was with the utmost difficulty that his fingers were
disengaged. He was carried into a house, deprived of the use of
speech, and bereft of all sensation; and, being suspended by the
heels, a vast quantity of water ran out of his mouth. This evacuation
being made, he began to utter dreadful groans, which gradually
increased to a continued roar; and, after he had regained the use
of his senses, he underwent a delirium that lasted several hours.
As for the treaters, they never dreamed of expressing the least
concern to Pickle or the physician for what had happened, because
it was an accident so common as to pass without notice.

Leaving the care of their vessel to the seamen, the company retired
to their respective lodgings, in order to shift their clothes;
and in the evening our travellers were conducted to the house of
their new friend, who, with a view of making his invitation the
more agreeable, had assembled, to the number of twenty or thirty
Englishmen, of all ranks and degrees, from the merchant to the
periwig-maker's prentice.

In the midst of this congregation stood a chafing-dish with live
coals, for the convenience of lighting their pipes, and every
individual was accommodated with a spitting-box. There was not
a mouth in the apartment unfurnished with a tube, so that they
resembled a congregation of chimeras breathing fire and smoke;
and our gentlemen were fain to imitate their example in their own
defence. It is not to be supposed that the conversation was either
very sprightly or polite; that the whole entertainment was of
the Dutch cast--frowzy and phlegmatic; and our adventurer, as he
returned to his lodging, tortured with the headache, and disgusted
with every circumstance of his treatment, cursed the hour in which
the doctor had saddled them with such troublesome companions.

Next morning by eight o'clock, these polite Hollanders returned
the visit, and, after breakfast, attended their English friends
to the house of a person that possessed a very curious cabinet of
curiosities, to which they had secured our company's admission.
The owner of this collection was a cheesemonger, who received them
in a woollen nightcap, with straps buttoned under his chin. As he
understood no language but his own, he told them, by the canal of
one of their conductors, that he did not make a practice of showing
his curiosities; but understanding that they were Englishmen, and
recommended to his friends, he was content to submit them to their
perusal. So saying, he led them up a dark stair, into a small room,
decorated with a few paltry figures in plaster of Paris, two or
three miserable landscapes, the skins of an otter, seal, and some
fishes stuffed; and in one corner stood a glass case, furnished
with newts, frogs, lizards, and serpents, preserved in spirits;
a human foetus, a calf with two heads, and about two dozen of
butterflies pinned upon paper.

The virtuoso having exhibited these particulars, eyed the strangers
with a look soliciting admiration and applause; and as he could not
perceive any symptom of either in their gestures or countenances,
withdrew a curtain, and displayed a wainscot chest of drawers, in
which, he gave them to understand, was something that would agreeably
amuse the imagination. Our travellers, regaled with this notice,
imagined that they would be entertained with the sight of some
curious medals, or other productions of antiquity; but how were
they disappointed, when they saw nothing but a variety of shells,
disposed in whimsical figures, in each drawer! After he had detained
them full two hours with a tedious commentary upon the shape, size,
and colour of each department, he, with a supercilious simper,
desired that the English gentlemen would frankly and candidly
declare, whether his cabinet, or that of Mynheer Sloane, at London,
was the most valuable. When this request was signified in English
to the company, the painter instantly exclaimed, "By the Lard! they
are not to be named of a day. And as for that matter, I would not
give one corner of Saltero's coffee-house at Chelsea for all the
trash he hath shown." Peregrine, unwilling to mortify any person
who had done his endeavour to please him, observed, that what he
had seen was very curious and entertaining; but that no private
collection in Europe was equal to that of Sir Hans Sloane, which,
exclusive of presents, had cost an hundred thousand pounds. The
two conductors were confounded at this asseveration, which, being
communicated to the cheesemonger, he shook his head with a significant
grin; and, though he did not choose to express his incredulity in
words, gave our hero to understand, that he did not much depend
upon his veracity. From the house of this Dutch naturalist, they
were draggled all round the city by the painful civility of their
attendants, who did not quit them till the evening was well advanced,
and then not till after they had promised to be with them before
ten o'clock next day, in order to conduct them to a country house,
situated in a pleasant village on the other side of the river.

Pickle was already so much fatigued with their hospitality, that,
for the first time of his life, he suffered a dejection of spirits;
and resolved, at any rate, to avoid the threatened persecution of
to-morrow. With this view, he ordered his servants to pack up some
clothes and linen in a portmanteau; and in the morning embarked,
with his governor, in the treckskuyt, for the Hague, whither
he pretended to be called by some urgent occasion, leaving his
fellow-travellers to make his apology to their friends, and assuring
them, that he would not proceed for Amsterdam without their society.
He arrived at the Hague in the forenoon, and dined at an ordinary
frequented by officers and people of fashion; where being informed
that the princess would see company in the evening, he dressed
himself in a rich suit of the Parisian cut, and went to court,
without any introduction. A person of his appearance could not fail
to attract the notice of such a small circle. The prince himself,
understanding he was an Englishman and a stranger, went up to him
without ceremony, and, having welcomed him to the place, conversed
with him for some minutes on the common topics of discourse.





CHAPTER LXV.




They proceed to the Hague; from whence they depart for Amsterdam,
where they see a Dutch Tragedy--Visit the Music-house, in which
Peregrine quarrels with the Captain of a Man-of-War--They pass
through Haerlem, in their way to Leyden--Return to Rotterdam, where
the Company separates, and our Hero, with his Attendants, arrive
in safety at Harwich.


Being joined by their fellow-travellers in the morning, they made
a tour to all the remarkable places in this celebrated village:
saw the foundry, the Stadthouse, the Spinhuys, Vauxhall, and Count
Bentinck's gardens; and in the evening went to the French comedy,
which was directed by a noted harlequin, who had found means to
flatter the Dutch taste so effectually, that they extolled him as
the greatest actor that ever appeared in the province of Holland.
This famous company did not represent regular theatrical pieces,
but only a sort of impromptus, in which this noted player always
performed the greatest part of the entertainment. Among other sallies
of wit that escaped him, there was one circumstance so remarkably
adapted to the disposition and genius of his audience, that it were
a pity to pass it over in silence. A windmill being exhibited on
the scene, harlequin, after having surveyed it with curiosity and
admiration, asks one of the millers the use of that machine; and
being told that it was a windmill, observes, with some concern,
that as there was not the least breath of wind, he could not have
the pleasure of seeing it turn round. Urged by this consideration,
he puts himself into the attitude of a person wrapt in profound
meditation; and, having continued a few seconds in this posture,
runs to the miller with great eagerness and joy, and, telling him
that he had found an expedient to make his mill work; very fairly
unbuttons his breeches. Then presenting his posteriors to the sails
of the machine, certain explosions are immediately heard, and the
arms of the mill begin to turn round, to the infinite satisfaction
of the spectators, who approve the joke with loud peals of applause.

Our travellers stayed a few days at the Hague, during which
the young gentleman waited on the British ambassador, to whom he
was recommended by his excellency at Paris, and lost about thirty
guineas at billiards to a French adventurer, who decoyed him into
the snare by keeping up his game. Then they departed in a post-waggon
for Amsterdam, being provided with letters of introduction to an
English merchant residing in that city, under whose auspices they
visited everything worth seeing, and. among other excursions, went
to see a Dutch tragedy acted, an entertainment which, of all others,
had the strangest effect upon the organs of our hero; the dress
of their chief personages was so antic, their manner so awkwardly
absurd, and their language so ridiculously unfit for conveying
the sentiment of love and honour, that Peregrine's nerves were
diuretically affected with the complicated absurdity, and he was
compelled to withdraw twenty times before the catastrophe of the
piece.

The subject of this performance was the famous story of Scipio's
continence and virtue, in restoring the fair captive to her lover.
The young Roman hero was represented by a broadfaced Batavian, in
a burgomaster's gown and a fur cap, sitting smoking his pipe at a
table furnished with a can of beer, a drinking glass, and a plate
of tobacco. The lady was such a person as Scipio might well be
supposed to give away, without any great effort of generosity; and
indeed the Celtiberian prince seemed to be of that opinion; for,
upon receiving her from the hand of the victor, he discovered none
of those transports of gratitude and joy which Livy describes in
recounting this event. The Dutch Scipio, however, was complaisant
enough in his way; for he desired her to sit at his right hand,
by the appellation of Ya frow, and with his own fingers filling
a clean pipe, presented it to Mynheer Allucio, the lover. The
rest of the economy of the piece was in the same taste; which was
so agreeable to the audience, that they seemed to have shaken off
their natural phlegm, in order to applaud the performance.

From the play our company adjourned to the house of their friend,
where they spent the evening; and the conversation turning upon
poetry, a Dutchman who was present, and understood the English
language, having listened very attentively to the discourse, lifted
up with both hands the greatest part of a Cheshire cheese that lay
upon the table, saying, "I do know vat is boetre. Mine brotre be
a great boet, and ave vrought a book as dick as all dat." Pickle,
diverted with this method of estimating an author according to the
quantity of his works, inquired about the subjects of this bard's
writings; but of these his brother could give no account, or other
information, but that there was little market for the commodity,
which hung heavy upon his hands, and induced him to wish he had
applied himself to another trade.

The only remarkable scene in Amsterdam, which our company bad not
seen, was the Spuyl or music-houses, which, by the connivance of
the magistrates, are maintained for the recreation of those who
might attempt the chastity of creditable women, if they were not
provided with such conveniences. To one of these night-houses did
our travellers repair, under the conduct of the English merchant,
and were introduced into such another place as the ever-memorable
coffee-house of Moll King; with this difference, that the company
here were not so riotous as the bucks of Covent Garden, but formed
themselves into a circle, within which some of the number danced
to the music of a scurvy organ and a few other instruments, that
uttered tunes very suitable to the disposition of the hearers, while
the whole apartment was shrouded with clouds of smoke impervious
to the view. When our gentlemen entered, the floor was occupied by
two females and their gallants, who, in the performance of their
exercise, lifted their legs like so many oxen at plough and the
pipe of one of those hoppers happening to be exhausted, in the midst
of his saraband, he very deliberately drew forth his tobacco-box,
filling and lighting it again, without any interruption to the
dance.

Peregrine being unchecked by the presence of his governor, who was
too tender of his own reputation to attend them in this expedition,
made up to a sprightly French girl who sat in seeming expectation
of a customer, and prevailing upon her to be his partner, led her
into the circle, and in his turn took the opportunity of dancing
a minuet, to the admiration of all present. He intended to have
exhibited another specimen of his ability in this art, when a captain
of a Dutch man-of-war chancing to come in, and seeing a stranger
engaged with the lady whom, it seems, he had bespoke for his
bedfellow, he advanced without any ceremony, and seizing her by
the arm, pulled her to the other side of the room. Our adventurer,
who was not a man to put up with such a brutal affront, followed
the ravisher with indignation in his eyes; and pushing him on one
side, retook the subject of their contest, and led her back to the
place from whence she had been dragged. The Dutchman, enraged at
the youth's presumption, obeyed the first dictates of his choler,
and lent his rival a hearty box on the ear; which was immediately
repaid with interest, before our hero could recollect himself
sufficiently to lay his hand upon his sword, and beckon the aggressor
to the door.

Notwithstanding the confusion and disorder which this affair
produced in the room, and the endeavours of Pickle's company, who
interposed, in order to prevent bloodshed, the antagonists reached
the street; and Peregrine drawing, was surprised to see the
captain advance against him with a long knife, which he preferred
to the sword that hung by his side. The youth, confounded at this
preposterous behaviour, desired him, in the French tongue, to lay
aside that vulgar implement, and approach like a gentleman.  But
the Hollander, who neither understood the proposal, nor would have
complied with this demand, had he been made acquainted with his
meaning, rushed forward like a desperado, before his adversary
could put himself on his guard; and if the young gentleman had not
been endued with surprising agility, his nose would have fallen
a sacrifice to the fury of the assailant. Finding himself in such
imminent jeopardy, he leaped to one side, and the Dutchman passing
him, in the force of his career, he with one nimble kick made such
application to his enemy's heels, that he flew like lightning into
the canal, where he had almost perished by pitching upon one of
the posts with which it is faced.

Peregrine having performed this exploit, did not stay for the
captain's coming on shore, but retreated with all despatch, by the
advice of his conductor; and next day embarked, with his companions,
in the skuyt, for Haerlem, where they dined; and in the evening
arrived at the ancient city of Leyden, where they met with some
English students, who treated them with great hospitality. Not but
that the harmony of the conversation was that same night interrupted
by a dispute that arose between one of those young gentlemen and
the physician, about the cold and hot methods of prescription in
the gout and rheumatism; and proceeded to such a degree of mutual
reviling, that Pickle, ashamed and incensed at his fellow-traveller's
want of urbanity, espoused the other's cause, and openly rebuked
him for his unmannerly petulance, which, he said, rendered him
unfit for the purposes, and unworthy of the benefit, of society.
This unexpected declaration overwhelmed the doctor with amazement
and confusion; he was instantaneously deprived of his speech, and,
during the remaining part of the party, sat in silent mortification.
In all probability, he deliberated with himself, whether or not he
should expostulate with the young gentleman on the freedom he had
taken with his character in a company of strangers; but as he knew
he had not a Pallet to deal with, he very prudently suppressed that
suggestion, and, in secret, chewed the cud of resentment.

After they had visited the physic-garden, the university, the
anatomical hall, and every other thing that was recommended to their
view, they returned to Rotterdam, and held a consultation upon the
method of transporting themselves to England. The doctor, whose
grudge against Peregrine was rather inflamed than allayed by our
hero's indifference and neglect, had tampered with the simplicity
of the painter, who was proud of his advances towards a perfect
reconciliation, and now took the opportunity of parting with our
adventurer, by declaring that he and his friend Mr. Pallet were
resolved to take their passage in a trading sloop, after he had
heard Peregrine object against that tedious, disagreeable, and
uncertain method of conveyance. Pickle immediately saw his intention,
and, without using the least argument to dissuade them from their
design, or expressing the smallest degree of concern at their
separation, very coolly wished them a prosperous voyage, and ordered
his baggage to be sent to Helvoetsluys. There he himself, and his
retinue, went on board of the packet next day, and, by the favour
of a fair wind, in eighteen hours arrived at Harwich.





CHAPTER LXVI.




Peregrine delivers his Letters of Recommendation at London, and
returns to the Garrison, to the unspeakable joy of the Commodore
and his whole Family.


Now that our hero found himself on English ground, his heart dilated
with the proud recollection of his own improvement since he left
his native soil. He began to recognise the interesting ideas of his
tender years; he enjoyed, by anticipation, the pleasure of seeing
his friends in the garrison, after an absence of eighteen months;
and the image of his charming Emily, which other less worthy
considerations had depressed, resumed the full possession of
his breast. He remembered, with shame, that he had neglected the
correspondence with her brother, which he himself had solicited,
and in consequence of which he had received a letter from that young
gentleman, while he lived at Paris. In spite of these conscientious
reflections. he was too self-sufficient to think he should find
any difficulty in obtaining forgiveness for such sins of omission;
and began to imagine that his passion would be prejudicial to the
dignity of his situation, if it should not be gratified upon terms
which formerly his imagination durst not conceive.

Sorry I am, that the task I have undertaken, lays me under the
necessity of divulging this degeneracy in the sentiment of our
imperious youth, who was now in the heyday of his blood, flushed with
the consciousness of his own qualifications, vain of his fortune,
and elated on the wings of imaginary expectation. Though he was
deeply enamoured of Miss Gauntlet, he was far from proposing her
heart as the ultimate aim of his gallantry, which, he did not doubt,
would triumph over the most illustrious females of the land, and
at once regale his appetite and ambition.

Meanwhile, being willing to make his appearance at the garrison
equally surprising and agreeable, he cautioned Mr. Jolter against
writing to the commodore, who had not heard of them since their
departure from Paris, and hired a post-chaise and horses, for
London. The governor, going out to give orders about the carriage,
inadvertently left a paper book open upon the table; and his pupil,
casting his eyes upon the page, chanced to read these words: "Sept.
15. Arrived in safety, by the blessing of God, in this unhappy kingdom
of England. And thus concludes the journal of my last peregrination."
Peregrine's curiosity being inflamed by this extraordinary
conclusion he turned to the beginning, and perused several sheets
of a diary such as is commonly kept by that class of people known
by the denomination of travelling governors, for the satisfaction
of themselves and the parents or guardians of their pupils, and
for the edification and entertainment of their friends.

That the reader may have a clear idea of Mr. Jolter's performance,
we shall transcribe the transactions of one day, as he had recorded
them; and that abstract will be a sufficient specimen of the whole
plan and execution of the work.

"May 3. At eight o'clock, set out from Boulogne in a post-chaise:
the morning hazy and cold. Fortified my stomach with a cordial.
Recommended ditto to Mr. P. as an antidote against the fog. Mem.
He refused it. The hither horse greased in the off-pastern of the
hind leg. Arrived at Samers. Mem. This last was a post and a half,
i.e.  three leagues, or nine English miles. The day clears up. A
fine champaign country, well stored with corn. The postillion says
his prayers in passing by a wooden crucifix upon the road. Mem.
The horses staled in a small brook that runs in a bottom, betwixt
two hills. Arrived at Cormont. A common post. A dispute with my
pupil, who is obstinate, and swayed by an unlucky prejudice. Proceed
to Montreuil, where we dine on choice pigeons. A very moderate
charge.  No chamber-pot in the room, owing to the negligence of
the maid.  This is an ordinary post. Set out again for Nampont.
Troubled with flatulences and indigestion. Mr. P. is sullen, and
seems to mistake an eructation for the breaking of wind backwards.
From Nampont depart for Bernay, at which place we arrive in the
evening, and propose to stay all night. N.B. The two last a redouble
posts, and our cattle very willing, though not strong. Sup on a
delicate ragout and excellent partridges, in company with Mr. H.
and his spouse.  Mem. The said H. trod upon my corn by mistake.
Discharge the bill, which is not very reasonable. Dispute with Mr.
P. about giving money to the servant. He insists upon my giving
a twenty-four sols piece, which is too much by two-thirds, in all
conscience. N.B. She was a pert baggage, and did not deserve a
liard."

Our hero was so much disobliged with certain circumstances of this
amusing and instructing journal, that, by way of punishing the
author, he interlined these words betwixt two paragraphs, in a
manner that exactly resembled the tutor's handwriting:" Mem. Had the
pleasure of drinking myself into a sweet intoxication, by toasting
our lawful king, and his royal family, among some worthy English
fathers of the Society of Jesus."

Having taken this revenge, he set out for London, where he waited
upon those noblemen to whom he had letters of recommendation from
Paris; and was not only graciously received, but even loaded with
caresses and proffers of service, because they understood he was
a young gentleman of fortune, who, far from standing in need of
their countenance or assistance, would make a useful and creditable
addition to the number of their adherents. He had the honour of
dining at their tables, in consequence of pressing invitations,
and of spending several evenings with the ladies, to whom he was
particularly agreeable, on account of his person, address, and
bleeding freely at play.

Being thus initiated in the beau monde, he thought it was high
time to pay his respects to his generous benefactor, the commodore;
and, accordingly, departed one morning, with his train, for the
garrison, at which he arrived in safety the same night. When he
entered the gate, which was opened by a new servant that did not
know him, he found his old friend, Hatchway, stalking in the yard,
with a nightcap on his head, and a pipe in his mouth; and, advancing
to him, took him by the hand before he had any intimation of his
approach.  The lieutenant, thus saluted by a stranger, stared at
him in silent astonishment, till he recollected his features, which
were no sooner known, than, dashing his pipe upon the pavement,
he exclaimed, "Smite my cross-trees! th'art welcome to port"; and
hugged him in his arms with great affection. He then, by a cordial
squeeze, expressed his satisfaction at seeing his old shipmate,
Tom, who, applying his whistle to his mouth, the whole castle echoed
with his performance.

The servants, hearing the well-known sound, poured out in a tumult
of joy; and, understanding that their young master was returned,
raised such a peal of acclamation, as astonished the commodore and
his lady, and inspired Julia with such an interesting presage, that
her heart began to throb with violence. Running out in the hurry
and perturbation of her hope, she was so much overwhelmed at sight
of her brother, that she actually fainted in his arms. But from
this trance she soon awaked; and Peregrine, having testified his
pleasure and affection, went upstairs, and presented himself before
his godfather and aunt. Mrs. Trunnion rose and received him with
a gracious embrace, blessing God for his happy return from a land
of impiety and vice, in which she hoped his morals had not been
corrupted, nor his principles of religion altered or impaired. The
old gentleman being confined to his chair, was struck dumb with
pleasure at his appearance; and, having made divers ineffectual
efforts to get up, at length discharged a volley of curses against
his own limbs, and held out his hand to his godson, who kissed it
with great respect.

After he had finished his apostrophe to the gout, which was the
daily and hourly subject of his execrations, "Well, my lad," said
he, "I care not how soon I go to the bottom, now I behold thee safe
in harbour again; and yet I tell a d--d lie; I would I could keep
afloat until I should see a lusty boy of thy begetting. Odds my
timbers! I love thee so well, that I believe thou art the spawn
of my own body; though I can give no account of thy being put upon
the stocks." Then, turning his eyes upon Pipes, who by this time
had penetrated into his apartment, and addressed him with the usual
salutation of "What cheer?" "Ahey," cried he, "are you there, you
herring-faced son of a sea-calf? What a slippery trick you played
your old commander! But come, you dog, there's my fist; I forgive
you, for the love you bear to my godson. Go, man your tackle, and
hoist a cask of strong beer into the yard, knock out the bung, and
put a pump in it, for the use of all my servants and neighbours;
and, d'ye hear, let the patereroes be fired, and the garrison
illuminated, as rejoicings for the safe arrival of your master. By
the Lord! if I had the use of these d--d shambling shanks, I would
dance a hornpipe with the best of you."

The next object of his attention was Mr. Jolter, who was honoured
with particular marks of distinction, and the repeated promise of
enjoying the living in his gift, as an acknowledgment of the care
and discretion with which he had superintended the education and
morals of our hero. The governor was so affected by the generosity of
his patron, that the tears ran down his cheeks, while he expressed
his gratitude, and the infinite satisfaction he felt in contemplating
the accomplishments of his pupil.

Meanwhile, Pipes did not neglect the orders he had received. The
beer was produced, the gates were thrown open for the admission
of all comers, the whole house was lighted up, and the patereroes
were discharged in repeated volleys. Such phenomena could not fail
to attract the notice of the neighbourhood. The club at Tunley's
were astonished at the report of the guns, which produced various
conjectures among the members of that sagacious society. The landlord
observed, that, in all likelihood, the commodore was visited by
hobgoblins, and ordered the guns to be fired in token of distress,
as he had acted twenty years before, when he was annoyed by the
same grievance. The exciseman, with a waggish sneer, expressed
his apprehension of Trunnion's death, in consequence of which the
patereroes might be discharged with an equivocal intent, either as
signals of his lady's sorrow or rejoicing. The attorney signified
a suspicion of Hatchway's being married to Miss Pickle, and that
the firing and illuminations were in honour of the nuptials; upon
which Gamaliel discovered some faint signs of emotion, and, taking
the pipe from his mouth, gave it as his opinion, that his sister
was brought to bed.

While they were thus bewildered in the maze of their own imaginations,
a company of countrymen, who sat drinking in the kitchen, and whose
legs were more ready than their invention, sallied out to know the
meaning of these exhibitions. Understanding that there was a butt
of strong beer abroach in the yard, to which they were invited
by the servants, they saved themselves the trouble and expense
of returning to spend the evening at the public-house, and listed
themselves under the banner of Tom Pipes, who presided as director
of this festival.

The news of Peregrine's return being communicated to the parish,
the parson, and three or four neighbouring gentlemen, who were
well-wishers to our hero, immediately repaired to the garrison,
in order to pay their compliments on this happy event, and were
detained to supper. An elegant entertainment was prepared by the
direction of Miss Julia, who was an excellent housewife; and the
commodore was so invigorated with joy, that he seemed to have renewed
his age.  Among those who honoured the occasion with their presence,
was Mr.  Clover, the young gentleman that made his addresses to
Peregrine's sister. His heart was so big with his passion, that,
while the rest of the company were engrossed by their cups, he seized
an opportunity of our hero's being detached from the conversation,
and, in the impatience of his love, conjured him to consent to
his happiness; protesting, that he would comply with any terms of
settlement that a man of his fortune could embrace, in favour of
a young lady who was absolute mistress of his affection.

Our youth thanked him very politely for his favourable sentiments
and honourable intention towards his sister, and told him, that
at present he saw no reason to obstruct his desire; that he would
consult Julia's own inclinations, and confer with him about the
means of gratifying his wish; but, in the meantime, begged to be
excused from discussing any point of such importance to them both.
Reminding him of the jovial purpose on which they were happily
met, he promoted such a quick circulation of the bottle, that their
mirth grew noisy and obstreperous; they broke forth into repeated
peals of laughter, without any previous incitement except that of
claret.  These explosions were succeeded by Bacchanalian songs,
in which the old gentleman himself attempted to bear a share;
the sedate governor snapped time with his fingers, and the parish
priest assisted in the chorus with a most expressive nakedness of
countenance. Before midnight they were almost all pinned to their
chairs, as if they had been fixed by the power of enchantment;
and, what rendered the confinement still more unfortunate, every
servant in the house was in the same situation; so that they were
fain to take their repose as they sat, and nodded at each other
like a congregation of Anabaptists.

Next day Peregrine communed with his sister on the subject of her
match with Mr. Clover, who, she told him, had offered to settle a
jointure of four hundred pounds, and take her to wife without any
expectation of a dowry. She moreover gave him to understand, that,
in his absence, she had received several messages from her mother,
commanding her to return to her father's house; but that she
had refused to obey these orders, by the advice and injunction of
her aunt and the commodore, which were indeed seconded by her own
inclination; because she had all the reason in the world to believe,
that her mother only wanted an opportunity of treating her with
severity and rancour. The resentment of that lady had been carried
to such indecent lengths, that, seeing her daughter at church one
day, she rose up, before the parson entered, and reviled her with
great bitterness, in the face of the whole congregation.





CHAPTER LXVII.




Sees his Sister happily married--Visits Emilia, who receives him
according to his Deserts.


Her brother being of opinion, that Mr. Clover's proposal was not to
be neglected, especially as Julia's heart was engaged in his favour,
communicated the affair to his uncle, who, with the approbation
of Mrs. Trunnion, declared himself well satisfied with the young
man's addresses, and desired that they might be buckled with all
expedition, without the knowledge or concurrence of her parents,
to whom (on account of their unnatural barbarity) she was not bound
to pay the least regard. Though our adventurer entertained the same
sentiments of the matter, and the lover, dreading some obstruction,
earnestly begged the immediate condescension of his mistress, she
could not be prevailed upon to take such a material step, without
having first solicited the permission of her father; resolved,
nevertheless, to comply with the dictates of her own heart, should
his objections be frivolous or unjust.

Urged by this determination, her admirer waited upon Mr. Gamaliel
at the public-house, and, with the appearance of great deference and
respect, made him acquainted with his affection for his daughter,
communicated the particulars of his fortune, with the terms of
settlement he was ready to make; and in conclusion told him, that
he would marry her without a portion. This last offer seemed to
have some weight with the father, who received it with civility,
and promised in a day or two to favour him with a final answer to
his demand. He, accordingly, that same evening consulted his wife,
who, being exasperated at the prospect of her daughter's independency,
argued with the most virulent expostulation against the match, as
an impudent scheme of her own planning, with a view of insulting
her parents, towards whom she had already been guilty of the most
vicious disobedience. In short, she used such remonstrances, as
not only averted this weak husband's inclination from the proposal
which he had relished before, but even instigated him to apply
for a warrant to apprehend his daughter, on the supposition that
she was about to bestow herself in marriage without his privity or
consent.

The justice of peace to whom this application was made, though he
could not refuse the order, yet, being no stranger to the malevolence
of the mother, which, together with Gamaliel's simplicity, was
notorious in the county, he sent an intimation of what had happened
to the garrison; upon which a couple of sentinels were placed on
the gate, and at the pressing solicitation of the lover, as well
as the desire of the commodore, her brother, and aunt, Julia was
wedded without further delay, the ceremony being performed by Mr.
Jolter, because the parish priest prudently declined any occasion
of giving offence, and the curate was too much in the interest of
their enemies to be employed in that office.

This domestic concern being settled to the satisfaction of our
hero, he escorted her next day to the house of her husband, who
immediately wrote a letter to her father, declaring his reasons for
having thus superseded his authority; and Mrs. Pickle's mortification
was unspeakable.

That the new-married couple might be guarded against all insult,
our young gentleman and his friend Hatchway, with their adherents,
lodged in Mr. Clover's house for some weeks; during which they visited
their acquaintance in the neighbourhood, according to custom. When
the tranquility of their family was perfectly established, and
the contract of the marriage executed in the presence of the old
commodore and his lady, who gave her niece five hundred pounds to
purchase jewels and clothes, Mr. Peregrine could no longer restrain
his impatience to see his dear Emily; and told his uncle, that next
day he proposed to ride across the country, in order to visit his
friend Gauntlet, whom he had not heard of for a long time.

The old gentleman, looking steadfastly in his face, "Ah! D--n your
cunning!" said he, "I find the anchor holds fast! I did suppose as
how you would have slipt your cable, and changed your berth; but,
I see, when a young fellow is once brought up by a pretty wench,
he may man his capstans and viol block, if he wool; but he'll as
soon heave up the Pike of Teneriffe, as bring his anchor aweigh!
Odds heartlikins! had I known the young woman was Ned Gauntlet's
daughter, I shouldn't have thrown out signal for leaving off chase."

Our adventurer was not a little surprised to hear the commodore
talk in this style; and immediately conjectured that his friend
Godfrey had informed him of the whole affair. Instead of listening
to this approbation of his flame, with those transports of joy which
he would have felt, had he retained his former sentiments, he was
chagrined at Trunnion's declaration, and offended at the presumption
of the young soldier, in presuming to disclose the secret with
which he had entrusted him. Reddening with these reflections, he
assured the commodore that he never had serious thoughts of matrimony;
so that if any person had told him he was under any engagement of
that kind, he had abused his ear; for he protested that he would
never contract such attachments without his knowledge and express
permission.

Trunnion commended him for his prudent resolution, and observed,
that, though no person mentioned to him what promises had passed
betwixt him and his sweetheart, it was very plain that he had made
love to her, and therefore it was to be supposed that his intentions
were honourable; for he could not believe he was such a rogue in his
heart, as to endeavour to debauch the daughter of a brave officer,
who had served his country with credit and reputation.  Notwithstanding
this remonstrance, which Pickle imputed to the commodore's ignorance
of the world, he set out for the habitation of Mrs. Gauntlet, with
the unjustifiable sentiments of a man of pleasure, who sacrifices
every consideration to the desire of his ruling appetite; and, as
Winchester lay in his way, resolved to visit some of his friends
who lived in that place. It was in the house of one of these that
he was informed of Emilia's being then in town with her mother; upon
which he excused himself from staying to drink tea, and immediately
repaired to their lodgings, according to the directions he had
received.

When he arrived at the door, instead of undergoing that perturbation
of spirits, which a lover in his interesting situation might be
supposed to feel, he suffered no emotion but that of vanity and
pride, favoured with an opportunity of self-gratification, and entered
his Emilia's apartment with the air of a conceited petit-maitre,
rather than that of the respectful admirer, when he visits the
object of his passion, after an absence of seventeen months.

The young lady, having been very much disobliged at his mortifying
neglect of her brother's letter, had summoned all her own pride
and resolution to her aid; and, by means of a happy disposition,
so far overcame her chagrin at his indifference, that she was able
to behave in his presence with apparent tranquility and ease. She
was even pleased to find he had, by accident, chosen a time for
his visit when she was surrounded by two or three young gentlemen,
who professed themselves her admirers. Our gallant was no sooner
announced, than she collected all her coquetry, put on the gayest
air she could assume, and contrived to giggle just as he appeared
at the room door. The compliments of salutation being performed,
she welcomed him to England in a careless manner, asked the news
of Paris, and, before he could make any reply, desired one of the
other gentlemen to proceed with the sequel of that comical adventure,
in the relation of which he had been interrupted.

Peregrine smiled within himself at this behaviour, which, without
all doubt, he believed she had affected to punish him for his unkind
silence while he was abroad, being fully persuaded that her heart
was absolutely at his devotion. On this supposition, he practised
his Parisian improvements on the art of conversation, and uttered a
thousand prettinesses in the way of compliment, with such incredible
rotation of tongue, that his rivals were struck dumb with astonishment,
and Emilia fretted out of all temper, at seeing herself deprived
of the prerogative of the sex. He persisted, however, in this
surprising loquacity, until the rest of the company thought proper
to withdraw, and then contracted his discourse into the focus of
love, which now put on a very different appearance from that which it
had formerly worn. Instead of awful veneration, which her presence
used to inspire, that chastity of sentiment, and delicacy of
expression, he now gazed upon her with the eyes of a libertine,
he glowed with the impatience of desire, talked in a strain that
barely kept within the bounds of decency, and attempted to snatch
such favours, as she, in the tenderness of mutual acknowledgments,
had once vouchsafed to bestow.

Grieved and offended as she was, at this palpable alteration in
his carriage, she disdained to remind him of his former deportment,
and, with dissembled good-humour, rallied him on the progress
he had made in gallantry and address. But, far from submitting to
the liberties he would have taken, she kept her person sacred from
his touch, and would not even suffer him to ravish a kiss of her
fair hand; so that he reaped no other advantage from the exercise
of his talents, during this interview, which lasted a whole hour,
than that of knowing he had overrated his own importance, and that
Emily's heart was not a garrison likely to surrender at discretion.

At length his addresses were interrupted by the arrival of the
mother, who had gone abroad to visit by herself; and the conversation
becoming more general, he understood that Godfrey was at London,
soliciting for a lieutenancy that had fallen vacant in the regiment
to which he belonged; and that Miss Sophy was at home with her
father.

Though our adventurer had not met with all the success he expected
by his first visit, he did not despair of reducing the fortress,
believing that in time there would be a mutiny in his favour, and
accordingly carried on the siege for several days, without profiting
by his perseverance; till, at length, having attended the ladies
to their own house in the country, he began to look upon this
adventure as time misspent, and resolved to discontinue his attack,
in hopes of meeting with a more favourable occasion; being, in
the meantime, ambitious of displaying in a higher sphere, those
qualifications which his vanity told him were at present misapplied.





CHAPTER LXVIII.




He attends his Uncle with great Affection during a Fit of
Illness--Sets out again for London--Meets with his Friend Godfrey,
who is prevailed upon to accompany him to Bath; on the Road to
which Place they chance to Dine with a Person who entertains them
with a curious Account of a certain Company of Adventurers.


Thus determined, he took leave of Emilia and her mother, on pretence
of going to London upon some urgent business, and returned to the
garrison, leaving the good old lady very much concerned, and the
daughter incensed at his behaviour, which was the more unexpected,
because Godfrey had told them that the commodore approved of his
nephew's passion.

Our adventurer found his uncle so ill of the gout, which, for the
first time, had taken possession of his stomach, that his life was
in imminent danger, and the whole family in disorder. He therefore
took the reins of government in his own hands, sent for all the
physicians in the neighbourhood, and attended him in person with
the most affectionate care, during the whole fit, which lasted a
fortnight, and then retired before the strength of his constitution.

When the old gentleman recovered his health, he was so penetrated
with Peregrine's behaviour, that he actually would have made
over to him his whole fortune, and depended upon him for his own
subsistence, had not our youth opposed the execution of the deed
with all his influence and might, and even persuaded him to make
a will, in which his friend Hatchway, and all his other adherents,
were liberally remembered, and his aunt provided for on her own
terms. This material point being settled, he, with his uncle's
permission, departed for London, after having seen the family
affairs established under the direction and administration of Mr.
Jolter and the lieutenant; for, by this time, Mrs. Trunnion was
wholly occupied with her spiritual concern.

On his first arrival at London, he sent a card to the lodgings of
Gauntlet, in consequence of a direction from his mother; and that
young gentleman waited on him next morning, though not with that
alacrity of countenance and warmth of friendship which might have
been expected from the intimacy of their former connection. Nor
was Peregrine himself actuated by the same unreserved affection
for the soldier which he had formerly entertained. Godfrey, over
and above the offence he had taken at Pickle's omission in point
of corresponding with him, had been informed, by a letter from his
mother, of the youth's cavalier behaviour to Emilia, during his
last residence at Winchester; and our young gentleman, as we have
already observed, was disgusted at the supposed discovery which the
soldier had made in his absence to the commodore. They, perceived
their mutual umbrage at meeting, and received each other with that
civility of reserve which commonly happens between two persons
whose friendship is in the wane.

Gauntlet at once divined the cause of the other's displeasure, and,
in order to vindicate his own character, after the first compliments
were passed, took the opportunity, on inquiring after the health
of the commodore, to tell Peregrine, that, while he tarried at the
garrison, on his return from Dover, the subject of the conversation, one
night, happening to turn on our hero's passion, the old gentleman
had expressed his concern about that affair; and, among other
observations, said, he supposed the object of his love was some
paltry hussy, whom he had picked up when he was a boy at school.
Upon which, Mr. Hatchway assured him, that she was a young woman of
as good a family as any in the county; and, after having prepossessed
him in her favour, ventured, out of the zeal of his friendship, to
tell who she was. Wherefore, the discovery was not to be imputed
to any other cause; and he hoped Mr. Pickle would acquit him of
ail share in the transaction.

Peregrine was very well pleased to be thus undeceived; his countenance
immediately cleared up, the formality of his behaviour relaxed into
his usual familiarity; he asked pardon for his unmannerly neglect
of Godfrey's letter, which he protested, was not owing to any
disregard, or abatement of friendship, but to a hurry of youthful
engagements, in consequence of which he bad procrastinated his
answer from time to time, until he was ready to return in person.

The young soldier was contented with this apology and, as Pickle's
intention, with respect to his sister, was still dubious and
undeclared, he did not think it was incumbent upon him, as yet,
to express any resentment on that score; but was wise enough to
foresee, that the renewal of his intimacy with our young gentleman
might be the means of reviving that flame which had been dissipated
by a variety of new ideas. With those sentiments, he laid aside
all reserve, and their communication resumed its former channel.
Peregrine made him acquainted with all the adventures in which
he had been engaged since their parting; and he, with the same
confidence, related the remarkable incidents of his own fate;
among other things, giving him to understand, that, upon obtaining
a commission in the army, the father of his dear Sophy, without
once inquiring about the occasion of his promotion, had not only
favoured him with his countenance in a much greater degree than
heretofore, but also contributed his interest, and even promised
the assistance of his purse, in procuring for him a lieutenancy,
which he was then soliciting with all his power; whereas, if he
had not been enabled, by a most accidental piece of good fortune,
to lift himself into the sphere of an officer, he had all the
reason in the world to believe that this gentleman, and all the
rest of his wealthy relations, would have suffered him to languish
in obscurity and distress; and by turning his misfortune into
reproach, made it a plea for their want of generosity and friendship.

Peregrine, understanding the situation of his friend's affairs,
would have accommodated him upon the instant with a sum to accelerate
the passage of his commission through the offices; but, being too
well acquainted with his scrupulous disposition, to manifest his
benevolence in that manner, he found means to introduce himself to
one of the gentlemen of the War Office, who was so well satisfied
with the arguments used in behalf of his friend, that Godfrey's
business was transacted in a very few days, though he himself knew
nothing of his interest being thus reinforced.

By this time, the season at Bath was begun; and our hero, panting
with the desire of distinguishing himself at that resort of
the fashionable world, communicated his design of going thither
to his friend Godfrey, whom he importuned to accompany him in the
excursion; and leave of absence from his regiment being obtained by
the influence of Peregrine's new quality friends, the two companions
departed from London in a post-chaise, attended, as usual, by the
valet-de-chambre and Pipes, who were become almost as necessary to
our adventurer as any two of his own organs.

At the inn, when they alighted for dinner, Godfrey perceived a
person walking by himself in the yard, with a very pensive air, and,
upon observing him more narrowly, recognised him to be a professed
gamester, whom he had formerly known at Tunbridge. On the strength
of this acquaintance, he accosted the peripatetic, who knew him
immediately; and, in the fulness of his grief and vexation, told
him, that he was now on his return from Bath, where he had been
stripped by a  company of sharpers, who resented that he should
presume to trade upon his own bottom.

Peregrine, who was extremely curious in his inquiries, imagining
that he might learn some entertaining and useful anecdotes from this
artist, invited him to dinner, and was accordingly fully informed
of all the political systems at Bath. He understood that there was
at London one great company of adventurers, who employed agents
in all the different branches of imposition throughout the whole
kingdom of England, allowing these ministers a certain proportion
of the profits accruing from their industry and skill, and reserving
the greatest share for the benefit of the common stock, which was
chargeable with the expense of fitting out individuals in their
various pursuits, as well as with the loss sustained in the course
of their adventures. Some whose persons and qualifications are by
the company judged adequate to the task, exert their talents in
making love to ladies of fortune, being accommodated with money
and accoutrements for that purpose, after having given their bonds
payable to one or other of the directors, on the day of marriage,
for certain sums, proportioned to the dowries they are to receive.
Others versed in the doctrine of chances, and certain secret
expediences, frequent all those places where games of hazard are
allowed: and such as are masters in the arts of billiards, tennis,
and bowls, are continually lying in wait, in all the scenes of these
diversions, for the ignorant and unwary.  A fourth class attend
horse-races, being skilled in those mysterious practices by which
the knowing ones are taken in. Nor is this community unfurnished with
those who lay wanton wives and old rich widows under contribution,
and extort money, by prostituting themselves to the embraces of
their own sex, and then threatening their admirers with prosecution.
But their most important returns are made by that body of their
undertakers who exercise their understandings in the innumerable
stratagems of the card table, at which no sharper can be too infamous
to be received, and even caressed by persons of the highest rank
and distinction. Among other articles of intelligence, our young
gentleman learned, that those agents, by whom their guest was broke,
and expelled from Bath. had constituted a bank against all sporters,
and monopolized the advantage in all sorts of play. He then told
Gauntlet, that, if he would put himself under his direction, he
would return with them, and lay such a scheme as would infallibly
ruin the whole society at billiards, as he knew that Godfrey excelled
them all in his knowledge of that game.

The soldier excused himself from engaging in any party of that kind,
and after dinner the travellers parted; but, as the conversation
between the two friends turned upon the information they had received,
Peregrine projected a plan for punishing those villainous pests of
society, who prey upon their fellow-creatures; and it was put in
execution by Gauntlet in the following manner.





CHAPTER LXIX.




Godfrey executes a Scheme at Bath, by which a whole Company of
Sharpers is ruined.


On the evening after their arrival at Bath, Godfrey, who had kept
himself up all day for that purpose, went in boots to the billiard
table; and, two gentlemen being at play, began to bet with so little
appearance of judgment, that one of the adventurers then present
was inflamed with a desire of profiting by his inexperience; and,
when the table was vacant, invited him to take a game for amusement.
The soldier, assuming the air of a self-conceited dupe, answered,
that he did not choose to throw away his time for nothing, but, if
he pleased, would piddle for a crown a game. This declaration was
very agreeable to the other, who wanted to be further confirmed in
the opinion he had conceived of the stranger, before he would play
for anything of consequence. The party being accepted, Gauntlet
put off his coat, and, beginning with seeming eagerness, won the
first game, because his antagonist kept up his play with a view of
encouraging him to wager a greater sum. The soldier purposely bit
at the hook, the stakes were doubled, and he was again victorious,
by the permission of his competitor. He now began to yawn; and
observing, that it was not worth his while to proceed in such a
childish manner; the other swore, in an affected passion, that he
would play him for twenty guineas. The proposal being embraced,
through the connivance of Godfrey, the money was won by the sharper,
who exerted his dexterity to the utmost, fearing that otherwise
his adversary would decline continuing the game.

Godfrey thus conquered, pretended to lose his temper, cursed his
own ill-luck, swore that the table had a cast, and that the balls
did not run true, changed his mast, and with great warmth, challenged
his enemy to double the sum. The gamester, who feigned reluctance,
complied with his desire; and having got the two first hazards,
offered to lay one hundred guineas to fifty on the game. The odds
were taken; and Godfrey having allowed himself to be overcome,
began to rage with great violence, broke the mast to pieces, threw
the balls out of the window, and, in the fury of his indignation,
defied his antagonist to meet him tomorrow, when he should be
refreshed from the fatigue of travelling. This was a very welcome
invitation to the gamester, who, imagining that the soldier would
turn out a most beneficial prize, assured him, that he would not
fail to be there next forenoon, in order to give him his revenge.

Gauntlet went home to his lodgings, fully certified of his own
superiority, and took his measures with Peregrine, touching the
prosecution of their scheme; while his opponent made a report of
his success to the brethren of the gang, who resolved to be present
at the decision of the match, with a view of taking advantage of
the stranger's passionate disposition.

Affairs being thus concerted on both sides, the players met, according
to appointment, and the room was immediately filled with spectators,
who either came thither by accident, curiosity, or design. The match
was fixed for one hundred pounds a game, the principals chose their
instruments, and laid aside their coats, and one of the knights
of the order proffered to lay another hundred on the head of his
associate. Godfrey took him upon the instant. A second worthy of
the same class, seeing him so eager, challenged him to treble the
sum; and his proposal met with the same reception, to the astonishment
of the company, whose expectation was raised to a very interesting
pitch. The game was begun, and the soldier having lost the
first hazard, the odds were offered by the confederacy with great
vociferation; but nobody would run such a risk in favour of a person
who was utterly unknown. The sharper having gained the second also,
the noise increased to a surprising clamour, not only of the gang,
but likewise of almost all the spectators, who desired to lay two
to one against the brother of Emilia.

Peregrine, who was present, perceiving the cupidity of the
association sufficiently inflamed, all of a sudden opened his mouth,
and answered their bets, to the amount of twelve hundred pounds;
which were immediately deposited, on both sides, in money and notes;
so that this was, perhaps, the most important game that ever was
played at billiards. Gauntlet seeing the agreement settled, struck
his antagonist's ball into the pocket in a twinkling, though it
was in one of those situations which are supposed to be against
the striker. The betters were a little discomposed at this event,
for which, however, they consoled themselves by imputing the success
to accident; but when, at the very next stroke, he sprung it over
the table, their countenances underwent an instantaneous distraction
of feature, and they waited, in the most dreadful suspense, for
the next hazard, which being likewise taken with infinite ease by
the soldier, the blood forsook their cheeks, and the interjection
"Zounds!" pronounced with a look of consternation, and in a tone
of despair, proceeded from every mouth at the same instant of time.
They were overwhelmed with horror and astonishment at seeing three
hazards taken in as many strokes, from a person of their friend's
dexterity; and shrewdly suspected, that the whole was a scheme
preconcerted for their destruction. On this supposition, they changed
the note, and attempted to hedge for their own indemnification,
by proposing to lay the odds in favour of Gauntlet; but so much
was the opinion of the company altered by that young gentleman's
success, that no one would venture to espouse the cause of his
competitor, who, chancing to improve his game by the addition of
another lucky hit, diminished the concern, and revived the hopes
of his adherents.

But this gleam of fortune did not long continue. Godfrey collected
his whole art and capacity, and, augmenting his score to number ten,
indulged himself with a view of the whole fraternity. The visages
of these professors had adopted different shades of complexion
at every hazard he had taken: from their natural colour they had
shifted into a sallow hue; from thence into pale; from pale into
yellow, which degenerated into a mahogany tint; and now they saw
seventeen hundred pounds of their stock depending upon a single
stroke, they stood like so many swarthy Moors, jaundiced with
terror and vexation. The fire which naturally glowed in the cheeks
and nose of the player, seemed utterly extinct, and his carbuncles
exhibited a livid appearance, as if a gangrene had already made
some progress in his face; his hand began to shake, and his whole
frame was seized with such trepidation, that he was fain to swallow
a bumper of brandy, in order to re-establish the tranquility of
his nerves. This expedient, however, did not produce the desired
effect; for he aimed the ball at the lead with such discomposure,
that it struck on the wrong side, and came off at an angle which
directed it full in the middle hole. This fatal accident was
attended with a universal groan, as if the whole universe had gone
to wreck; and notwithstanding that tranquility for which adventurers
are so remarkable, this loss made such an impression upon them
all, that each in particular manifested his chagrin, by the most
violent emotions. One turned up his eyes to heaven, and bit his
nether lip; another gnawed his fingers, while he stalked across
the room; a third blasphemed with horrid imprecations; and he who
played the party sneaked off, grinding his teeth together, with a
look that baffles all description, and as he crossed the threshold,
exclaiming, "A d--d bite, by G--!"

The victors, after having insulted them, by asking, if they were
disposed for another chance, carried off their winning, with the
appearance of great composure, though in their hearts they were
transported with unspeakable joy; not so much on account of the
booty they had gained, as in consideration of having so effectually
destroyed such a nest of pernicious miscreants.

Peregrine, believing that now he had found an opportunity of serving
his friend, without giving offence to the delicacy of his honour,
told him, upon their arrival at their lodgings, that fortune had at
length enabled him to become in a manner independent, or at least
make himself easy in his circumstances, by purchasing a company with
the money he had won. So saying, he put his share of the success
in Gauntlet's hand, as a sum that of right belonged to him, and
promised to write in his behalf to a nobleman, who had interest
enough to promote such a quick rise in the service.

Godfrey thanked him for his obliging intention, but absolutely
refused, with great loftiness of demeanour, to appropriate to his
own use any part of the money which Pickle had gained, and seemed
affronted at the other's entertaining a sentiment so unworthy of
his character. He would not even accept, in the way of loan, such
an addition to his own stock, as would amount to the price of
a company of foot; but expressed great confidence in the future
exertion of that talent which had been blessed with such a prosperous
beginning.  Our hero finding him thus obstinately deaf to the voice
of his own interest, resolved to govern himself in his next endeavours
of friendship, by his experience of this ticklish punctilio; and,
in the meantime, gave a handsome benefaction to the hospital, out
of these first fruits of the success in play, and reserved two
hundred pounds for a set of diamond ear-rings and solitaire, which
he intended for a present to Miss Emily.





CHAPTER LXX.




The two Friends eclipse all their Competitors in Gallantry, and
practise a pleasant Project of Revenge upon the Physicians of the
Place.


The fame of their exploit against the sharpers was immediately
diffused through all the companies at Bath; so that, when our
adventurers appeared in public, they were pointed out by an hundred
extended fingers, and considered as consummate artists in all the
different species of finesse, which they would not fail to practise
with the first opportunity. Nor was this opinion of their characters
any obstacle to their reception into the fashionable parties in
the place; but, on the contrary, such a recommendation, which, as
I have already hinted, never fails to operate for the advantage of
the possessor.

This first adventure, therefore, served them as an introduction to
the company at Bath, who were not a little surprised to find their
expectations baffled by the conduct of the two companions; because,
far from engaging deeply at play, they rather shunned all occasions
of gaming, and directed their attention to gallantry, in which our
hero shone unrivalled. His external qualifications, exclusive of
any other merit, were strong enough to captivate the common run
of the female sex; and these, reinforced with a sprightliness of
conversation, and a most insinuating address, became irresistible,
even by those who were fortified with pride, caution, or indifference.
But, among all the nymphs of this gay place, he did not meet with
one object that disputed the empire of his heart with Emilia, and
therefore he divided his attachment according to the suggestions
of vanity and whim; so that, before he had resided a fortnight at
Bath, he had set all the ladies by the ears, and furnished all the
hundred tongues of scandal with full employment.  The splendour of
his appearance excited the inquiries of envy, which, instead of
discovering any circumstances to his prejudice, was cursed with
the information of his being a young gentleman of a good family,
and heir to an immense fortune.

The countenance of some of his quality friends, who arrived at Bath,
confirmed this piece of intelligence. Upon which his acquaintance
was courted and cultivated with great assiduity; and he met with
such advances from some of the fair sex, as rendered him extremely
fortunate in his amours. Nor was his friend Godfrey a stranger to
favours of the same kind; his accomplishments were exactly calculated
for the meridian of female taste; and, with certain individuals
of that sex, his muscular frame, and the robust connection of his
limbs, were more attractive than the delicate proportions of his
companion. He accordingly reigned paramount among those inamoratas
who were turned of thirty, without being under the necessity of
proceeding by tedious addresses, and was thought to have co-operated
with the waters in removing the sterility of certain ladies, who
had long undergone the reproach and disgust of their husbands;
while Peregrine set up his throne among those who laboured under
the disease of celibacy, from the pert miss of fifteen, who,
with a fluttering heart, tosses her head, bridles up, and giggles
involuntarily at sight of a handsome young man, to the staid
maid of twenty-eight, who, with a demure aspect, moralizes on the
vanity of beauty, the folly of youth, and simplicity of woman,
and expatiates on friendship, benevolence, and good sense, in the
style of a Platonic philosopher.

In such a diversity of dispositions, his conquests were attended
with all the heart-burnings, animosities, and turmoils of jealousy
and spite. The younger class took all opportunities of mortifying
their seniors in public, by treating them with that indignity which,
contrary to the general privilege of age, is, by the consent and
connivance of mankind, leveled against those who have the misfortune
to come under the denomination of old maids; and these last retorted
their hostilities in the private machinations of slander, supported
by experience and subtilty of invention. Not one day passed in
which some new story did not circulate, to the prejudice of one or
other of those rivals.

If our hero, in the long-room, chanced to quit one of the moralists,
with whom he had been engaged in conversation, he was immediately
accosted by a number of the opposite faction, who, with ironical
smiles, upbraided him with cruelty to the poor lady he had left,
exhorted him to have compassion on her sufferings; and, turning
their eyes towards the object of their intercession, broke forth
into a universal peal of laughter. On the other hand, when Peregrine,
in consequence of having danced with one of the minors overnight,
visited her in the morning, the Platonists immediately laid hold
on the occasion, tasked their imaginations, associated ideas, and,
with sage insinuations, retailed a thousand circumstances of the
interview, which never had any foundation in truth. They observed,
that, if girls are determined to behave with such indiscretion, they
must lay their accounts with incurring the censure of the world;
that she in question was old enough to act more circumspectly; and
wondered that her mother would permit any young fellow to approach
the chamber while her daughter was naked in bed. As for the servants
peeping through the key-hole, to be sure it was an unlucky accident;
but people ought to be upon their guard against such curiosity, and
give their domestics no cause to employ their penetration. These
and other such reflections were occasionally whispered as secrets
among those who were known to be communicative; so that, in a few
hours, it became the general topic of discourse; and, as it had
been divulged under injunctions of secrecy, it was almost impossible
to trace the scandal to its origin; because every person concerned
must have promulgated her own breach of trust, in discovering her
author of the report.

Peregrine, instead of allaying, rather exasperated this contention,
by an artful distribution of his attention among the competitors;
well knowing, that, should his regard be converged into one point,
he would soon forfeit the pleasure he enjoyed in seeing them at
variance; for both parties would join against the common enemy,
and his favourite would be persecuted by the whole coalition. He
perceived, that, among the secret agents of scandal, none were so
busy as the physicians, a class of animals who live in this place,
like so many ravens hovering about a carcase, and even ply for
employment, like scullers at Hungerford-stairs. The greatest part
of them have correspondents in London, who make it their business
to inquire into the history, character, and distemper of every one
that repairs to Bath, for the benefit of the waters, and if they
cannot procure interest to recommend their medical friends to these
patients before they set out, they at least furnish them with a
previous account of what they could collect, that their correspondents
may use this intelligence for their own advantage. By these means,
and the assistance of flattery and assurance, they often insinuate
themselves into the acquaintance of strangers, and, by consulting
their dispositions, become necessary and subservient to their
prevailing passions. By their connection with apothecaries and
nurses, they are informed of all the private occurrences in each
family, and therefore enabled to gratify the rancour of malice, amuse
the spleen of peevish indisposition, and entertain the eagerness
of impertinent curiosity.

In the course of these occupations, which frequently affected the
reputation of our two adventurers, this whole body fell under the
displeasure of our hero, who, after divers consultations with his
friend, concerted a stratagem, which was practised upon the faculty
in this manner. Among those who frequented the pump-room, was an
old officer, whose temper, naturally impatient, was, by repeated
attacks of the gout, which had almost deprived him of the use of
his limbs, sublimated into a remarkable degree of virulence and
perverseness.  He imputed the inveteracy of his distemper to the
malpractice of a surgeon who had administered to him, while he
laboured under the consequences of an unfortunate amour; and this
supposition had inspired him with an insurmountable antipathy
to all the professors of the medical art, which was more and more
confirmed by the information of a friend at London, who had told
him, that it was the common practice among the physicians at Bath
to dissuade their patients from drinking the water, that the cure,
and in consequence their attendance, might be longer protracted.

Thus prepossessed, he had come to Bath, and, conformable to a few
general instructions he had received, used the waters without any
farther direction, taking all occasions of manifesting his hatred and
contempt of the sons of Esculapius, both by speech and gesticulations,
and even by pursuing a regimen quite contrary to that which he knew
they prescribed to others who seemed to be exactly in his condition.
But he did not find his account in this method, how successful
soever it may have been in other cases. His complaints, instead
of vanishing, were every day more and more enraged: and at length
he was confined to his bed, where he lay blaspheming from morn to
night, and from night to morn, though still more determined than
ever to adhere to his former maxims.

In the midst of his torture, which was become the common joke of
the town, being circulated through the industry of the physicians,
who triumphed in his disaster, Peregrine, by means of Mr. Pipes,
employed a country fellow, who had come to market, to run with
great haste, early one morning, to the lodgings of all the doctors
in town, and desire them to attend the colonel with all imaginable
despatch. In consequence of this summons, the whole faculty put
themselves in motion; and three of the foremost arriving at the
same instant of time, far from complimenting one another with the
door, each separately essayed to enter, and the whole triumvirate
stuck in the passage. While they remained thus wedged together,
they descried two of their brethren posting towards the same goal,
with all the speed that God had enabled them to exert; upon which
they came to a parley, and agreed to stand by one another. This
covenant being made, they disentangled themselves, and, inquiring
about the patient, were told by the servant that he had just fallen
asleep.

Having received this intelligence, they took possession of his
ante-chamber, and shut the door, while the rest of the tribe posted
themselves on the outside as they arrived; so that the whole passage
was filled, from the top of the staircase to the street-door;
and the people of the house, together with the colonel's servant,
struck dumb with astonishment. The three leaders of this learned
gang had no sooner made their lodgment good, than they began to
consult about the patient's malady, which every one of them pretended
to have considered with great care and assiduity. The first who
gave his opinion, said, the distemper was an obstinate arthritis;
the second affirmed, that it was no other than a confirmed pox;
and the third swore, it was an inveterate scurvy. This diversity
of opinions was supported by a variety of quotations from medical
authors, ancient as well as modern; but these were not of sufficient
authority, or, at least, not explicit enough to decide the dispute;
for there are many schisms in medicine, as well as in religion,
and each sect can quote the fathers in support of the tenets they
profess. In short, the contention rose to such a pitch of clamour,
as not only alarmed the brethren on the stair, but also awaked
the patient from the first nap he had enjoyed in the space of ten
whole days. Had it been simply waking, he would have been obliged
to them for the noise that disturbed him; for, in that case, he
would have been relieved from the tortures of hell fire, to which, in
his dreams, he fancied himself exposed. But this dreadful vision
had been the result of that impression which was made upon his
brain by the intolerable anguish of his joints; so that, when he
awaked, the pain, instead of being allayed, was rather aggravated
by a great acuteness of sensation; and the confused vociferation
in the next room invading his ears at the same time, he began to
think his dream was realised, and, in the pangs of despair, applied
himself to a bell that stood by his bedside, which he rung with
great violence and perseverance.

This alarm put an immediate stop to the disputation of the three
doctors, who, upon this notice of his being awake, rushed into his
chamber, without ceremony; and two of them seizing his arms, the
third made the like application to one of his temples. Before the
patient could recollect himself from the amazement which had laid
hold on him at this unexpected irruption, the room was filled
by the rest of the faculty, who followed the servant that entered
in obedience to his master's call; and the bed was in a moment
surrounded by these gaunt ministers of death. The colonel seeing
himself beset with such an assemblage of solemn visages and figures,
which he had always considered with the utmost detestation and
abhorrence, was incensed to a most inexpressible degree of indignation;
and so inspirited by his rage, that though his tongue denied its
office, his other limbs performed their functions. He disengaged
himself from the triumvirate, who had taken possession of his body,
sprung out of bed with incredible agility, and, seizing one of his
crutches, applied it so effectually to one of the three, just as
he stooped to examine the patient's water, that his tie-periwig
dropped into the pot, while he himself fell motionless on the floor.

This significant explanation disconcerted the whole fraternity;
every man turned his face, as if it were by instinct, towards the
door; and the retreat of the community being obstructed by the
efforts of individuals, confusion and tumultuous uproar ensued. For
the colonel, far from limiting his prowess to the first exploit,
handled his weapon with astonishing vigour and dexterity, without
respect of persons; so that few or none of them had escaped without
marks of his displeasure, when his spirits failed, and he sank down
again quite exhausted on his bed. Favoured by this respite, the
discomfited faculty collected their hats and wigs, which had fallen
off in the fray; and perceiving the assailant too much enfeebled
to renew the attack, set up their throats together, and loudly
threatened to prosecute him severely for such an outrageous assault.

By this time the landlord had interposed; and, inquiring into the
cause of the disturbance, was informed of what had happened by the
complainants, who, at the same time, giving him to understand that
they had been severally summoned to attend the colonel that morning,
he assured them that they had been imposed upon by some wag, for his
lodger had never dreamed of consulting any one of their profession.

Thunderstruck at this declaration, the general clamour instantaneously
ceased; and each, in particular, at once comprehending the nature
of the joke, they sneaked silently off with the loss they had
sustained, in unutterable shame and mortification; while Peregrine
and his friend, who took care to be passing that way by accident,
made a full stop at sight of such an extraordinary efflux, and
enjoyed the countenance and condition of every one as he appeared;
nay, even made up to some of those who seemed most affected with
their situation, and mischievously tormented them with questions,
touching this unusual congregation; then, in consequence of
the information they received from the landlord and the colonel's
valet, subjected the sufferers to the ridicule of all the company
in town. As it would have been impossible for the authors of this
farce to keep themselves concealed from the indefatigable inquiries
of the physicians, they made no secret of their having directed
the whole: though they took care to own it in such an ambiguous
manner, as afforded no handle of prosecution.





CHAPTER LXXI.




Peregrine humbles a noted Hector, and meets with a strange Character
at the House of a certain Lady.


Among those who never failed to reside at Bath during the season,
was a certain person, who, from the most abject misery, had, by his
industry and art at play, amassed about fifteen thousand pounds;
and though his character was notorious, insinuated himself so far
into the favour of what is called the best company, that very few
private parties of pleasure took place in which he was not principally
concerned. He was of a gigantic stature, a most intrepid countenance;
and his disposition, naturally overbearing, had, in the course of
his adventures and success, acquired a most intolerable degree of
insolence and vanity. By the ferocity of his features, and audacity
of his behaviour, he had obtained a reputation for the most undaunted
courage, which had been confirmed by divers adventures, in which
he had humbled the most assuming heroes of his own fraternity; so
that he now reigned chief Hector of the place with unquestioned
authority.

With this son of fortune was Peregrine one evening engaged at play,
and so successful, that he could not help informing his friend
of his good luck. Godfrey, hearing the description of the loser,
immediately recognized the person, whom he had known at Tunbridge;
and, assuring Pickle that he was a sharper of the first water,
cautioned him against any further connection with such a dangerous
companion, who, he affirmed, had suffered him to win a small sum,
that he might be encouraged to lose a much greater sum upon some
other occasion.

Our young gentleman treasured up this advice; and though he did
not scruple to give the gamester an opportunity of retrieving his
loss, when he next day demanded his revenge, he absolutely refused
to proceed after he had refunded his winning. The other, who considered
him as a hot-headed unthinking youth, endeavoured to inflame his
pride to a continuance of the game, by treating his skill with scorn
and contempt; and, among other sarcastic expressions, advised him
to go to school again, before he pretended to engage with masters
of the art. Our hero, incensed at his arrogance, replied with great
warmth, that he knew himself sufficiently qualified for playing
with men of honour, who deal upon the square, and hoped he should
always deem it infamous either to learn or practise the tricks of
a professed gamester. "Blood and thunder! meaning me, sir?" cried
this artist, raising his voice, and curling his visage into a most
intimidating frown. "Zounds! I'll cut the throat of any scoundrel
who has the presumption to suppose that I don't play as honourably
as e'er a nobleman in the kingdom: and I insist upon an explanation
from you, sir; or, by hell and brimstone! I shall expect other
sort of satisfaction." Peregrine (whose blood by this time boiled
within him) answered without hesitation, "Far from thinking your
demand unreasonable, I will immediately explain myself without
reserve, and tell you, that, upon unquestionable authority, I
believe you to be an impudent rascal and common cheat."

The Hector was so amazed and confounded at the freedom of this
declaration, which he thought no man on earth would venture to make
in his presence, that, for some minutes, he could not recollect
himself; but at length whispered a challenge in the ear of our
hero, which was accordingly accepted. When they arrived next morning
upon the field, the gamester, arming his countenance with all its
terrors, advanced with a sword of a monstrous length, and, putting
himself in a posture, called out aloud in a most terrific voice,
"Draw, d--n ye, draw; I will this instant send you to your fathers."
The youth was not slow in complying with his desire; his weapon was
unsheathed in a moment, and he began the attack with such unexpected
spirit and address, that his adversary, having made shift with
great difficulty to parry the first pass, retreated a few paces,
and demanded a parley, in which he endeavoured to persuade the
young man, that to lay a man of his character under the necessity
of chastising his insolence, was the most rash and inconsiderate
step that he could possibly have taken; but that he had compassion
upon his youth, and was willing to spare him if he would surrender
his sword, and promise to ask pardon in public for the offence
he had given. Pickle was so much exasperated at this unparalleled
effrontery, that, without deigning to make the least reply, he
flung his own hat in the proposer's face, and renewed the charge
with such undaunted agility, that the gamester, finding himself in
manifest hazard of his life, betook himself to his heels, and fled
homewards with incredible speed, being closely pursued by Peregrine,
who, having sheathed his sword, pelted him with stones as he ran,
and compelled him to go, that same day, into banishment from Bath,
where he had domineered so long.

By this achievement, which was the subject of astonishment to all
the company, who had looked upon the fugitive as a person of heroic
courage, our adventurer's reputation was rendered formidable in
all its circumstances; although he thereby disobliged a good many
people of fashion, who had contracted an intimacy of friendship
with the exile, and who resented his disgrace, as if it had been
the misfortune of a worthy man. These generous patrons, however,
bore a very small proportion to those who were pleased with the
event of the duel; because, in the course of their residence at
Bath, they had either been insulted or defrauded by the challenger.
Nor was this instance of our hero's courage unacceptable to
the ladies, few of whom could now resist the united force of such
accomplishments.  Indeed, neither he nor his friend Godfrey would
have found much difficulty in picking up an agreeable companion for
life; but Gauntlet's heart was pre-engaged to Sophy; and Pickle,
exclusive of his attachment to Emily, which was stronger than he
himself imagined, possessed such a share of ambition as could not
be satisfied with the conquest of any female he beheld at Bath.

His visits were, therefore, promiscuous, without any other view
than that of amusement; and though his pride was flattered by the
advances of the fair, whom he had captivated, he never harboured
one thought of proceeding beyond the limits of common gallantry,
and carefully avoided all particular explanations. But, what above
all other enjoyments yielded him the most agreeable entertainment,
was the secret history of characters, which he learned from a very
extraordinary person, with whom he became acquainted in this manner.

Being at the house of a certain lady on a visiting day, he was struck
with the appearance of an old man, who no sooner entered the room
than the mistress of the house very kindly desired one of the wits
present to roast the old put. This petit-maitre, proud of the
employment, went up to the senior, who had something extremely
peculiar and significant in his countenance, and saluting him with
divers fashionable congees, accosted him in these words: "Your
servant, you old rascal. I hope to have the honour of seeing you
hanged. I vow to Gad! you look extremely shocking, with these gummy
eyes, lanthorn jaws, and toothless chaps. What! you squint at the
ladies, you old rotten medlar? Yes, yes, we understand your ogling;
but you must content yourself with a cook-maid, sink me! I see you
want to sit. These withered shanks of yours tremble under their
burden; but you must have a little patience, old Hirco! indeed you
must. I intend to mortify you a little longer, curse me!"

The company was so tickled with this address, which was delivered
with much grimace and gesticulation, that they burst out into a
loud fit of laughter, which they fathered upon a monkey that was
chained in the room; and, when the peal was over, the wit renewed
the attack in these words: "I suppose you are fool enough to think
this mirth was occasioned by Pug. Ay, there he is; you had best
survey him; he is of your own family; switch me. But the laugh was
at your expense; and you ought to thank Heaven for making you so
ridiculous." While he uttered these ingenious ejaculations, the
old gentleman bowed alternately to him and the monkey, that seemed
to grin and chatter in imitation of the beau, and, with an arch
solemnity of visage, pronounced, "Gentlemen, as I have not the honour
to understand your compliments, they will be much better bestowed
on each other." So saying, he seated himself, and had the satisfaction
to see the laugh returned upon the aggressor, who remained confounded
and abashed, and in a few minutes left the room, muttering, as he
retired, "The old fellow grows scurrilous, stap my breath!"

While Peregrine wondered in silence at this extraordinary scene, the
lady of the house perceiving his surprise, gave him to understand,
that the ancient visitant was utterly bereft of the sense of hearing;
that his name was Cadwallader Crabtree, his disposition altogether
misanthropical; and that he was admitted into company on account
of entertainment he afforded by his sarcastic observations, and
the pleasant mistakes to which he was subject from his infirmity.
Nor did our hero wait a long time for an illustration of this odd
character. Every sentence he spoke was replete with gall; nor did
his satire consist in general reflections, but a series of remarks,
which had been made through the medium of a most whimsical peculiarity
of opinion.

Among those who were present at this assembly was a young officer,
who having, by dint of interest, obtained a seat in the lower
house, thought it incumbent upon him to talk of affairs of state;
and accordingly regaled the company with an account of a secret
expedition which the French were busied in preparing; assuring
them that he had it from the mouth of the minister, to whom it had
been transmitted by one of his agents abroad. In descanting upon
the particulars of the armament, he observed that they had twenty
ships of the line ready manned and victualled at Brest, which were
destined for Toulon, where they would be joined by as many more;
and from thence proceed to the execution of their scheme, which he
imparted as a secret not fit to be divulged.

This piece of intelligence being communicated to all the company
except Mr. Crabtree, who suffered by his loss of hearing, that cynic
was soon after accosted by a lady, who, by means of an artificial
alphabet, formed by a certain conjunction and disposition of the
fingers, asked if he had heard any extraordinary news of late.
Cadwallader, with his usual complaisance, replied, that he supposed
she took him for a courier or spy, by teasing him eternally with
that question. He then expatiated upon the foolish curiosity of
mankind, which, he said, must either proceed from idleness or want
of ideas; and repeated almost verbatim the officer's information,
a vague ridiculous report invented by some ignorant coxcomb, who
wanted to give himself airs of importance, and believed only by
those who were utterly unacquainted with the politics and strength
of the French nation.

In confirmation of what he had advanced, he endeavoured to demonstrate
how impossible it must be for that people to fit out even the third
part of such a navy, so soon after the losses they had sustained
during the war; and confirmed his proof by asserting, that to
his certain knowledge, the harbours of Brest and Toulon could not
at that time produce a squadron of eight ships of the line.  The
member, who was an utter stranger to this misanthrope, hearing his
own asseverations treated with such contempt, glowed with confusion
and resentment, and, raising his voice, began to defend his own
veracity, with great eagerness and trepidation, mingling with his
arguments many blustering invectives, against the insolence and
ill manners of his supposed contradictor, who sat with the most
mortifying composure of countenance, till the officer's patience
was quite exhausted, and then, to the manifest increase of his
vexation, he was informed, that his antagonist was so deaf, that
in all probability, the last trumpet would make no impression upon
him, without a previous renovation of his organs.





CHAPTER LXXII.




He cultivates an Acquaintance with the Misanthrope, who favours
him with a short Sketch of his own History.


Peregrine was extremely well pleased with this occasional rebuke,
which occurred so seasonably, that he could scarce believe it
accidental. He looked upon Cadwallader as the greatest curiosity
he had ever known, and cultivated the old man's acquaintance with
such insinuating address, that in less than a fortnight he obtained
his confidence. As they one day walked into the fields together,
the man-hater disclosed himself in these words:--"Though the term
of our communication has been but short, you must have perceived,
that I treat you with uncommon marks of regard; which, I assure
you, is not owing to your personal accomplishments, nor the pains
you take to oblige me; for the first I overlook, and the last I see
through. But there is something in your disposition which indicates
a rooted contempt for the world, and I understand you have made
some successful efforts in exposing one part of it to the ridicule
of the other. It is upon this assurance that I offer you my advice
and assistance, in prosecuting other schemes of the same nature;
and to convince you that such an alliance is not to be rejected,
I will now give you a short sketch of my history, which will be
published after my death, in forty-seven volumes of my own compiling.

"I was born about forty miles from this place, of parents who, having
a very old family name to support, bestowed their whole fortune
on my elder brother; so that I inherited of my father little else
than a large share of choler, to which I am indebted for a great
many adventures that did not always end to my satisfaction. At the
age of eighteen I was sent up to town, with a recommendation to
a certain peer, who found means to amuse me with the promise of a
commission for seven whole years; and 'tis odds but I should have
made my fortune by my perseverance, had not I been arrested, and
thrown into the Marshalsea by my landlord, on whose credit I had
subsisted three years, after my father had renounced me as an idle
vagabond. There I remained six months, among those prisoners who
have no other support than chance charity; and contracted a very
valuable acquaintance, which was of great service to me in the
future emergencies of my life.

"I was no sooner discharged, in consequence of an act of parliament
for the relief of insolvent debtors, than I went to the house of my
creditor, whom I cudgelled without mercy; and, that I might leave
nothing undone of those things which I ought to have done, my next
stage was to Westminster Hall, where I waited until my patron came
forth from the house, and saluted him with a blow that laid him
senseless on the pavement. But my retreat was not so fortunate as
I could have wished. The chairman and lacqueys in waiting having
surrounded and disarmed me in a trice, I was committed to Newgate,
and loaded with chains; and a very sagacious gentleman, who was
afterwards hanged, having sat in judgment upon my case, pronounced
me guilty of a capital crime, and foretold my condemnation at the
Old Bailey. His prognostic, however, was disappointed; for nobody
appearing to prosecute me at the next session, I was discharged by
order of the court. It would be impossible for me to recount, in
the compass of one day's conversation, all the particular exploits
of which I bore considerable share. Suffice it to say, I have been,
at different times, prisoner in all the jails within the bills
of mortality. I have broken from every round-house on this side
Temple-bar. No bailiff, in the days of my youth and desperation,
durst execute a writ upon me without a dozen of followers; and the
justices themselves trembled when I was brought before them.

"I was once maimed by a carman, with whom I quarrelled, because
he ridiculed my leek on St. David's day; my skull was fractured by
a butcher's cleaver on the like occasion. I have been run through
the body five times, and lost the tip of my left ear by a pistol
bullet.  In a rencontre of this kind, having left my antagonist
for dead, I was wise enough to make my retreat into France; and a
few days after my arrival at Paris, entering into conversation with
some officers on the subject of politics, a dispute arose, in which
I lost my temper, and spoke so irreverently of the Grand Monarque,
that next morning I was sent to the Bastille, by virtue of a
lettre de cachet.  There I remained for some months, deprived of
all intercourse with rational creatures; a circumstance for which
I was not sorry, as I had the more time to project schemes of
revenge against the tyrant who confined me, and the wretch who had
betrayed my private conversation. But tired, at length, with these
fruitless suggestions, I was fain to unbend the severity of my
thoughts by a correspondence with some industrious spiders, who
had hung my dungeon with their ingenious labours.

"I considered their work with such attention that I soon became an
adept in the mystery of weaving, and furnished myself with as many
useful observations and reflections on that art, as will compose
a very curious treatise, which I intend to bequeath to the Royal
Society, for the benefit of our woollen manufacture; and this with
a view to perpetuate my own name, rather than befriend my country;
for, thank Heaven! I am weaned from all attachments of that kind,
and look upon myself as one very little obliged to any society
whatsoever. Although I presided with absolute power over this
long-legged community, and distributed punishments and rewards to
each, according to his deserts, I grew impatient of my situation;
and my natural disposition one day prevailing, like a fire which
had long been smothered, I wreaked the fury of my indignation upon
my innocent subjects, and in a twinkling destroyed the whole race.
While I was employed in this general massacre, the turnkey, who
brought me food, opened the door, and perceiving my transport,
shrugged up his shoulders, and leaving my allowance, went out,
pronouncing, Le pauvre diable! la tete lui tourne. My passion no
sooner subsided than I resolved to profit by this opinion of the
jailor, and from that day counterfeited lunacy with such success,
that in less than three months I was delivered from the Bastille,
and sent to the galleys, in which they thought my bodily vigour
might be of service, although the faculties of my mind were decayed.
Before I was chained to the oar, I received three hundred stripes
by way of welcome, that I might thereby be rendered more tractable,
notwithstanding I used all the arguments in my power to persuade them
I was only mad north-north-west, and, when the wind was southerly,
knew a hawk from a handsaw.

"In our second cruise we had the good fortune to be overtaken by
a tempest, during which the slaves were unbound, that they might
contribute the more to the preservation of the galley, and have a
chance for their lives, in case of shipwreck. We were no sooner at
liberty, than, making ourselves masters of the vessel, we robbed
the officers, and ran her on shore among rocks on the coast of
Portugal; from whence I hastened to Lisbon, with a view of obtaining
my passage in some ship bound for England, where, by this time, I
hoped my affair was forgotten.

"But, before this scheme could be accomplished, my evil genius led me
into company; and, being intoxicated, I began to broach doctrines
on the subject of religion, at which some of the party were
scandalized and incensed; and I was next day dragged out of bed
by the officers of the Inquisition, and conveyed to a cell in the
prison belonging to that tribunal.

"At my first examination, my resentment was strong enough to support
me under the torture, which I endured without flinching; but my
resolution abated, and my zeal immediately cooled, when I understood
from a fellow-prisoner, who groaned on the other side of the
partition, that in a short time there would be an auto da fe; in
consequence of which I should, in all probability, be doomed to
the flames, if I would not renounce my heretical errors, and submit
to such penance as the church should think fit to prescribe. This
miserable wretch was convicted of Judaism, which he had privately
practised by connivance for many years, until he had amassed a
fortune sufficient to attract the regard of the church. To this he
fell a sacrifice, and accordingly prepared himself for the stake;
while I, not at all ambitious of the crown of martyrdom, resolved
to temporize; so that, when I was brought to the question the second
time, I made a solemn recantation. As I had no worldly fortune to
obstruct my salvation, I was received into the bosom of the church,
and, by way of penance, enjoined to walk barefoot to Rome in the
habit of a pilgrim.

"During my peregrination through Spain, I was detained as a spy,
until I could procure credentials from the Inquisition at Lisbon;
and behaved with such resolution and reserve, that, after being
released, I was deemed a proper person to be employed in quality of
a secret intelligencer at a certain court. This office I undertook
without hesitation; and being furnished with money and bills of
credit, crossed the Pyrenees, with intention to revenge myself upon
the Spaniards for the severities I had undergone during my captivity.

"Having therefore effectually disguised myself by a change of dress,
and a large patch on one eye, I hired an equipage, and appeared at
Bologna in quality of an itinerant physician; in which capacity I
succeeded tolerably well, till my servants decamped in the night
with my baggage, and left me in the condition of Adam. In short,
I have travelled over the greatest part of Europe, as a beggar,
pilgrim, priest, soldier, gamester, and quack; and felt the extremes
of indigence and opulence, with the inclemency of weather in all
its vicissitudes. I have learned that the characters of mankind
are everywhere the same; that common sense and honesty bear an
infinitely small proportion to folly and vice; and that life is at
best a paltry province.

"After having suffered innumerable hardships, dangers, and disgraces,
I returned to London, where I lived some years in a garret, and
picked up a subsistence, such as it was, by vending purges in the
streets, from the back of a pied horse, in which situation I used
to harangue the mob in broken English, under pretence of being an
High German doctor.

"At last an uncle died, by whom I inherited an estate of three
hundred pounds per annum, though, in his lifetime, he would not
have parted with a sixpence to save my soul and body from perdition.

"I now appear in the world, not as a member of any community,
or what is called a social creature, but merely as a spectator,
who entertains himself with the grimaces of a jack-pudding, and
banquets his spleen in beholding his enemies at loggerheads. That
I may enjoy this disposition, abstracted from all interruption,
danger, and participation, I feign myself deaf; an expedient by
which I not only avoid all disputes and their consequences, but
also become master of a thousand little secrets, which are every
day whispered in my presence, without any suspicion of their being
overheard. You saw how I handled that shallow politician at my
Lady Plausible's the other day. The same method I practise upon
the crazed Tory, the bigot Whig, the sour, supercilious pedant,
the petulant critic, the blustering coward, the fawning fool, the
pert imp, sly sharper, and every other species of knaves and fools,
with which this kingdom abounds.

"In consequence of my rank and character, I obtain free admission
to the ladies, among whom I have acquired the appellation of the
Scandalous Chronicle. As I am considered, while silent, in no other
light than that of a footstool or elbow-chair, they divest their
conversation of all restraint before me, and gratify my sense of
hearing with strange things, which, if I could prevail upon myself
to give the world that satisfaction, would compose a curious piece
of secret history, and exhibit a quite different idea of characters
from what is commonly entertained.

"By this time, young gentleman, you may perceive that I have it
in my power to be a valuable correspondent, and that it will be to
your interest to deserve my confidence."

Here the misanthrope left off speaking, desirous to know the
sentiments of our hero, who embraced the proffered alliance in a
transport of joy and surprise; and the treaty was no sooner concluded,
than Mr. Crabtree began to perform articles, by imparting to him a
thousand delicious secrets, from the possession of which he promised
himself innumerable scenes of mirth and enjoyment. By means of this
associate, whom he considered as the ring of Gyges, he foresaw,
that he should be enabled to penetrate, not only into the chambers,
but even to the inmost thoughts of the female sex. In order to
ward off suspicion, they agreed to revile each other in public, and
meet at a certain private rendezvous, to communicate their mutual
discoveries, and concert their future operations.

But, soon after this agreement, our adventurer was summoned to the
garrison by an express from his friend Hatchway, representing that
the commodore lay at the point of death; and, in less than an hour
after the receipt of this melancholy piece of news, he set out
post for his uncle's habitation, having previously taken leave of
Crabtree, who promised to meet him in two months in London; and
settled a correspondence with Gauntlet, who proposed to remain at
Bath during the rest of the season.





CHAPTER LXXIII.




Peregrine arrives at the Garrison, where he receives the last
Admonitions of Commodore Trunnion, who next Day resigns his Breath,
and is buried according to his own Directions--Some Gentlemen in
the Country make a fruitless Attempt to accommodate Matters betwixt
Mr.  Gamaliel Pickle and his eldest Son.


About four o'clock in the morning our hero arrived at the garrison,
where he found his generous uncle in extremity, supported in bed
by Julia on one side, and Lieutenant Hatchway on the other, while
Mr.  Jolter administered spiritual consolation to his soul; and
between whiles comforted Mrs. Trunnion, who, with her maid, sat by
the fire, weeping with great decorum; the physician having just taken
his last fee, and retired, after pronouncing the fatal prognostic,
in which he anxiously wished he might be mistaken.

Though the commodore's speech was interrupted by a violent hiccup,
he still retained the use of his senses; and, when Peregrine approached,
stretched out his hand with manifest signs of satisfaction. The
young gentleman, whose heart overflowed with gratitude and affection,
could not behold such a spectacle unmoved.  He endeavoured to
conceal his tenderness, which, in the wildness of his youth, and
the pride of his disposition, he considered as a derogation from
his manhood; but, in spite of all his endeavours, the tears gushed
from his eyes, while he kissed the old man's hand; and he was so
utterly disconcerted by his grief, that, when he attempted to speak,
his tongue denied its office; so that the commodore, perceiving
his disorder, made a last effort of strength, and consoled him in
these words:--"Swab the spray from your bowsprit, my good lad, and
coil up your spirits. You must not let the toplifts of your heart
give way, because you see me ready to go down at these years. Many
a better man has foundered before he has made half my way; thof I
trust, by the mercy of God, I shall be sure in port in a very few
glasses, and fast moored in a most blessed riding; for my good
friend Jolter hath overhauled the journal of my sins, and, by the
observation he hath taken of the state of my soul, I hope I shall
happily conclude my voyage, and be brought up in the latitude of
heaven. Here has been a doctor that wanted to stow me chock full of
physic; but, when a man's hour is come, what signifies his taking
his departure with a 'pothecary's shop in his hold? Those fellows
come alongside of dying men, like the messengers of the Admiralty
with sailing orders; but I told him as how I could slip my cable
without his direction or assistance, and so he hauled off in
dudgeon. This cursed hiccup makes such a rippling in the current
of my speech, that mayhap you don't understand what I say. Now,
while the sucker of my wind-pump will go, I would willingly mention
a few things, which I hope you will set down in the log-book of your
remembrance, when I am stiff, d'ye see. There's your aunt sitting
whimpering by the fire; I desire you will keep her tight, warm,
and easy in her old age, she's an honest heart in her own way,
and, thof she goes a little crank and humoursome, by being often
overstowed with Nantz and religion, she has been a faithful shipmate
to me, and I daresay she never turned in with another man since
we first embarked in the same bottom. Jack Hatchway, you know the
trim of her as well as e'er a man in England, and I believe she has
a kindness for you; whereby, if you two will grapple in the way of
matrimony, when I am gone, I do suppose that my godson, for love
of me, will allow you to live in the garrison all the days of your
life."

Peregrine assured him, he would with pleasure comply with any request
he should make in behalf of two persons whom he esteemed so much.
The lieutenant, with a waggish sneer, which even the gravity of the
situation could not prevent, thanked them both for their good-will,
telling the commodore, he was obliged to him for his friendship, in
seeking to promote him to the command of a vessel which he himself
had worn out in the service; but that, notwithstanding, he should
be content to take charge of her, though he could not help being
shy of coming after such an able navigator.

Trunnion, exhausted as he was, smiled at this sally, and, after some
pause, resumed his admonitions in this manner:--"I need not talk of
Pipes, because I know you'll do for him without any recommendation;
the fellow has sailed with me in many a hard gale, and I'll warrant
him as stout a seaman as ever set face to the weather. But I hope
you'll take care of the rest of my crew, and not disrate them after
I am dead, in favour of new followers. As for that young woman, Ned
Gauntlet's daughter, I'm informed as how she's an excellent wench,
and has a respect for you; whereby, if you run her on board in an
unlawful way, I leave my curse upon you, and trust you will never
prosper in the voyage of life. But I believe you are more of an
honest man, than to behave so much like a pirate. I beg, of all
love, you wool take care of your constitution, and beware of running
foul of harlots, who are no better than so many mermaids, that sit
upon rocks in the sea, and hang out a fair face for the destruction
of passengers; thof I must say, for my own part, I never met with
any of those sweet singers, and yet I have gone to sea for the
space of thirty years. But howsomever, steer your course clear of
all such brimstone b--s. Shun going to law, as you would shun the
devil; and look upon all attorneys as devouring sharks, or ravenous
fish of prey. As soon as the breath is out of my body, let minute
guns be fired, till I am safe under ground. I would also be buried
in the red jacket I had on when I boarded and took the Renummy.
Let my pistols, cutlass, and pocket-compass be laid in the coffin
along with me. Let me be carried to the grave by my own men, rigged
in the black caps and white shirts which my barge's crew were wont
to wear; and they must keep a good look out, that none of your
pilfering rascallions may come and heave me up again, for the lucre
of what they can get, until the carcase is belayed by a tombstone.
As for the motto, or what you call it, I leave that to you and
Mr. Jolter, who are scholars; but I do desire, that it may not be
engraved in the Greek or Latin lingos, and much less in the French,
which I abominate, but in plain English, that, when the angel
comes to pipe all hands, at the great day, he may know that I am
a British man, and speak to me in my mother tongue. And now I have
no more to say, but God in heaven have mercy upon my soul, and send
you all fair weather, wheresoever you are bound."

So saying, he regarded every individual around him with a look of
complacency, and closing his eye, composed himself to rest, while
the whole audience, Pipes himself not excepted, were melted with
sorrow; and Mrs. Trunnion consented to quit the room, that she might
not be exposed to the unspeakable anguish of seeing him expire.

His last moments, however, were not so near as they imagined. He
began to doze, and enjoyed small intervals of ease, till next day
in the afternoon; during which remissions, he was heard to pour
forth many pious ejaculations, expressing his hope, that, for
all the heavy cargo of his sins, he should be able to surmount
the puttock-shrouds of despair, and get aloft to the cross-trees
of God's good favour. At last his voice sunk so low as not to be
distinguished; and, having lain about an hour, almost without any
perceptible signs of life, he gave up the ghost with a groan which
announced his decease.

Julia was no sooner certified of this melancholy event, than she
ran to her aunt's chamber, weeping aloud; and immediately a very
decent concert was performed by the good widow and her attendants.
Peregrine and Hatchway retired till the corpse should be laid
out; and Pipes having surveyed the body, with a face of rueful
attention,--"Well fare thy soul! old Hawser Trunnion," said he:
"man and boy I have known thee these five-and-thirty years, and
sure a truer heart never broke biscuit. Many a hard gale hast thou
weathered; but now thy spells are all over, and thy hull fairly
laid up. A better commander I'd never desire to serve; and who knows
but I may help to set up thy standing rigging in another world?"

All the servants of the house were affected with the loss of their
old master; and the poor people in the neighbourhood assembled at
the gate, and, by repeated howlings, expressed their sorrow for
the death of their charitable benefactor. Peregrine, though he felt
everything which love and gratitude could inspire on this occasion,
was not so much overwhelmed with affliction as to be incapable of
taking the management of the family into his own hands. He gave
directions about the funeral with great discretion, after having
paid the compliments of condolence to his aunt, whom he consoled
with the assurance of his inviolable esteem and affection. He ordered
a suit of mourning to be made for every person in the garrison,
and invited all the neighbouring gentlemen to the burial, not even
excepting his father and brother Gam, who did not, however, honour
the ceremony with their presence; nor was his mother humane enough
to visit her sister-in-law in her distress.

In the method of interment, the commodore's injunctions were obeyed
to a title; and at the same time our hero made a donation of fifty
pounds to the poor of the parish, as a benefaction which his uncle
had forgot to bequeath. Having performed these obsequies with the
most pious punctuality, he examined the will, to which there was
no addition since it had first been executed, adjusted the payment
of all the legacies, and, being sole executor, took an account of
the estate to which he had succeeded, which, after all deductions,
amounted to thirty thousand pounds. The possession of such a
fortune, of which he was absolute master, did not at all contribute
to the humiliation of his spirit, but inspired him with new ideas
of grandeur and magnificence, and elevated his hope to the highest
pinnacle of expectation.

His domestic affairs being settled, he was visited by almost all
the gentlemen of the county, who came to pay their compliments of
congratulation on his accession to the estate; and some of them
offered their good offices towards a reconciliation betwixt his father
and him, induced by the general detestation which was entertained
for his brother Gam, who was by this time looked upon by his
neighbours as a prodigy of insolence and malice. Our young squire
thanked them for their kind proposal, which he accepted; and old
Gamaliel, at their entreaties, seemed very well disposed to any
accommodation: but as he would not venture to declare himself before
he had consulted his wife, his favourable disposition was rendered
altogether ineffectual, by the instigations of that implacable
woman; and our hero resigned all expectation of being reunited to
his father's house. His brother, as usual, took all opportunities
of injuring his character, by false aspersions, and stories
misrepresented, in order to prejudice his reputation; nor was his
sister Julia suffered to enjoy her good fortune in peace. Had he
undergone such persecution from an alien to his blood, the world
would have heard of his revenge; but, notwithstanding his indignation,
he was too much tinctured by the prejudices of consanguinity, to
lift his arm in judgment against the son of his own parents; and this
consideration abridged the term of his residence at the garrison,
where he had proposed to stay for some months.





VOLUME II.





CHAPTER LXXIV.




The young Gentleman, having settled his domestic Affairs, arrives
in London, and sets up a gay Equipage--He meets with Emilia, and
is introduced to her Uncle.


His aunt, at the earnest solicitations of Julia and her husband,
took up her quarters at the house of that affectionate kinswoman,
who made it her chief study to comfort and cherish the disconsolate
widow; and Jolter, in expectation of the living, which was not yet
vacant, remained in garrison, in quality of land-steward upon our
hero's country estate. As for the lieutenant, our young gentleman
communed with him in a serious manner, about the commodore's proposal
of taking Mrs. Trunnion to wife; and Jack, being quite tired of the
solitary situation of a bachelor, which nothing but the company of
his old commander could have enabled him to support so long, far
from discovering aversion from the match, observed with an arch
smile, that it was not the first time he had commanded a vessel in
the absence of Captain Trunnion; and therefore, if the widow was
willing, he would cheerfully stand by her helm, and, as he hoped
the duty would not be of long continuance, do his endeavour to
steer her safe into port, where the commodore might come on board,
and take charge of her again.

In consequence of this declaration, it was determined that Mr.
Hatchway should make his addresses to Mrs. Trunnion as soon as
decency would permit her to receive them; and Mr. Clover and his
wife promised to exert their influence on his behalf. Meanwhile,
Jack was desired to live at the castle as usual, and assured, that
it should be put wholly in his possession, as soon as he should be
able to accomplish this matrimonial scheme.

When Peregrine had settled all these points to his own satisfaction,
he took leave of all his friends, and, repairing to the great city,
purchased a new chariot and horses, put Pipes and another lacquey
into rich liveries, took elegant lodgings in Pall Mall, and made
a most remarkable appearance among the people of fashion.

It was owing to this equipage, and the gaiety of his personal
deportment, that common fame, which is always a common liar,
represented him as a young gentleman who had just succeeded to an
estate of five thousand pounds per annum, by the death of an uncle;
that he was entitled to an equal fortune at the decease of his
own father, exclusive of two considerable jointures, which would
devolve upon him at the demise of his mother and aunt. This report,
false and ridiculous as it was, he could not find in his heart to
contradict. Not but that he was sorry to find himself so misrepresented;
but his vanity would not allow him to take any step that might
diminish his importance in the opinion of those who courted his
acquaintance, on the supposition that his circumstances were actually
as affluent as they were said to be. Nay, so much was he infatuated
by this weakness, that he resolved to encourage the deception,
by living up to the report; and accordingly engaged in the most
expensive parties of pleasure, believing that, before his present
finances should be exhausted, his fortune would be effectually
made, by the personal accomplishments he should have occasion to
display to the beau monde in the course of his extravagance. In a
word, vanity and pride were the ruling foibles of our adventurer,
who imagined himself sufficiently qualified to retrieve his fortune
in various shapes, long before he could have any idea of want or
difficulty. He thought he should have it in his power, at any time,
to make a prize of a rich heiress, or opulent widow; his ambition had
already aspired to the heart of a young handsome duchess dowager,
to whose acquaintance he had found means to be introduced; or,
should matrimony chance to be unsuitable to his inclinations, he
never doubted, that, by the interest he might acquire among the
nobility, he should be favoured with some lucrative post, that
would amply recompense him for the liberality of his disposition.
There are many young men who entertain the same expectations, with
half the reason he had to be so presumptuous.

In the midst of these chimerical calculations, his passion for
Emilia did not subside; but, on the contrary, began to rage with
such an inflammation of desire, that her idea interfered with every
other reflection, and absolutely disabled him from prosecuting
the other lofty schemes which his imagination had projected. He
therefore laid down the honest resolution of visiting her in all the
splendour of his situation, in order to practise upon her virtue
with all his art and address, to the utmost extent of his affluence
and fortune. Nay, so effectually had his guilty passion absorbed
his principles of honour, conscience, humanity, and regard for the
commodore's last words, that he was base enough to rejoice at the
absence of his friend Godfrey, who, being then with his regiment
in Ireland, could not dive into his purpose, or take measures for
frustrating his vicious design.

Fraught with these heroic sentiments, he determined to set out for
Sussex in his chariot and six, attended by his valet-de-chambre and
two footmen; and as he was now sensible that in his last essay he
had mistaken his cue, he determined to change his battery, and sap
the fortress, by the most submissive, soft, and insinuating behaviour.

On the evening that preceded this proposed expedition, he went
into one of the boxes at the playhouse, as usual, to show himself
to the ladies; and reconnoitring the company through a glass (for
no other reason but because it was fashionable to be purblind),
perceived his mistress very plainly dressed, in one of the seats
above the stage, talking to another young woman of a very homely
appearance. Though his heart beat the alarm with the utmost
impatience at sight of his Emilia, he was for some minutes deterred
from obeying the impulse of his love, by the presence of some ladies
of fashion, who, he feared, would think the worse of him, should
they see him make his compliment in public to a person of her figure.
Nor would the violence of his inclination have so far prevailed
over his pride, as to lead him thither, had he not recollected, that
his quality friends would look upon her as some handsome Abigail,
with whom he had an affair of gallantry, and of consequence give
him credit for the intrigue.

Encouraged by this suggestion, he complied with the dictates
of love, and flew to the place where his charmer sat. His air and
dress were so remarkable, that it was almost impossible he should
have escaped the eyes of a curious observer, especially as he had
chosen a time for coming in, when his entrance could not fail to
attract the notice of the spectators; I mean, when the whole house
was hushed in attention to the performance on the stage. Emilia,
therefore, perceived him at his first approach; she found herself
discovered by the direction of his glass, and, guessing his intention
by his abrupt retreat from the box, summoned all her fortitude to
her aid, and prepared for his reception.  He advanced to her with
an air of eagerness and joy, tempered with modesty and respect, and
expressed his satisfaction at seeing her, with a seeming reverence
of regard. Though she was extremely well pleased at this unexpected
behaviour, she suppressed the emotions of her heart, and answered
his compliments with affected ease and unconcern, such as might
denote the good humour of a person who meets by accident with an
indifferent acquaintance. After having certified himself of her
own good health, he very kindly inquired about her mother and Miss
Sophy, gave her to understand that he had lately been favoured
with a letter from Godfrey; that he had actually intended to set
out next morning on a visit to Mrs.  Gauntlet, which, now that he
was so happy as to meet with her, he would postpone, until he should
have the pleasure of attending her to the country. After having
thanked him for his polite intention, she told him, that her mother
was expected in town in a few days, and that she herself had come
to London some weeks ago, to give attendance upon her aunt, who
had been dangerously ill, but was now pretty well recovered.

Although the conversation of course turned upon general topics,
during the entertainment he took all opportunities of being
particular with his eyes, through which he conveyed a thousand
tender protestations. She saw and inwardly rejoiced at the humility
of his looks; but, far from rewarding it with one approving glance,
she industriously avoided this ocular intercourse, and rather
coquetted with a young gentleman that ogled her from the opposite
box. Peregrine's penetration easily detected her sentiments, and he
was nettled at her dissimulation, which served to confirm him in his
unwarrantable designs upon her person. He persisted in his assiduities
with indefatigable perseverance; when the play was concluded, handed
her and her companion into a hackney-coach, and with difficulty was
permitted to escort them to the house of Emilia's uncle, to whom
our hero was introduced by the young lady, as an intimate friend
of her brother Godfrey.

The old gentleman, who was no stranger to the nature of Peregrine's
connection with his sister's family, prevailed upon him to stay
supper, and seemed particularly well pleased with his conversation
and deportment, which, by the help of his natural sagacity, he
wonderfully adapted to the humour of his entertainer. After supper,
when the ladies were withdrawn, and the citizen called for his
pipe, our sly adventurer followed his example. Though he abhorred
the plant, he smoked with an air of infinite satisfaction, and
expatiated upon the virtues of tobacco, as if he had been deeply
concerned in the Virginia trade. In the progress of the discourse,
he consulted the merchant's disposition; and the national debt
coming upon the carpet, held forth upon the funds like a professed
broker. When the alderman complained of the restrictions and
discouragements of trade, his guest inveighed against exorbitant
duties, with the nature of which he seemed as well acquainted as
any commissioner of the customs; so that the uncle was astonished
at the extent of his knowledge, and expressed his surprise that
a gay young gentleman like him should have found either leisure
or inclination to consider subjects so foreign to the fashionable
amusements of youth.

Pickle laid hold on this opportunity to tell him, that he was
descended from a race of merchants; and that, early in life, he had
made it his business to instruct himself in the different branches
of trade, which he not only studied as his family profession, but
also as the source of all our national riches and power. He then
launched out in praise of commerce, and the promoters thereof;
and, by way of contrast, employed all his ridicule in drawing such
ludicrous pictures of the manners and education of what is called
high life, that the trader's sides were shaken by laughter,
even to the danger of his life; and he looked upon our adventurer
as a miracle of sobriety and good sense. Having thus ingratiated
himself with the uncle, Peregrine took his leave, and next day,
in the forenoon, visited the niece in his chariot, after she had
been admonished by her kinsman to behave with circumspection, and
cautioned against neglecting or discouraging the addresses of such
a valuable admirer.





CHAPTER LXXV.




He prosecutes his Design upon Emilia with great Art and Perseverance.


Our adventurer, having by his hypocrisy obtained free access to his
mistress, began the siege by professing the most sincere contrition
for his former levity, and imploring her forgiveness with such
earnest supplication, that, guarded as she was against his flattering
arts, she began to believe his protestations, which were even
accompanied with tears, and abated a good deal of that severity
and distance she had proposed to maintain during this interview.
She would not, however, favour him with the least acknowledgment
of a mutual passion, because, in the midst of his vows of eternal
constancy and truth, he did not mention one syllable of wedlock,
though he was now entirely master of his own conduct, and this
consideration created a doubt, which fortified her against all his
attacks. Yet, what her discretion would have concealed, was discovered
by her eyes, which, in spite of all her endeavours, breathed
forth complacency and love; for her inclination was flattered by
her own self-sufficiency, which imputed her admirer's silence in
that particular to the hurry and perturbation of his spirits, and
persuaded her that he could not possibly regard her with any other
than honourable intentions.

The insidious lover exulted in the tenderness of her looks,
from which he presaged a complete victory; but, that he might not
overshoot himself by his own precipitation, he would not run the risk
of declaring himself, until her heart should be so far entangled
within his snares, as that neither the suggestions of honour,
prudence, nor pride, should be able to disengage it. Armed with
this resolution, he restrained the impatience of his temper within
the limits of the most delicate deportment. After having solicited
and obtained permission to attend her to the next opera, he took her
by the hand, and, pressing it to his lips, in the most respectful
manner, went away, leaving her in a most whimsical state of suspense,
chequered with an interesting vicissitude of hope and fear.  On
the appointed day, he appeared again about five o'clock in the
afternoon, and found her native charms so much improved by the
advantages of dress, that he was transported with admiration and
delight; and, while he conducted her to the Haymarket, could scarce
bridle the impetuosity of his passion, so as to observe the forbearing
maxims he had adopted. When she entered the pit, he had abundance
of food for the gratification of his vanity; for, in a moment,
she eclipsed all the female part of the audience; each individual
allowing in her own heart that the stranger was by far the handsomest
woman there present, except herself.

Here it was that our hero enjoyed a double triumph; he was vain
of this opportunity to enhance his reputation for gallantry among
the ladies of fashion who knew him, and proud of an occasion to
display his quality acquaintance to Emilia, that she might entertain
the greater idea of the conquest she had made, and pay the more
deference to his importance in the sequel of his addresses. That
he might profit as much as possible by this situation, he went up
and accosted every person in the pit, with whom he ever had least
communication, whispered and laughed with an affected air of
familiarity, and even bowed at a distance to some of the nobility,
on the slender foundation of having stood near them at court, or
presented them with a pinch of rappee at White's chocolate-house.

This ridiculous ostentation, though now practised with a view of
promoting his design, was a weakness that, in some degree, infected
the whole of his behaviour; for nothing gave him so much joy in
conversation, as an opportunity of giving the company to understand
how well he was with persons of distinguished rank and character.
He would often, for example, observe, as it were occasionally, that
the Duke of G-- was one of the best-natured men in the world, and
illustrate this assertion by some instance of his affability, in
which he himself was concerned. Then, by an abrupt transition, he
would repeat some repartee of Lady T--, and mention a certain bon
mot of the Earl of C--, which was uttered in his hearing.

Abundance of young men in this manner make free with the names,
though they have never had access to the persons of the nobility;
but this was not the case with Peregrine, who, in consideration of
his appearance and supposed fortune, together with the advantage of
his introduction, was, by this time, freely admitted to the tables
of the great.

In his return with Emilia from the opera, though he still maintained
the most scrupulous decorum in his behaviour, he plied her with the
most passionate expressions of love, squeezed her hand with great
fervency, protested that his whole soul was engrossed by her idea,
and that he could not exist independent of her favour. Pleased as
she was with his warm and pathetic addresses, together with the
respectful manner of his making love, she yet had prudence and
resolution sufficient to contain her tenderness, which was ready
to run over; being fortified against his arts, by reflecting, that,
if his aim was honourable, it was now his business to declare it.
On this consideration, she refused to make any serious reply to
his earnest expostulations, but affected to receive them as the
undetermined effusions of gallantry and good breeding.

This fictitious gaiety and good-humour, though it baffled his hope
of extorting from her an acknowledgment of which he might have
taken immediate advantage, nevertheless encouraged him to observe,
as the chariot passed along the Strand, that the night was far
advanced; that supper would certainly be over before they could
reach her uncle's house; and to propose that he should wait upon
her to some place, where they might be accommodated with a slight
refreshment.  She was offended at the freedom of this proposal,
which, however, she treated as a joke, thanking him for his courteous
offer, and assuring him, that when she should be disposed for a
tavern treat, he alone would have the honour of bestowing it.

Her kinsman being engaged with company abroad, and her aunt retired
to rest, he had the good fortune to enjoy a tete-a-tete with her
during a whole hour, which he employed with such consummate skill,
that her caution was almost overcome. He not only assailed her with
the artillery of sighs, vows, prayers, and tears, but even pawned
his honour in behalf of his love. He swore, with many imprecations,
that although her heart was surrendered to him at discretion, there
was a principle within him, which would never allow him to injure
such innocence and beauty; and the transports of his passion had,
upon this occasion so far overshot his purpose, that if she had
demanded an explanation while he was thus agitated, he would have
engaged himself to her wish by such ties as he could not break
with any regard to his reputation. But from such expostulation she
was deterred, partly by pride, and partly by the dread of finding
herself mistaken in such an interesting conjecture. She therefore
enjoyed the present flattering appearance of her fate, was prevailed
upon to accept the jewels which he purchased with part of his winning
at Bath, and, with the most enchanting condescension, submitted
to a warm embrace when he took his leave, after having obtained
permission to visit her as often as his inclination and convenience
would permit.

In his return to his own lodgings, he was buoyed up with his success
to an extravagance of hope, already congratulated himself upon his
triumph over Emilia's virtue, and began to project future conquests
among the most dignified characters of the female sex. But his
attention was not at all dissipated by these vain reflections; he
resolved to concentrate the whole exertion of his soul upon the
execution of his present plan, desisted, in the meantime, from all
other schemes of pleasure, interest, and ambition, and took lodgings
in the city, for the more commodious accomplishment of his purpose.
While our lover's imagination was thus agreeably regaled, his
mistress did not enjoy her expectations without the intervention
of doubts and anxiety. His silence, touching the final aim of his
addresses, was a mystery on which she was afraid of exercising
her sagacity; and her uncle tormented her with inquiries into the
circumstances of Peregrine's professions and deportment. Rather
than give this relation the least cause for suspicion, which must
have cut off all intercourse betwixt her and her admirer, she said
everything which she thought would satisfy his care and concern for
her welfare; and, in consequence of such representation, she enjoyed,
without reserve, the company of our adventurer, who prosecuted his
plan with surprising eagerness and perseverance.





CHAPTER LXXVI.




He prevails upon Emilia to accompany him to a Masquerade, makes a
treacherous Attempt upon her Affection, and meets with a deserved
Repulse.


Scarce a night elapsed in which he did not conduct her to some
public entertainment. When, by the dint of his insidious carriage, he
thought himself in full possession of her confidence and affection,
he lay in wait for an opportunity; and, hearing her observe
in conversation, that she had never been at a masquerade, begged
leave to attend her to the next ball; at the same time extending
his invitation to the young lady in whose company he had found her
at the play, she being present when this subject of discourse was
introduced. He had flattered himself, that this gentlewoman would
decline the proposal, as she was a person seemingly of a demure
disposition, who had been born and bred in the city, where such
diversions are looked upon as scenes of lewdness and debauchery.
For once, however, he reckoned without his host; curiosity is as
prevalent in the city as at the court end of the town. Emilia no
sooner signified her assent to his proposal, than her friend, with
an air of satisfaction, agreed to make one of the party; and he was
obliged to thank her for that complaisance, which laid him under
infinite mortification. He set his genius at work to invent some
scheme for preventing her unseasonable intrusion. Had an opportunity
offered, he would have acted as her physician, and administered a
medicine that would have laid her under the necessity of staying
at home. But his acquaintance with her being too slight to furnish
him with the means of executing this expedient, he devised another,
which was practised with all imaginable success.  Understanding
that her grandmother had left her a sum of money independent of
her parents, he conveyed a letter to her mother, intimating, that
her daughter, on pretence of going to the masquerade, intended
to bestow herself in marriage to a certain person, and that in a
few days she would be informed of the circumstances of the whole
intrigue, provided she would keep this information secret, and
contrive some excuse for detaining the young lady at home, without
giving her cause to believe she was apprised of her intention. This
billet, subscribed "Your well-wisher, and unknown humble servant,"
had the desired effect upon the careful matron, who, on the ball
day, feigned herself so extremely ill, that Miss could not with
any decency quit her mamma's apartment; and therefore sent her
apology to Emilia in the afternoon, immediately after the arrival
of Peregrine, who pretended to be very much afflicted with the
disappointment, while his heart throbbed with a transport of joy.

About ten o'clock the lovers set out for the Haymarket, he being
dressed in the habit of Pantaloon, and she in that of Columbine;
and they had scarce entered the house when the music struck up,
the curtain was withdrawn, and the whole scene displayed at once,
to the admiration of Emilia, whose expectation was infinitely
surpassed by this exhibition. Our gallant having conducted her
through all the different apartments, and described the economy of
the place, led her into the circle, and, in their turn, they danced
several minuets; then going to the sideboard, he prevailed upon
her to eat some sweetmeats and drink a glass of champagne. After
a second review of the company, they engaged in country dances, at
which exercise they continued until our adventurer concluded that
his partner's blood was sufficiently warm for the prosecution of
his design. On this supposition, which was built upon her declaring
that she was thirsty and fatigued, he persuaded her to take a
little refreshment and repose; and, for that purpose, handed her
downstairs into the eating-room, where, having seated her on the
floor, he presented her with a glass of wine and water; and, as she
complained of being faint, enriched the draught with some drops
of a certain elixir, which he recommended as a most excellent
restorative, though it was no other than a stimulating tincture,
which he had treacherously provided for the occasion. Having swallowed
this potion, by which her spirits were manifestly exhilarated, she
ate a slice of ham, with the wing of a cold pullet, and concluded
the meal with a glass of burgundy, which she drank at the earnest
entreaty of her admirer.  These extraordinary cordials co-operating
with the ferment of her blood, which was heated by violent motion,
could not fail to affect the constitution of a delicate young
creature, who was naturally sprightly and volatile. Her eyes began
to sparkle with unusual fire and vivacity, a thousand brilliant
sallies of wit escaped her, and every mask that accosted her
underwent some smarting repartee.

Peregrine, overjoyed at the success of his administration, proposed
that they should resume their places at the country dances, with
a view to promote and assist the efficacy of his elixir; and, when
he thought her disposition was properly adapted for the theme, began
to ply her with all the elocution of love. In order to elevate his
own spirits to that pitch of resolution which his scheme required,
he drank two whole bottles of burgundy, which inflamed his passion
to such a degree, that he found himself capable of undertaking and
perpetrating any scheme for the gratification of his desire.

Emilia, warmed by so many concurring incentives, in favour of the
man she loved, abated considerably of her wonted reserve, listened
to his protestations with undissembled pleasure, and, in the
confidence of her satisfaction, even owned him absolute master
of her affections. Ravished with this confession, he now deemed
himself on the brink of reaping the delicious fruits of his art
and assiduity; and the morning being already pretty far advanced,
assented with rapture to the first proposal she made of retiring
to her lodgings. The blinds of the chariot being pulled up, he
took advantage of the favourable situation of her thoughts; and,
on pretence of being whimsical, in consequence of the wine he had
swallowed, clasped her in his arms, and imprinted a thousand kisses
on her pouting lips, a freedom which she pardoned as the privilege
of intoxication. While he thus indulged himself with impunity, the
carriage halted, and Pipes opening the door, his master handed her
into the passage, before she perceived that it was not her uncle's
house at which they had alighted.

Alarmed at this discovery, she, with some confusion, desired
to know his reason for conducting her to a strange place at these
hours. But he made no reply, until he had led her into an apartment,
when he gave her to understand, that, as her uncle's family must
be disturbed by her going thither so late in the night, and the
streets near Temple-bar were infested by a multitude of robbers and
cut-throats, he had ordered his coachman to halt at this house, which
was kept by a relation of his, a mighty good sort of a gentlewoman,
who would be proud of an opportunity to accommodate a person for
whom he was known to entertain such tenderness and esteem.

Emilia had too much penetration to be imposed upon by this plausible
pretext. In spite of her partiality for Peregrine, which had never
been inflamed to such a pitch of complacency before, she comprehended
his whole plan in a twinkling. Though her blood boiled with
indignation, she thanked him with an affected air of serenity for
his kind concern, and expressed her obligation to his cousin; but,
at the same time, insisted upon going home, lest her absence should
terrify her uncle and aunt, who, she knew, would not retire to rest
till her return.

He urged her, with a thousand remonstrances, to consult her own
ease and safety, promising to send Pipes into the city, for the
satisfaction of her relations. But, finding her obstinately deaf
to his entreaties, he assured her, that he would, in a few minutes,
comply with her request; and, in the meantime, begged she would
fortify herself against the cold with a cordial, which he poured
out in her presence, and which, now that her suspicion was aroused,
she refused to taste, notwithstanding all his importunities. He then
fell on his knees before her, and the tears gushing from his eyes,
swore that his passion was wound up to such a pitch of impatience, that
he could no longer live upon the unsubstantial food of expectation;
and that, if she would not vouchsafe to crown his happiness, he
would forthwith sacrifice himself to her disdain. Such an abrupt
address, accompanied with all the symptoms of frantic agitation,
could not fail to perplex and affright the gentle Emilia, who,
after some recollection, replied with a resolute tone, that she
could not see what reason he had to complain of her reserve, which
she was not at liberty to lay entirely aside, until he should have
avowed his intentions in form, and obtained the sanction of those
whom it was her duty to obey. "Divine creature!" cried he, seizing
her hand, and pressing it to his lips, "it is from you alone I hope
for that condescension, which would overwhelm me with the transports
of celestial bliss. The sentiments of parents are sordid, silly,
and confined. I mean not then to subject my passion to such low
restrictions as were calculated for the purposes of common life.
My love is too delicate and refined to wear those vulgar fetters,
which serve only to destroy the merit of voluntary affection, and
to upbraid a man incessantly with the articles of compulsion, under
which he lies. My dear angel! spare me the mortification of being
compelled to love you, and reign sole empress of my heart and
fortune. I will not affront you so much as to talk of settlements;
my all is at your disposal. In this pocket-book are notes to
the amount of two thousand pounds; do me the pleasure to accept
of them; to-morrow I will lay ten thousand more in your lap. In a
word, you shall be mistress of my whole estate, and I shall
think myself happy in living dependent on your bounty! "

Heavens! what were the emotions of the virtuous, the sensible, the
delicate, the tender Emilia's heart, when she heard this insolent
declaration from the mouth of a man whom she had honoured with her
affection and esteem! It was not simply horror, grief, or indignation,
that she felt, in consequence of this unworthy treatment, but the
united pangs of all together, which produced a sort of hysteric
laughter, while she told him that she could not help admiring his
generosity.

Deceived by this convulsion, and the ironical compliment that
attended it, the lover thought he had already made great progress
in his operations, and that it was now his business to storm the
fort by a vigorous assault, that he might spare her the confusion
of yielding without resistance. Possessed by this vain suggestion,
he started up, and, folding her in his arms, began to obey the
furious dictates of his unruly and ungenerous desire. With an air
of cool determination, she demanded a parley; and when, upon her
repeated request, he granted it, addressed herself to him in these
words, while her eyes gleamed with all the dignity of the most
awful resentment:--

"Sir, I scorn to upbraid you with a repetition of your former vows
and protestations, nor will I recapitulate the little arts you have
practised to ensnare my heart; because, though by dint of the most
perfidious dissimulation you have found means to deceive my opinion,
your utmost efforts have never been able to lull the vigilance of
my conduct, or to engage my affection beyond the power of discarding you
without a tear, whenever my honour should demand such a sacrifice.
Sir, you are unworthy of my concern or regret, and the sigh that
now struggles from my breast is the result of sorrow, for my own
want of discernment. As for your present attempt upon my chastity,
I despise your power, as I detest your intention. Though, under
the mask of the most delicate respect, you have decoyed me from
the immediate protection of my friends, and contrived other impious
stratagems to ruin my peace and reputation, I confide too much in my
own innocence, and the authority of the law, to admit one thought
of fear, much less to sink under the horror of this shocking
situation, into which I have been seduced. Sir, your behaviour
on this occasion is, in all respects, low and contemptible. For,
ruffian as you are, you durst not harbour the thought of executing
your execrable scheme, while you knew my brother was near enough
to prevent or revenge the insult; so that you must not only be a
treacherous villain, but also a most despicable coward."

Having expressed herself in this manner, with a most majestic
severity of aspect, she opened the door, and walking down-stairs
with surprising resolution, committed herself to the care of a
watchman, who accommodated her with a hackney-chair, in which she
was safely conveyed to her uncle's house.

Meanwhile, the lover was so confounded and overawed by these cutting
reproaches, and her animated behaviour, that all his resolution
forsook him, and he found himself not only incapable of obstructing
her retreat, but even of uttering one syllable to deprecate her
wrath, or extenuate the guilt of his own conduct. The nature of
his disappointment, and the keen remorse that seized him, when he
reflected upon the dishonourable footing on which his character
stood with Emilia, raised such perturbation in his mind, that his
silence was succeeded by a violent fit of distraction, during which
he raved like a bedlamite, and acted a thousand extravagancies,
which convinced the people of the house, a certain bagnio, that
he had actually lost his wits. Pipes, with great concern, adopted
the same opinion; and, being assisted by the waiters, hindered him,
by main force, from running out and pursuing the fair fugitive,
whom, in his delirium, he alternately cursed and commended with
horrid imprecations and lavish applause. His faithful valet, having
waited two whole hours, in hopes of seeing this gust of passion
overblown, and perceiving that the paroxysm seemed rather to increase,
very prudently sent for a physician of his master's acquaintance,
who, having considered the circumstances and symptoms of the
disorder, directed that he should be plentifully blooded, without
loss of time, and prescribed a draught to compose the tumult of
his spirits.  These orders being punctually performed, he grew more
calm and tractable, recovered his reflection so far as to be ashamed
of the ecstasy he had undergone, and suffered himself quietly to
be undressed and put to bed, where the fatigue occasioned by his
exercise at the masquerade co-operated with the present dissipation
of his spirits to lull him into a profound sleep, which greatly
tended to the preservation of his intellects. Not that he found
himself in a state of perfect tranquility when he waked about
noon.  The remembrance of what had passed overwhelmed him with
mortification. Emilia's invectives still sounded in his ears. And,
while he deeply resented her disdain, he could not help admiring
her spirit, and his heart did homage to her charms.





CHAPTER LXXVII.




He endeavours to Reconcile himself to his Mistress, and Expostulates
with the Uncle, who forbids him the House.


In this state of division, he went home to his own lodgings in
a chair; and while he deliberated with himself whether he should
relinquish the pursuit, and endeavour to banish her idea from his
breast, or go immediately and humble himself before his exasperated
mistress, and offer his hand as an atonement for his crime, his
servant put in his hand a packet, which had been delivered by a ticket
porter at the door. He no sooner perceived that the superscription
was in Emilia's handwriting, than he guessed the nature of the
contents; and, opening the seal with disordered eagerness, found
the jewels he had given to her enclosed in a billet, couched in
these words:--

     "That I may have no cause to reproach myself with having
     retained the least memorial of a wretch whom I equally
     despise and abhor, I take this opportunity of restoring
     these ineffectual instruments of his infamous design upon
     the honour of                           "Emilia."

His chagrin was so much galled and inflamed at the bitterness
of this contemptuous message, that he gnawed his fingers till the
blood ran over his nails, and even wept with vexation. Sometimes
he vowed revenge against her haughty virtue, and reviled himself
for his precipitate declaration, before his scheme was brought to
maturity; then he would consider her behaviour with reverence and
regard, and bow before the irresistible power of her attractions.
In short, his breast was torn by conflicting passions: love, shame,
and remorse, contended with vanity, ambition, and revenge; and the
superiority was still doubtful when headstrong desire interposed,
and decided in favour of an attempt towards a reconciliation with
the offended fair.

Impelled by this motive, he set out in the afternoon for the house
of her uncle, not without hopes of that tender enjoyment, which
never fails to attend an accommodation betwixt two lovers of taste
and sensibility. Though the consciousness of his trespass encumbered
him with an air of awkward confusion, he was too confident of his
own qualifications and address to despair of forgiveness; and, by
that time he arrived at the citizen's gate, he had conned a very
artful and pathetic harangue, which he proposed to utter in his
own behalf, laying the blame of his conduct on the impetuosity of
his passion, increased by the burgundy which he had too liberally
drunk; but he did not meet with an opportunity to avail himself of
this preparation. Emilia, suspecting that he would take some step
of this kind to retrieve her favour, had gone abroad on pretence
of visiting, after having signified to her kinsman her resolution
to avoid the company of Peregrine, on account of some ambiguities
which, she said, were last night remarkable in his demeanour at the
masquerade. She chose to insinuate her suspicion in these hints,
rather than give an explicit detail of the young man's dishonourable
contrivance, which might have kindled the resentment of the family
to some dangerous pitch of animosity and revenge.

Our adventurer, finding himself baffled in his expectation of seeing
her, inquired for the old gentleman, with whom he thought he had
influence enough to make his apology good, in case he should find
him prepossessed by the young lady's information. But here too he
was disappointed, the uncle having gone to dine in the country, and
his wife was indisposed; so that he had no pretext for staying in
the house till the return of his charmer. Being, however, fruitful
of expedients, he dismissed his chariot, and took possession of a
room in a tavern, the windows of which fronted the merchant's gate;
and there he proposed to watch until he should see her approach.
This scheme he put in practice with indefatigable patience, though
it was not attended with the expected success.

Emilia, whose caution was equally vigilant and commendable, foreseeing
that she might be exposed to the fertility of his invention, came
home by a private passage, and entered by a postern, which was
altogether unknown to her admirer; and her uncle did not arrive
until it was so late that he could not, with any decency, demand
a conference.

Next morning, he did not fail to present himself at the door, and
his mistress being denied by her own express direction, insisted
upon seeing the master of the house, who received him with such
coldness of civility, as plainly gave him to understand that he was
acquainted with the displeasure of his niece. He, therefore, with
an air of candour, told the citizen, he could easily perceive by
his behaviour that he was the confidant of Miss Emily, of whom he
was come to ask pardon for the offence he had given; and did not
doubt, if he could be admitted to her presence, that he should be
able to convince her that he had not erred intentionally, or at
least propose such reparation as would effectually atone for his
fault.

To this remonstrance the merchant, without any ceremony or circumlocution,
answered, that though he was ignorant of the nature of his offence,
he was very certain, that it must have been something very flagrant
that could irritate his niece to such a degree, against a person
for whom she had formerly a most particular regard. He owned, she
had declared her intention to renounce his acquaintance for ever,
and, doubtless, she had good reason for so doing; neither would
he undertake to promote an accommodation, unless he would give him
full power to treat on the score of matrimony, which he supposed
would be the only means of evincing his own sincerity, and obtaining
Emilia's forgiveness. Peregrine's pride was kindled by this blunt
declaration, which he could not help considering as the result of
a scheme concerted betwixt the young lady and her uncle, in order
to take advantage of his heat. He therefore replied, with manifest
signs of disgust, that he did not apprehend there was any occasion
for a mediator to reconcile the difference betwixt Emilia and him;
and that all he desired was an opportunity of pleading in his own
behalf. The citizen frankly told him, that, as his niece had expressed
an earnest desire of avoiding his company, he would not put the
least constraint upon her inclination; and, in the meantime, gave
him to know, that he was particularly engaged. Our hero, glowing
with indignation at this supercilious treatment, "I was in the
wrong," said he, "to look for good manners so far on this side
of Temple-bar; but you must give me leave to tell you, sir, that
unless I am favoured with an interview with Miss Gauntlet, I shall
conclude that you have actually laid a constraint upon her inclination,
for some sinister purposes of your own."--"Sir," replied the old
gentleman, "you are welcome to make what conclusions shall seem
good unto your own imagination; but pray be so good as to allow me
the privilege of being master in my own house." So saying, he very
complaisantly showed him to the door; and our lover being diffident
of his own temper, as well as afraid of being used with greater
indignity, in a place where his personal prowess would only serve
to heighten his disgrace, quitted the house in a transport of rage,
which he could not wholly suppress, telling the landlord, that if
his age did not protect him, he would have chastised him for his
insolent behaviour.





CHAPTER LXXVIII.




He projects a violent Scheme, in consequence of which he is involved
in a most fatiguing Adventure, which greatly tends towards the
Augmentation of his Chagrin.


Thus debarred of personal communication with his mistress, he essayed
to retrieve her good graces by the most submissive and pathetic
letters, which he conveyed by divers artifices to her perusal; but,
reaping no manner of benefit from these endeavours, his passion
acquired a degree of impatience little inferior to downright
frenzy; and he determined to run every risk of life, fortune, and
reputation, rather than desist from his unjustifiable pursuit.
Indeed, his resentment was now as deeply concerned as his love,
and each of these passions equally turbulent and loud in demanding
gratification. He kept sentinels continually in pay, to give him
notice of her outgoings, in expectation of finding some opportunity
to carry her off; but her circumspection entirely frustrated this
design, for she suspected everything of that sort from a disposition
like his, and regulated her motions accordingly.

Baffled by her prudence and penetration, he altered his plan.
On pretence of being called to his country house by some affair
of importance, he departed from London, and, taking lodgings at a
farmer's house that stood near the road through which she must have
necessarily passed in her return to her mother, concealed himself
from all intercourse, except with his valet-de-chambre and Pipes,
who had orders to scour the country, and reconnoitre every horse,
coach, or carriage, that should appear on that highway, with a view
of intercepting his Emilia in her passage.

He had waited in this ambuscade a whole week, when his valet gave
him notice, that he and his fellow-scout had discovered a chaise-and-six,
driving at full speed towards them; upon which they had flapped
their hats over their eyes, so as they might not be known, in case
they should be seen, and concealed themselves behind a hedge, from
whence they could perceive in the carriage, as it passed, a young
man plainly dressed, with a lady in a mask, of the exact size,
shape, and air of Emilia; and that Pipes followed them at a distance,
while he rode back to communicate this piece of intelligence.

Peregrine would scarce allow him time to conclude his information.
He ran down to the stable, where his horse was kept ready saddled
for the purpose, and, never doubting that the lady in question
was his mistress, attended by one of her uncle's clerks, mounted
immediately, and rode full gallop after the chaise, which, when
he had proceeded about two miles, he understood from Pipes, had
put up at a neighbouring inn. Though his inclination prompted him
to enter her apartment without further delay, he suffered himself
to be dissuaded from taking such a precipitate step, by his privy
counsellor, who observed, that it would be impracticable to execute
his purpose of conveying her against her will from a public inn,
that stood in the midst of a populous village, which would infallibly
rise in her defence. He advised him therefore to be in wait for
the chaise, in some remote and private part of the road, where
they might accomplish their aim without difficulty or danger.  In
consequence of this admonition our adventurer ordered Pipes to
reconnoitre the inn, that she might not escape another way, while
he and the valet, in order to avoid being seen, took a circuit by
an unfrequented path, and placed themselves in ambush, on a spot
which they chose for the scene of their achievement. Here they
tarried a full hour, without seeing the carriage, or hearing from
their sentinel. So that the youth, unable to exert his patience
one moment longer, left the foreigner in his station, and rode back
to his faithful lacquey, who assured him, that the travellers had
not yet hove up their anchor, or proceeded on their voyage.

Notwithstanding this information, Pickle began to entertain such
alarming suspicions, that he could not refrain from advancing to
the gate, and inquire for the company which had lately arrived in
a chaise-and-six. The innkeeper, who was not at all pleased with
the behaviour of those passengers, did not think proper to observe
the instructions he had received: on the contrary, he plainly told
him, that the chaise did not halt, but only entered at one door,
and went out at the other, with a view to deceive those who pursued
it, as he guessed from the words of the gentleman, who had earnestly
desired that his route might be concealed from any person who
should inquire about their motions. "As for my own peart, measter,"
continued this charitable publican, "I believes as how they are no
better than they should be, else they wouldn't be in such a deadly
fear of being overtaken. Methinks, said I, when I saw them in such
a woundy pother to be gone, oddsheartlikins! this must be some
London 'prentice running away with his measter's daughter, as sure
as I'm a living soul. But, be he who he will, sartain it is, a has
nothing of the gentleman about en; for, thof a asked such a favour,
a never once put hand in pocket, or said, 'Dog, will you drink?'
Howsomever, that don't argufy in reverence of his being in a
hurry; and a man may be sometimes a little too judgmatical in his
conjectures." In all probability, this loquacious landlord would
have served the travellers effectually, had Peregrine heard him to
an end; but this impetuous youth, far from listening to the sequel
of his observations, interrupted him in the beginning of his career,
by asking eagerly which road they followed; and, having received
the innkeeper's directions, clapped spurs to his horse, commanding
Pipes to make the valet acquainted with the course, that they might
attend him with all imaginable despatch.

By the publican's account of their conduct, his former opinion was
fully confirmed. He plied his steed to the height of his mettle;
and so much was his imagination engrossed by the prospect of having
Emilia in his power, that he did not perceive the road on which he
travelled was quite different from that which led to the habitation
of Mrs. Gauntlet. The valet-de-chambre was an utter stranger to
that part of the country; and, as for Mr. Pipes, such considerations
were altogether foreign to the economy of his reflection.

Ten long miles had our hero rode, when his eyes were blessed with
the sight of the chaise ascending an hill, at the distance of a
good league; upon which he doubled his diligence in such a manner,
that he gained upon the carriage every minute, and at length
approached so near to it, that he could discern the lady and her
conductor, with their heads thrust out at the windows, looking
back, and speaking to the driver alternately, as if they earnestly
besought him to augment the speed of his cattle.

Being thus, as it were, in sight of port, while he crossed the road,
his horse happened to plunge into a cart-rut with such violence,
that he was thrown several yards over his head; and, the beast's
shoulder being slipped by the fall, he found himself disabled
from plucking the fruit, which was almost within his reach; for he
had left his servants at a considerable distance behind him; and
although they had been at his back, and supplied him with another
horse, they were so indifferently mounted, that he could not
reasonably expect to overtake the flyers, who profited so much by
this disaster that the chaise vanished in a moment.

It may be easily conceived how a young man of his disposition passed
his time, in this tantalizing situation. He ejaculated with great
fervency; but his prayers were not the effects of resignation.
He ran back on foot, with incredible speed, in order to meet his
valet, whom he unhorsed in a twinkling, and, taking his seat, began
to exercise his whip and spurs, after having ordered the Swiss to
follow him on the other gelding, and committed the lame hunter to
the care of Pipes.

Matters being adjusted in this manner, our adventurer prosecuted
the race with all his might; and, having made some progress,
was informed by a countryman, that the chaise had struck off into
another road, and, according to his judgment, was by that time
about three miles ahead; though, in all probability, the horses
would not be able to hold out much longer, because they seemed
to be quite spent when they passed his door. Encouraged by this
intimation, Peregrine pushed on with great alacrity, though he
could not regain sight of the desired object, till the clouds of
night began to deepen, and even then he enjoyed nothing more than
a transient glimpse; for the carriage was no sooner seen, than
shrouded again from his view. These vexatious circumstances animated
his endeavours, while they irritated his chagrin. In short, he
continued his pursuit, till the night was far advanced, and himself so
uncertain about the object of his care, that he entered a solitary
inn, with a view of obtaining some intelligence, when, to his
infinite joy, he perceived the chaise standing by itself, and the
horses panting in the yard.

In full confidence of his having arrived at last at the goal of
all his wishes, he alighted instantaneously, and, running up to the
coachman, with a pistol in his hand, commanded him, in an imperious
tone, to conduct him to the lady's chamber, on pain of death. The
driver, affrighted at this menacing address, protested, with great
humility, that he did not know whither his fare had retired; for
that he himself was paid and dismissed from the service, because
he would not undertake to drive them all night across the country
without stopping to refresh his horses. But he promised to go in
quest of the waiter, who would show him to their apartment. He was
accordingly detached on that errand, while our hero stood sentinel
at the gate, till the arrival of his valet-de-chambre, who, joining
him by accident, before the coachman returned, relieved him in his
watch; and then the young gentleman, exasperated at his messenger's
delay, rushed, with fury in his eyes, from room to room, denouncing
vengeance upon the whole family; but he did not meet with one living
soul, until he entered the garret, where he found the landlord
and his wife in bed. This chicken-hearted couple, by the light of
a rush candle that burned on the hearth, seeing a stranger burst
into the chamber, in such a terrible attitude, were seized with
consternation; and, exalting their voices, in a most lamentable
strain, begged, for the passion of Christ, that he would spare
their lives, and take all they had.

Peregrine guessing, from this exclamation, and the circumstance
of their being abed, that they mistook him for a robber, and were
ignorant of that which he wanted to know, dispelled their terror,
by making them acquainted with the cause of his visit, and desired
the husband to get up with all possible despatch, in order to assist
and attend him in his search.

Thus reinforced, he rummaged every corner of the inn, and at last,
finding the hostler in the stable, was by him informed, to his
unspeakable mortification, that the gentleman and lady who arrived
in the chaise, had immediately hired post-horses for a certain
village at the distance of fifteen miles, and departed without
halting for the least refreshment. Our adventurer, mad with his
disappointment, mounted his horse in an instant, and, with his
attendant, took the same road, with full determination to die,
rather than desist from the prosecution of his design. He had,
by this time, rode upwards of thirty miles, since three o'clock
in the afternoon; so that the horses were almost quite jaded, and
travelled this stage so slowly, that it was morning before they
reached the place of their destination, where, far from finding
the fugitives, he understood that no such persons as he described
had passed that way, and that, in all likelihood, they had taken
a quite contrary direction, while in order to mislead him in
his pursuit, they had amused the hostler with a false route. This
conjecture was strengthened by his perceiving, now for the first
time, that he had deviated a considerable way from the road,
through which they must have journeyed, in order to arrive at the
place of her mother's residence; and these suggestions utterly
deprived him of the small remains of recollection which he had hitherto
retained. His eyes rolled about, witnessing rage and distraction;
he foamed at the mouth, stamped upon the ground with great violence,
uttered incoherent imprecations against himself and all mankind,
and would have sallied forth again, he knew not whither, upon the
same horse, which he had already almost killed with fatigue, had
not his confidant found means to quiet the tumult of his thoughts,
and recall his reflection, by representing the condition of the
poor animals, and advising him to hire fresh horses, and ride post
across the country, to the village in the neighbourhood of Mrs.
Gauntlet's habitation, where they should infallibly intercept the
daughter, provided they could get the start of her upon the road.

Peregrine not only relished, but forthwith acted in conformity with
this good counsel. His own horses were committed to the charge of
the landlord, with directions for Pipes, in case he should come in
quest of his master: and, a couple of stout geldings being prepared,
he and his valet took the road again, steering their course according
to the motions of the post-boy, who undertook to be their guide.
They had almost finished the first stage, when they descried a
post-chaise just halting at the inn where they proposed to change
horses; upon which our adventurer, glowing with a most interesting
presage, put his beast to the full speed, and approached near enough
to distinguish, as the travellers quitted the carriage, that he
had at last come up with the very individual persons whom he had
pursued so long.

Flushed with this discovery, he galloped into the yard so suddenly,
that the lady and her conductor scarce had time to shut themselves
up in a chamber, to which they retreated with great precipitation;
so that the pursuer was now certain of having housed his prey. That
he might, however, leave nothing to fortune, he placed himself upon
the stair by which they had ascended to the apartment, and sent
up his compliments to the young lady, desiring the favour of being
admitted to her presence, otherwise he should be obliged to waive
all ceremony, and take that liberty which she would not give. The
servant, having conveyed his message through the keyhole, returned
with an answer, importing that she would adhere to the resolution
she had taken, and perish, rather than comply with his will. Our
adventurer, without staying to make any rejoinder to this reply,
ran upstairs, and, thundering at the door for entrance, was given
to understand by the nymph's attendant, that a blunderbuss was
ready primed for his reception, and that he would do well to spare
him the necessity of shedding blood in defence of a person who had
put herself under his protection. "All the laws of the land," said
he, "cannot now untie the knots by which we are bound together;
and therefore I will guard her as my own property; so that you
had better desist from your fruitless attempt, and thereby consult
your own safety; for, by the God that made me! I will discharge my
piece upon you, as soon as you set your nose within the door; and
your blood be upon your own head."

These menaces, from a citizen's clerk, would have been sufficient
motives for Pickle to storm the breach, although they had not been
reinforced by that declaration, which informed him of Emilia's
having bestowed herself in marriage upon such a contemptible rival.
This sole consideration added wings to his impetuosity, and he
applied his foot to the door with such irresistible force, as burst
it open in an instant, entering at the same time with a pistol
ready cocked in his hand. His antagonist, instead of firing his
blunderbuss, when he saw him approach, started back with evident
signs of surprise and consternation, exclaiming, "Lord Jesus! Sir,
you are not the man! and, without doubt, are under some mistake with
regard to us." Before Peregrine had time to answer this salutation,
the lady, hearing it, advanced to him, and, pulling off a mask,
discovered a face which he had never seen before. The Gorgon's head,
according to the fables of antiquity, never had a more instantaneous
or petrifying effect, than that which this countenance produced
upon the astonished youth. His eyes were fixed upon this unknown
object, as if they had been attracted by the power of enchantment,
his feet seemed riveted to the ground, and, after having stood
motionless for the space of a few minutes, he dropped down in an
apoplexy of disappointment and despair. The Swiss, who had followed
him, seeing his master in this condition, lifted him up, and,
laying him upon a bed in the next room, let him blood immediately,
without hesitation, being always provided with a case of lancets,
against all accidents on the road. To this foresight our hero, in all
probability, was indebted for his life. By virtue of a very copious
evacuation, he recovered the use of his senses; but the complication
of fatigues and violent transports, which he had undergone, brewed
up a dangerous fever in his blood; and, a physician being called
from the next market-town, several days elapsed before he would
answer for his life.





CHAPTER LXXIX.




Peregrine sends a Message to Mrs. Gauntlet, who rejects his
Proposal--He repairs to the Garrison.


At length, however, his constitution overcame his disease, though
not before it had in a great measure tamed the fury of his disposition,
and brought him to a serious consideration of his conduct. In this
humiliation of his spirits, he reflected with shame and remorse
upon his treachery to the fair, the innocent Emilia; he remembered
his former sentiments in her favour, as well as the injunctions
of his dying uncle; he recollected his intimacy with her brother,
against which he had so basely sinned; and, revolving all the
circumstances of her conduct, found it so commendable, spirited, and
noble, that he deemed her an object of sufficient dignity to merit
his honourable addresses, even though his duty had not been concerned
in this decision. But, obligated as he was to make reparation to a
worthy family, which he had so grossly injured, he thought he could
not manifest his reformation too soon; and, whenever he found himself
able to hold a pen, wrote a letter to Mrs.  Gauntlet, wherein he
acknowledged, with many expressions of sorrow and contrition, that
he had acted a part altogether unbecoming a man of honour, and
should never enjoy the least tranquility of mind, until he should
have merited her forgiveness. He protested, that, although his
happiness entirely depended upon the determination of Emilia, he
would even renounce all hope of being blessed with her favour, if
she could point out any other method of making reparation to that
amiable young lady, but by laying his heart and fortune at her
feet, and submitting himself to her pleasure during the remaining
part of his life. He conjured her, therefore, in the most pathetic
manner, to pardon him, in consideration of his sincere repentance,
and to use her maternal influence with her daughter, so as that he
might be permitted to wait upon her with a wedding ring, as soon
as his health would allow him to undertake the journey.

This explanation being despatched by Pipes, who had, by this time,
found his master, the young gentleman inquired about the couple
whom he had so unfortunately pursued, and understood from his
valet-de-chambre, who learned the story from their own mouths, that
the lady was the only daughter of a rich Jew, and her attendant no
other than his apprentice, who had converted her to Christianity,
and married her at the same time; that this secret having taken
air, the old Israelite had contrived a scheme to separate them for
ever; and they being apprised of his intention, had found means
to elope from his house, with a view of sheltering themselves in
France, until the affair could be made up; that, seeing three men
ride after them with such eagerness, they never doubted that the
pursuers were her father, and some friends, or domestics, and on
that supposition had fled with the utmost despatch and trepidation,
until they had found themselves happily undeceived, at that very
instant when they expected nothing but mischief and misfortune.
Lastly, the Swiss gave him to understand, that, after having
professed some concern for his deplorable situation, and enjoyed a
slight refreshment, they had taken their departure for Dover, and,
in all likelihood, were safely arrived at Paris.

In four-and-twenty hours after Pipes was charged with his commission,
he brought back an answer from the mother of Emilia, couched in
these words:--

     Sir,--I received the favour of yours, and am glad, for your
     own sake, that you have attained a due sense and conviction
     of your unkind and unchristian behaviour to poor Emy. I thank
     God, none of my children were ever so insulted before. Give
     me leave to tell you, sir, my daughter was no upstart, without
     friends or education, but a young lady, as well bred, and
     better born, than most private gentlewomen in the kingdom;
     and therefore, though you had no esteem for her person, you
     ought to have paid some regard to her family, which, no
     disparagement to you, sir, is more honourable than your own.
     As for your proposal, Miss Gauntlet will not hear of it,
     being that she thinks her honour will not allow her to listen
     to any terms of reconciliation; and she is not yet so
     destitute as to embrace an offer to which she has the least
     objection. In the meantime, she is so much indisposed, that
     she cannot possibly see company; so I beg you will not take
     the trouble of making a fruitless journey to this place.
     Perhaps your future conduct may deserve her forgiveness,
     and really, as I am concerned for your happiness, which you
     assure me depends upon her condescension, I wish with all my
     heart it may; and am, notwithstanding all that has happened,
     your sincere well-wisher.             "Cecilia Gauntlet."

From this epistle, and the information of his messenger, our hero
learned, that his mistress had actually profited by his wild-goose
chase, so as to make a safe retreat to her mother's house. Though
sorry to hear of her indisposition, he was also piqued at her
implacability, as well as at some stately paragraphs of the letter,
in which, he thought, the good lady had consulted her own vanity,
rather than her good sense. These motives of resentment helped him
to bear his disappointment like a philosopher, especially as he had
now quieted his conscience, in proffering to redress the injury he
had done; and, moreover, found himself, with regard to his love,
in a calm state of hope and resignation.

A seasonable fit of illness is an excellent medicine for the
turbulence of passion. Such a reformation had the fever produced
on the economy of his thoughts, that he moralized like an apostle,
and projected several prudential schemes for his future conduct. In
the meantime, as soon as his health was sufficiently re-established,
he took a trip to the garrison, in order to visit his friends;
and learned from Hatchway's own mouth, that he had broke the ice
of courtship to his aunt, and that his addresses were now fairly
afloat; though, when he first declared himself to the widow, after
she had been duly prepared for the occasion, by her niece and the
rest of her friends, she had received his proposal with a becoming
reserve, and piously wept at the remembrance of her husband,
observing, that she should never meet with his fellow.

Peregrine promoted the lieutenant's suit with all his influence,
and all Mrs. Trunnion's objections to the match being surmounted,
it was determined, that the day of marriage should be put off for
three months, that her reputation might not suffer by a precipitate
engagement. His next care was to give orders for erecting a plain
marble monument to the memory of his uncle, on which the following
inscription, composed by the bridegroom, actually appeared in golden
letters:

                     Here lies,
             Foundered in a fathom and half,
                     The shell
                         Of
                 HAWSER TRUNNION, Esq.
            Formerly commander of a squadron
               In his Majesty's service,
          Who broached to, at five P.M. Oct. 10,
      In the year of his age threescore and nineteen.

            He kept his guns always loaded,
             And his tackle ready mann'd,
        And never showed his poop to the enemy,
            Except when he took her in tow;
    But, His shot being expended, His match burnt out,
             And his upper works decayed,
    He was sunk by Death's superior weight of metal.

                     Nevertheless,
       He will be weighed again at the Great Day,
      His rigging refitted, And his timbers repaired;
                And, with one broadside,
          Make his adversary strike in his turn.





CHAPTER LXXX.




He returns to London, and meets with Cadwallader, who entertains
him with many curious Particulars--Crabtree sounds the Duchess,
and undeceives Pickle, who, by an extraordinary Accident, becomes
acquainted with another Lady of Quality.


The young gentleman having performed these last offices in honour
of his deceased benefactor, and presented Mr. Jolter to the
long-expected living, which at this time happened to be vacant,
returned to London, and resumed his former gaiety: not that he was
able to shake Emilia from his thought, or even to remember her
without violent emotions; for, as he recovered his vigour, his
former impatience recurred, and therefore he resolved to plunge
himself headlong into some intrigue, that might engage his passions
and amuse his imagination.

A man of his accomplishments could not fail to meet with a variety of
subjects on which his gallantry would have been properly exercised;
and this abundance distracted his choice, which at any time was
apt to be influenced by caprice and whim. I have already observed,
that he had lifted his view, through a matrimonial perspective, as
high as a lady of the first quality and distinction: and now, that
he was refused by Miss Gauntlet, and enjoyed a little respite from
the agonies of that flame which her charms had kindled in his heart,
he renewed his assiduities to her grace. Though he durst not yet
risk an explanation, he enjoyed the pleasure of seeing himself
so well received in quality of a particular acquaintance, that he
flattered himself with the belief of his having made some progress
in her heart; and was confirmed in this conceited notion by the
assurances of her woman, whom, by liberal largesses, he retained in
his interest, because she found means to persuade him that she was
in the confidence of her lady. But, notwithstanding this encouragement,
and the sanguine suggestions of his own vanity, he dreaded the
thoughts of exposing himself to her ridicule and resentment by a
premature declaration. and determined to postpone his addresses,
until he should be more certified of the probability of succeeding
in his attempt.

While he remained in this hesitation and suspense, he was one
morning very agreeably surprised with the appearance of his friend
Crabtree, who, by the permission of Pipes, to whom he was well
known, entered his chamber before he was awake, and, by a violent
shake of the shoulder, disengaged him from the arms of sleep. The
first compliments having mutually passed, Cadwallader gave him to
understand, that he had arrived in town overnight in the stage-coach
from Bath, and entertained him with such a ludicrous account of his
fellow-travellers, that Peregrine, for the first time since their
parting, indulged himself in mirth, even to the hazard of suffocation.

Crabtree, having rehearsed these adventures, in such a peculiarity
of manner as added infinite ridicule to every circumstance, and
repeated every scandalous report which had circulated at Bath,
after Peregrine's departure, was informed by the youth, that he
harboured a design upon the person of such a duchess, and in all
appearance had no reason to complain of his reception; but that
he would not venture to declare himself, until he should be more
ascertained of her sentiments; and therefore he begged leave to
depend upon the intelligence of his friend Cadwallader, who, he
knew, was admitted to her parties.

The misanthrope, before he would promise his assistance, asked
if his prospect verged towards matrimony; and our adventurer, who
guessed the meaning of his question, replying in the negative, he
undertook the office of reconnoitring her inclination, protesting
at the same time, that he would never concern himself in any scheme
that did not tend to the disgrace and deception of all the sex. On
these conditions he espoused the interest of our hero; and a plan
was immediately concerted, in consequence of which they met by
accident at her grace's table. Pickle having staid all the forepart
of the evening, and sat out all the company, except the misanthrope
and a certain widow lady who was said to be in the secrets of my
lady duchess, went away on pretence of an indispensable engagement,
that Crabtree might have a proper opportunity of making him the
subject of conversation.

Accordingly, he had scarce quitted the apartment, when this cynic,
attending him to the door with a look of morose disdain, "Were I
an absolute prince," said he, "and that fellow one of my subjects,
I would order him to be clothed in sackcloth, and he should drive
my asses to water, that his lofty spirit might be lowered to the
level of his deserts. The pride of a peacock is downright self-denial,
when compared with the vanity of that coxcomb, which was naturally
arrogant, but is now rendered altogether intolerable, by the
reputation he acquired at Bath, for kicking a bully, outwitting
a club of raw sharpers, and divers other pranks, in the execution
of which he was more lucky than wise. But nothing has contributed
so much to the increase of his insolence and self-conceit, as the
favour he found among the ladies; ay, the ladies, madam: I care
not who knows it: the ladies, who, to their honour be it spoken,
never fail to patronize foppery and folly, provided they solicit
their encouragement. And yet this dog was not on the footing of those
hermaphroditical animals, who may be reckoned among the number of
waiting-women, who air your shifts, comb your lap-dogs, examine your
noses with magnifying glasses, in order to squeeze out the worms,
clean your tooth-brushes, sweeten your handkerchiefs, and soften
waste paper for your occasions. This fellow Pickle was entertained
for more important purposes; his turn of duty never came till all
those lapwings were gone to roost; then he scaled windows, leaped
over garden walls, and was let in by Mrs. Betty in the dark. Nay,
the magistrates of Bath complimented him with the freedom of the
corporation, merely because, through his means, the waters had gained
extraordinary credit; for every female of a tolerable appearance,
that went thither on account of her sterility, got the better of
her complaint, during his residence at Bath. And now the fellow
thinks no woman can withstand his addresses. He had not been here
three minutes, when I could perceive, with half an eye, that he
had marked out your grace for a conquest,--I mean in an honourable
way; though the rascal has impudence enough to attempt anything."

So saying, he fixed his eyes upon the duchess, who, while her
face glowed with indignation, turning to her confidant, expressed
herself in these words: "Upon my life! I believe there is actually
some truth in what this old ruffian says; I have myself observed
that young fellow eyeing me with a very particular stare."--"It
is not to be at all wondered at," said her friend, "that a youth
of his complexion should be sensible to the charms of your grace!
but I dare say he would not presume to entertain any but the most
honourable and respectful sentiments."--"Respectful sentiments!"
cried my lady, with a look of ineffable disdain; "if I thought the
fellow had assurance enough to think of me in any shape, I protest
I would forbid him my house. Upon my honour, such instances of
audacity should induce persons of quality to keep your small gentry
at a greater distance; for they are very apt to grow impudent, upon
the least countenance or encouragement."

Cadwallader, satisfied with this declaration, changed the subject
of discourse, and next day communicated his discovery to his friend
Pickle, who upon this occasion felt the most stinging sensations
of mortified pride, and resolved to quit his prospect with a good
grace. Nor did the execution of this self-denying scheme cost him
one moment's uneasiness; for his heart had never been interested in
the pursuit, and his vanity triumphed in the thoughts of manifesting
his indifference. Accordingly, the very next time he visited her
grace, his behaviour was remarkably frank, sprightly and disengaged;
and the subject of love being artfully introduced by the widow,
who had been directed to sound his inclinations, he rallied the
passion with great ease and severity and made no scruple of declaring
himself heart-whole.  Though the duchess had resented his supposed
affection, she was now offended at his insensibility, and even
signified her disgust, by observing, that perhaps his attention
to his own qualifications screened him from the impression of all
other objects.

While he enjoyed this sarcasm, the meaning of which he could
plainly discern, the company was joined by a certain virtuoso, who
had gained free access to all the great families of the land, by
his noble talent of gossiping and buffoonery. He was now in the
seventy-fifth year of his age; his birth was so obscure, that he
scarce knew his father's name; his education suitable to the dignity
of his descent; his character publicly branded with homicide,
profligacy, and breach of trust; yet this man, by the happy
inheritance of impregnable effrontery, and a lucky prostitution
of all principle in rendering himself subservient to the appetites
of the great, had attained to an independency of fortune, as well
as to such a particular share of favour among the quality, that,
although he was well known to have pimped for three generations of
the nobility, there was not a lady of fashion in the kingdom who
scrupled to admit him to her toilette, or even to be squired by him
in any place of public entertainment. Not but that this sage was
occasionally useful to his fellow-creatures, by these connections
with people of fortune; for he often undertook to solicit charity
in behalf of distressed objects, with a view of embezzling one-half
of the benefactions. It was an errand of this kind that now brought
him to the house of her grace.

After having sat a few minutes, he told the company that he would
favour them with a very proper opportunity to extend their benevolence,
for the relief of a poor gentlewoman, who was reduced to the most
abject misery, by the death of her husband, and just delivered of
a couple of fine boys: they, moreover, understood from his information,
that this object was daughter of a good family, who had renounced
her in consequence of her marrying an ensign without a fortune; and
even obstructed his promotion with all their influence and power;
a circumstance of barbarity which had made such an impression upon
his mind, as disordered his brain, and drove him to despair, in a
fit of which he had made away with himself, leaving his wife, then
big with child, to all the horrors of indigence and grief.

Various were the criticisms on this pathetic picture, which the
old man drew with great expression. My lady duchess concluded that
she must be a creature void of all feeling and reflection, who
could survive such aggravated misery, therefore did not deserve to
be relieved, except in the character of a common beggar; and was
generous enough to offer a recommendation, by which she would be
admitted into an infirmary, to which her grace was a subscriber;
at the same time advising the solicitor to send the twins to the
Foundling Hospital, where they could be carefully nursed and brought
up, so as to become useful members to the commonwealth. Another
lady, with all due deference to the opinion of the duchess, was free
enough to blame the generosity of her grace, which would only serve
to encourage children in disobedience to their parents, and might
be the means not only of prolonging the distress of the wretched
creature, but also of ruining the constitution of some young heir,
perhaps the hope of a great family; for she did suppose that madam,
when her month should be up, and her brats disposed of, would spread
her attractions to the public, provided she could profit by her
person, and, in the usual way, make a regular progress from St.
James's to Drury Lane. She apprehended, for these reasons, that
their compassion would be most effectually shown, in leaving her to
perish in her present necessity; and that the old gentleman would
be unpardonable, should he persist in his endeavours to relieve
her. A third member of this tender-hearted society, after having
asked if the young woman was handsome, and being answered in the
negative, allowed that there was a great deal of reason in what had
been said by the honourable person who had spoke last; nevertheless,
she humbly conceived her sentence would admit of some mitigation.
"Let the bantlings," said she, "be sent to the hospital, according
to the advice of her grace, and a small collection be made for the
present support of the mother; and, when her health is recovered,
I will take her into my family, in quality of an upper servant, or
medium between me and my woman; for, upon my life! I can't endure
to chide or give directions to a creature, who is, in point of
birth and education, but one degree above the vulgar."

This proposal met with universal approbation. The duchess, to
her immortal honour, began the contribution with a crown; so that
the rest of the company were obliged to restrict their liberality
to half the sum, that her grace might not be affronted. And the
proposer, demanding the poor woman's name and place of abode, the
old mediator could not help giving her ladyship a verbal direction,
though he was extremely mortified, on more accounts than one, to
find such an issue to his solicitation.

Peregrine, who, "though humorous as winter, had a tear for pity,
and a hand open as day for melting charity," was shocked at the
nature and result of this ungenerous consultation. He contributed
his half-crown, however, and, retiring from the company, betook
himself to the lodgings of the forlorn lady in the straw, according
to the direction he had heard. Upon inquiry, he understood that
she was then visited by some charitable gentlewoman, who had sent
for a nurse, and waited the return of the messenger; and he sent
up his respects, desiring he might be permitted to see her, on
pretence of having been intimate with her late husband.

Though the poor woman had never heard of his name, she did not
think proper to deny his request; and he was conducted to a paltry
chamber in the third story, where he found this unhappy widow
sitting upon a truckle-bed, and suckling one of her infants, with
the most piteous expression of anguish in her features, which were
naturally regular and sweet, while the other was fondled on the knee
of a person, whose attention was so much engrossed by her little
charge, that, for the present, she could mind nothing else; and
it was not till after the first compliments passed betwixt the
hapless mother and our adventurer, that he perceived the stranger's
countenance, which inspired him with the highest esteem and admiration.
He beheld all the graces of elegance and beauty, breathing sentiment
and beneficence, and softened into the most enchanting tenderness
of weeping sympathy. When he declared the cause of his visit, which
was no other than the desire of befriending the distressed lady,
to whom he presented a bank-note for twenty pounds, he was favoured
with such a look of complacency by this amiable phantom, who might
have been justly taken for an angel ministering to the necessities
of mortals, that his whole soul was transported with love and
veneration. Nor was this prepossession diminished by the information
of the widow, who, after having manifested her gratitude in a flood
of tears, told him, that the unknown object of his esteem was a
person of honour, who having heard by accident of her deplorable
situation, had immediately obeyed the dictates of her humanity,
and come in person to relieve her distress; that she had not only
generously supplied her with money for present sustenance, but
also undertaken to provide a nurse for her babes, and even promised
to favour her with protection, should she survive her present
melancholy situation. To these articles of intelligence she added,
that the name of her benefactress was the celebrated Lady --,
to whose character the youth was no stranger, though he had never
seen her person before. The killing edge of her charms was a little
blunted by the accidents of time and fortune; but no man of taste
and imagination, whose nerves were not quite chilled with the frost
of age, could, even at that time, look upon her with impunity. And
as Peregrine saw her attractions heightened by the tender office
in which she was engaged, he was smitten with her beauty, and
so ravished with her compassion, that he could not suppress his
emotions, but applauded her benevolence with all the warmth of
enthusiasm.

Her ladyship received his compliments with great politeness
and affability. And the occasion on which they met being equally
interesting to both, an acquaintance commenced between them, and
they concerted measures for the benefit of the widow and her two
children, one of whom our hero bespoke for his own godson; for
Pickle was not so obscure in the beau monde, but that his fame had
reached the ears of this lady, who, therefore, did not discourage
his advances towards her friendship and esteem. All the particulars
relating to their charge being adjusted, he attended her ladyship
to her own house; and, by her conversation, had the pleasure of
finding her understanding suitable to her other accomplishments.
Nor had she any reason to think that our hero's qualifications had
been exaggerated by common report.

One of their adopted children died before it was baptized; so that
their care concentred in the other, for whom they stood sponsors.
Understanding that the old agent was becoming troublesome in
his visits to the mother, to whom he now began to administer such
counsel as shocked the delicacy of her virtue, they removed her into
another lodging, where she would not be exposed to his machinations.
In less than a month, our hero learned from a nobleman of his
acquaintance, that the hoary pander had actually engaged to procure
for him this poor afflicted gentlewoman; and, being frustrated in
his intention, substituted in her room a nymph from the purlieus
of Covent Garden, that made his lordship smart severely for the
favours she bestowed.

Meanwhile, Peregrine cultivated his new acquaintance with all his art
and assiduity, presuming, from the circumstances of her reputation
and fate, as well as on the strength of his own merit, that, in
time, he should be able to indulge that passion which had begun
to glow within his breast. As her ladyship had undergone a vast
variety of fortune and adventure, which he had heard indistinctly
related, with numberless errors and misrepresentations, he was no
sooner entitled, by the familiarity of communication, to ask such
a favour, than he earnestly entreated her to entertain him with the
particulars of her story; and, by dint of importunity, she was at
length prevailed upon, in a select party, to gratify his curiosity,
by the account given in the following chapter.





CHAPTER LXXXI.




The Memoirs of a Lady of Quality.


"By the circumstances of the story which I am going to relate,
you will be convinced of my candour, while you are informed of my
indiscretion. You will be enabled, I hope, to perceive, that, howsoever
my head may have erred, my heart hath always been uncorrupted, and
that I have been unhappy, because I loved, and was a woman.

"I believe I need not observe, that I was the only child of a man
of good fortune, who indulged me in my infancy with all the tenderness
of paternal affection; and, when I was six years old, sent me to a
private school, where I stayed till my age was doubled, and became
such a favourite, that I was, even in those early days, carried to
all the places of public diversion, the court itself not excepted,
an indulgence that flattered my love of pleasure, to which I was
naturally addicted, and encouraged those ideas of vanity and ambition
which spring up so early in the human mind.

"I was lively and good-natured, my imagination apt to run riot,
my heart liberal and disinterested, though I was so obstinately
attached to my own opinions, that I could not well brook contradiction;
and, in the whole of my disposition, resembled that of Henry V.,
as described by Shakespeare.

"In my thirteenth year I went to Bath, where I was first introduced
into the world as a woman, having been entitled to that privilege
by my person, which was remarkably tall for my years; and there my
fancy was quite captivated by the variety of diversions in which I
was continually engaged. Not that the parties were altogether new
to me, but because I now found myself considered as a person of
consequence, and surrounded by a crowd of admirers, who courted
my acquaintance, and fed my vanity with praise and adulation. In
short, whether or not I deserved their encomiums, I leave the world
to judge; but my person was commended, and my talent in dancing met
with universal applause. No wonder, then, that everything appeared
joyous to a young creature, who was so void of experience and
dissimulation, that she believed everybody's heart as sincere as
her own, and every object such as it appeared to be.

"Among the swains who sighed, or pretended to sigh for me, were two
that bore a pretty equal share of my favour (it was too superficial
to deserve the name of love). One of these was a forward youth of
sixteen, extremely handsome, lively, and impudent. He attended in
quality of page upon the Princess Amelia, who spent that season
at Bath. The other was a Scotch nobleman turned of thirty, who
was graced with a red ribbon, and danced particularly well, two
qualifications of great weight with a girl of my age, whose heart
was not deeply interested in the cause. Nevertheless, the page
prevailed over this formidable rival; though our amour went no
farther than a little flirting, and ceased entirely when I left
the place.

"Next year, however, I revisited this agreeable scene, and passed
my time in the same circle of amusements; in which, indeed, each
season at Bath is exactly resembled by that which succeeds, allowing
for the difference of company, which is continually varying. There
I met with the same incense, and again had my favourite, who was
a North Briton, and captain of foot, near forty years of age, and
a little lame, an impediment which I did not discover, until it was
pointed out by some of my companions, who rallied me upon my choice.
He was always cheerful, and very amorous, had a good countenance,
and an excellent understanding, possessed a great deal of art, and
would have persuaded me to marry him, had I not been restrained by
the authority of my father, whose consent was not to be obtained
in favour of a man of his fortune.

"At the same time, many proposals of marriage were made to my parents;
but as they came from people whom I did not like, I rejected them
all, being determined to refuse every man who did not make his
addresses to myself in person, because I had no notion of marrying
for anything but love. Among these formal proposers was a Scottish
earl, whose pretensions were broke off by some difference about
settlements; and the son of an English baron, with whom my father
was in treaty, when he carried me to town, on a visit to a young
lady. with whom I had been intimate from my infancy. She was just
delivered of her first son, for whom we stood sponsors; so that
this occasion detained us a whole month, during which I went to a
ball at court, on the Queen's birthday, and there, for the first
time, felt what love and beauty were.

"The second son of Duke H--, who had just returned from his travels,
was dancing with the princess royal, when a young lady came and
desired me to go and see a stranger, whom all the world admired.
Upon which I followed her into the circle, and observed this object
of admiration. He was dressed in a coat of white cloth, faced with
blue satin, embroidered with silver, of the same piece with his
waistcoat; his fine hair hung down his back in ringlets below his
waist; his hat was laced with silver, and garnished with a white
feather; but his person beggared description. He was tall and
graceful, neither corpulent nor meagre, his limbs finely proportioned,
his countenance open and majestic, his eyes full of sweetness and
vivacity, his teeth regular, and his pouting lips of the complexion
of the damask rose. In short, he was formed for love, and inspired
it wherever he appeared; nor was he a niggard of his talents, but
liberally returned it, at least, what passed for such; for he had
a flow of gallantry, for which many ladies of this land can vouch
from their own experience. But he exclaimed against marriage,
because he had, as yet, met with no woman to whose charms he would
surrender his liberty, though a princess of France, and lady of
the same rank in --, were said to be, at that time, enamoured of
his person.

"I went home, totally engrossed by his idea, flattering myself that
he had observed me with some attention; for I was young and new,
and had the good fortune to attract the notice and approbation of
the queen herself.

"Next day, being at the opera, I was agreeably surprised with the
appearance of this amiable stranger, who no sooner saw me enter, than
he approached so near to the place where I sat, that I overheard what
he said to his companions; and was so happy as to find myself the
object of his discourse, which abounded with rapturous expressions
of love and admiration. I could not listen to these transports
without emotion; my colour changed, my heart throbbed with unusual
violence, and my eyes betrayed my inclination in sundry favourable
glances, which he seemed to interpret aright, though he could not
then avail himself of his success, so far as to communicate his
sentiments by speech, because we were strangers to each other.

"I passed that night in the most anxious suspense, and several
days elapsed before I saw him again. At length, however, being at
court on a ball-night, and determined against dancing, I perceived
him among the crowd, and, to my unspeakable joy, saw him advance,
with my Lord P--, who introduced him to my acquaintance. He soon
found means to alter my resolution, and I condescended to be his
partner all the evening; during which he declared his passion in
the most tender and persuasive terms that real love could dictate,
or fruitful imagination invent.

"I believed his protestations, because I wished them true, and
was an unexperienced girl of fifteen. I complied with his earnest
request of being permitted to visit me, and even invited him to
breakfast next morning; so that you may imagine (I speak to those
that feel) I did not, that night, enjoy much repose. Such was the
hurry and flutter of my spirits, that I rose at six to receive
him at ten. I dressed myself in a new pink satin gown, and my best
laced night-clothes, and was so animated by the occasion that, if
ever I deserved a compliment upon my looks, it was my due at this
meeting.  The wished-for moment came that brought my lover to my
view. I was overwhelmed with joy, modesty, and fear of I knew not
what. We sat down to breakfast, but did not eat. He renewed his
addresses with irresistible eloquence, and pressed me to accept
of his hand without further hesitation. But to such a precipitate
step I objected, as a measure repugnant to my decency, as well as
to that duty which I owed to my father, whom I tenderly loved.

"Though I withstood this premature proposal, I did not attempt to
disguise the situation of my thoughts; and thus commenced a tender
correspondence, which was maintained by letters while I remained
in the country, and carried on, when I was in town, by private
interviews twice or thrice a week at the house of my milliner,
where such endearments passed as refined and happy lovers know, and
others can only guess. Truth and innocence prevailed on my side,
while his heart was fraught with sincerity and love. Such frequent
intercourse created an intimacy which I began to think dangerous,
and therefore yielded to his repeated desire that we might be
united for ever.  Nay, I resolved to avoid him, until the day should
be fixed, and very innocently, though not very wisely, told him my
reason for this determination, which was no other than a consciousness
of my incapacity to refuse him anything he should demand as a
testimony of my love.

"The time was accordingly appointed, at the distance of a few days,
during which I intended to have implored my father's consent, though
I had but faint hopes of obtaining it. But he was by some means or
other apprised of our design, before I could prevail upon myself
to make him acquainted with our purpose. I had danced with my lover
at the ridotto on the preceding evening, and there perhaps our
eyes betrayed us. Certain it is, several of Lord W--'s relations,
who disapproved of the match, came up and rallied him on his passion;
Lord S--k, in particular, used this remarkable expression, "Nephew,
as much love as you please, but no matrimony."

"Next day, the priest being prepared, and the bridegroom waiting
for me at the appointed place, in all the transports of impatient
expectation, I was, without any previous warning, carried into the
country by my father, who took no notice of the intelligence he
had received, but decoyed me into the coach on pretence of taking
the air; and, when we had proceeded as far as Turnham Green, gave
me to understand, that he would dine in that place.

"There was no remedy. I was obliged to bear my disappointment,
though with an aching heart, and followed him up-stairs into an
apartment, where he told me he was minutely informed of my matrimonial
scheme. I did not attempt to disguise the truth, but assured him,
while the tears gushed from my eyes, that my want of courage alone
had hindered me from making him privy to my passion; though I owned,
I should have married Lord W--, even though he had disapproved of
my choice. I reminded him of the uneasy life I led at home, and
frankly acknowledged, that I loved my admirer too well to live
without him; though, if he would favour me with his consent, I
would defer my intention, and punctually observe any day he would
fix for our nuptials. Meanwhile I begged he would permit me to
send a message to Lord W--, who was waiting in expectation of my
coming, and might, without such notice, imagine I was playing the
jilt. He granted this last request; in consequence of which I sent
a letter to my lover, who, when he received it, had almost fainted
away, believing I should be locked up in the country, and snatched
for ever from his arms. Tortured with these apprehensions, he
changed clothes immediately, and, taking horse, resolved to follow
me whithersoever we should go.

"After dinner, we proceeded as far as Brentford, where we
lay, intending to be at my father's country house next night; and
my admirer putting up at the same inn, practised every expedient
his invention could suggest to procure an interview; but all his
endeavours were unsuccessful, because I, who little dreamed of his
being so near, had gone to bed upon our first arrival, overwhelmed
with affliction and tears. In the morning I threw myself at
my father's feet, and conjured him, by all the ties of paternal
affection, to indulge me with an opportunity of seeing my admirer
once more, before I should be conveyed from his wishes. The melancholy
condition in which I preferred this supplication, melted the tender
heart of my parent, who yielded to my supplications, and carried
me back to town for that purpose.

"Lord W--, who had watched our motions, and arrived at his own
lodgings before we arrived at my father's house, obeyed my summons
on the instant, and appeared before me like an angel. Our faculties
were for some minutes suspended by a conflict of grief and joy. At
length I recovered the use of speech, and gave him to understand,
that I was come to town in order to take my leave of him, by the
permission of my father, whom I had promised to attend into the
country next day, before he would consent to my return; the chief
cause and pretence of which was my earnest desire to convince him,
that I was not to blame for the disappointment he had suffered,
and that I should see him again in a month, when the nuptial knot
should be tied in spite of all opposition.

"My lover, who was better acquainted with the world, had wellnigh
run distracted with this information. He swore he would not leave
me, until I should promise to meet and marry him next day; or,
if I refused to grant that request, he would immediately leave
the kingdom, to which he would never more return; and, before his
departure, sacrifice Lord H. B--, son to the Duke of S. A--, who
was the only person upon earth who could have betrayed us to my
father, because he alone was trusted with the secret of our intended
marriage, and had actually undertaken to give me away; an office
which he afterwards declined. Lord W-- also affirmed, that my
father decoyed me into the country with a view of cooping me up,
and sequestering me entirely from his view and correspondence.

"In vain I pleaded my father's well-known tenderness, and used
all the arguments I could recollect to divert him from his revenge
upon Lord H--. He was deaf to all my representations, and nothing,
I found, would prevail upon him to suppress his resentment, but
a positive promise to comply with his former desire. I told him I
would hazard everything to make him happy; but could not, with any
regard to my duty, take such a step without the knowledge of my
parent; or, if I were so inclined, it would be impracticable to
elude his vigilance and suspicion. However, he employed such pathetic
remonstrances, and retained such a powerful advocate within my own
breast, that, before we parted, I assured him my whole power should
be exerted for his satisfaction; and he signified his resolution
of sitting up all night, in expectation of seeing me at his lodgings.

"He had no sooner retired, than I went into the next room, and
desired my father to fix a day for the marriage; in which case I
would cheerfully wait upon him into the country; whereas, should
he deny my request, on pretence of staying for the consent of my
mother's relations, which was very uncertain, I would seize the
first opportunity of marrying Lord W--, cost what it would. He
consented to the match, but would not appoint a day for the ceremony,
which he proposed to defer until all parties should be agreed; and
such a favourable crisis, I feared, would never happen.

"I therefore resolved within myself to gratify my lover's expectation,
by eloping, if possible, that very night; though the execution of
this plan was extremely difficult, because my father was upon the
alarm, and my own maid, who was my bedfellow, altogether in his
interest. Notwithstanding these considerations, I found means to
engage one of the housemaids in my behalf, who bespoke a hackney-coach,
to be kept in waiting all night; and to bed I went with my Abigail,
whom, as I had not closed an eye, I waked about five in the morning,
and sent to pack up some things for our intended journey.

"While she was thus employed, I got up, and huddled on my clothes,
standing upon my pillow, lest my father, who lay in the chamber
below, should hear me afoot, and suspect my design. Having dressed
myself with great despatch and disorder, I flounced downstairs,
stalking as heavily as I could tread, that he might mistake me for
one of the servants; and my confederate opening the door, I sallied
out into the street, though I knew not which way to turn; and, to
my unspeakable mortification, neither coach nor chair appeared.

"Having travelled on foot a good way, in hope of finding a
convenience, and being not only disappointed in that particular,
but also bewildered in my peregrination, I began to be exceedingly
alarmed with the apprehension of being met by some person who might
know me; because in that case, my design would undoubtedly have
been discovered, from every circumstance of my appearance at that
time of day; for I had put on the very clothes which I had pulled
off overnight, so that my dress was altogether odd and peculiar.
My shoes were very fine, and over a large hoop I wore a pink satin
quilted petticoat trimmed with silver, which was partly covered by
a white dimity night-gown, a full quarter of a yard too short; my
handkerchief and apron were hurried on without pinning; my nightcap
could not contain my hair, which hung about my ears in great
disorder; and my countenance denoted a mixture of hope and fear,
joy and shame.

"In this dilemma, I made my addresses to that honourable member
of society, a shoe-black, whom I earnestly entreated to provide me
with a coach or chair, promising to reward him liberally for his
trouble, but he, having the misfortune to be lame, was unable to
keep up with my pace; so that by his advice and direction, I went
into the first public-house I found open, where I stayed some
time, in the utmost consternation, among a crew of wretches whom I
thought proper to bribe for their civility, not without the terror
of being stripped.  At length, however, my messenger returned with
a chair, of which I took immediate possession; and fearing that,
by this time, my family would be alarmed, and send directly to Lord
W--'s lodgings, I ordered myself to be carried thither backwards,
that so I might pass undiscovered.

"This stratagem succeeded according to my wish; I ran upstairs,
in a state of trepidation, to my faithful lover, who waited for me
with the most impatient and fearful suspense. At sight of me his
eyes lightened with transport: he caught me in his arms, as the
richest present Heaven could bestow; gave me to understand that
my father had already sent to his lodgings in quest of me; then
applauding my love and resolution in the most rapturous terms, he
ordered a hackney-coach to be called, and, that we might run no
risk of separation, attended me to church, where we were lawfully
joined in the sight of Heaven.

"His fears were then all over, but mine recurred with double
aggravation: I dreaded the sight of my father, and shared all the
sorrow he suffered on account of my undutiful behaviour; for I
loved him with such piety of affection, that I would have endured
every other species of distress, rather than given him the least
uneasiness; but love, where he reigns in full empire, is altogether
irresistible, surmounts every difficulty, and swallows up all other
considerations. This was the case with me; and now the irrevocable
step was taken, my first care was to avoid his sight. With this
view, I begged that Lord W-- would think of some remote place
in the country, to which we might retire for the present, and he
forthwith conducted me to a house on Blackheath, where we were very
civilly received by a laughter-loving dame, who seemed to mistake
me for one of her own sisterhood. I no sooner perceived her opinion,
than I desired Lord W-- to undeceive her; upon which she was made
acquainted with the nature of my situation, and showed us into
a private room, where I called for pen and paper, and wrote an
apology to my father, for having acted contrary to his will in so
important a concern.

"This task being performed, the bridegroom gave me to understand,
that there was a necessity for our being bedded immediately, in
order to render the marriage binding, lest my father should discover
and part us before consummation. I pleaded hard for a respite till
the evening, objecting to the indecency of going to bed before noon;
but he found means to invalidate all my arguments, and to convince
me that it was now my duty to obey. Rather than hazard the imputation
of being obstinate and refractory on the first day of my probation,
I suffered myself to be led into a chamber, which was darkened by
my express stipulation, that my shame and confusion might be the
better concealed, and yielded to the privilege of a dear husband,
who loved me to adoration.

"About five o'clock in the afternoon we were called to dinner,
which we had ordered to be ready at four; but such a paltry care
had been forgot amidst the transports of our mutual bliss. We got
up, however, and when we came downstairs, I was ashamed to see the
light of day, or meet the eyes of my beloved lord. I ate little,
said less, was happy, though overwhelmed with confusion, underwent
a thousand agitations, some of which were painful, but by far the
greater part belonged to rapture and delight; we were imparadised
in the gratification of our mutual wishes, and felt all that love
can bestow, and sensibility enjoy.

"In the twilight we returned to Lord W--'s lodgings in town, where
I received a letter from my father, importing that he would never
see me again. But there was one circumstance in his manner of writing,
from which I conceived a happy presage of his future indulgence.
He had begun with his usual appellation of 'Dear Fanny,' which,
though it was expunged to make way for the word 'Madam,' encouraged
me to hope that his paternal fondness was not yet extinguished.

"At supper we were visited by Lord W--'s younger sister, who laughed
at us for our inconsiderate match, though she owned she envied
our happiness, and offered me the use of her clothes until I could
retrieve my own. She was a woman of a great deal of humour, plain
but genteel, civil, friendly, and perfectly well bred. She favoured
us with her company till the night was pretty far advanced, and
did not take her leave till we retired to our apartment.

"As our lodgings were not spacious or magnificent, we resolved
to see little company; but this resolution was frustrated by the
numerous acquaintance of Lord W--, who let in half the town: so
that I ran the gauntlet for a whole week among a set of wits, who
always delight in teasing a young creature of any note, when she
happens to make such a stolen match. Among those that visited us
upon this occasion was my lord's younger brother, who was at that
time in keeping with a rich heiress of masculine memory, and took
that opportunity of making a parade with his equipage, which was
indeed very magnificent, but altogether disregarded by us, whose
happiness consisted in the opulence of mutual love.

"This ceremony of receiving visits being performed, we went to wait
on his mother, the duchess of H--, who, hearing I was an heiress,
readily forgave her son for marrying without her knowledge and
consent, and favoured us with a very cordial reception; insomuch,
that for several months, we dined almost constantly at her table;
and I must own, I always found her unaltered in her civility and
affection, contrary to her general character, which was haughty
and capricious. She was undoubtedly a woman of great spirit and
understanding, but subject to an infirmity which very much impairs
and disguises every other qualification.

"In about three weeks after our marriage, I was so happy as to
obtain the forgiveness of my father, to whose house we repaired, in
order to pay our respects and submission. At sight of me he wept;
nor did I behold his tears unmoved. My heart was overcharged with
tenderness and sorrow, for having offended such an indulgent parent;
so that I mingled my tears with his, while my dear husband, whose
soul was of the softest and gentlest mould, melted with sympathy
at the affecting scene. Being thus reconciled to my father, we
attended him into the country, where we were received by my mother,
who was a sensible good woman, though not susceptible to love, and
therefore less apt to excuse a weakness to which she was an utter
stranger.  This was likewise the case with an uncle, from whom I
had great expectations. He was a plain good-natured man, and treated
us with great courtesy, though his notions, in point of love, were
not exactly conformable to ours. Nevertheless, I was, and seemed to
be so happy in my choice, that my family not only became satisfied
with the match, but exceedingly fond of Lord W--.

"After a short stay with them in the country, we returned to
London, in order to be introduced at court, and then set out for
the north, on a visit to my brother-in-law the duke of H--, who had,
by a letter to Lord W--, invited us to his habitation. My father
accordingly equipped us with horses and money; for our own finances
were extremely slender, consisting only of a small pension, allowed
by his grace, upon whom the brothers were entirely dependent, the
father having died suddenly, before suitable provision could be
made for his younger children.

"When I took leave of my relations, bidding adieu to my paternal
home, and found myself launching into a world of care and trouble,
though the voyage on which I embarked was altogether voluntary, and
my companion the person on whom I doted to distraction,--I could
not help feeling some melancholy sensations, which, however, in
a little time, gave way to a train of more agreeable ideas. I was
visited in town by almost all the women of fashion, many of whom,
I perceived, envied me the possession of a man who had made strange
havoc among their hearts, and some of them knew the value of his
favour. One in particular endeavoured to cultivate my friendship
with singular marks of regard; but I thought proper to discourage
her advances, by keeping within the bounds of bare civility; and,
indeed, to none of them was I lavish of my complaisance; for I
dedicated my whole time to the object of my affection, who engrossed
my wishes to such a degree, that, although I was never jealous,
because I had no reason to be so, I envied the happiness of every
woman whom he chanced at any time to hand into a coach.

"The duchess of --, who was newly married to the earl of P--, a
particular friend of Lord W--'s, carried me to court, and presented
me to the queen, who expressed her approbation of my person in very
particular terms, and, observing the satisfaction that appeared in
my countenance, with marks of admiration, desired her ladies to
take notice, how little happiness depended upon wealth, since there
was more joy in my face than in all her court besides.

"Such a declaration could not fail to overwhelm me with blushes,
which her Majesty seemed to behold with pleasure; for she frequently
repeated the remark, and showed me to all the foreigners of
distinction, with many gracious expressions of favour. She wished
Lord W-- happiness instead of joy, and was pleased to promise,
that she would provide for her pretty beggars. And poor enough we
certainly were in every article but love. Nevertheless, we felt no
necessities, but passed the summer in a variety of pleasures and
parties; the greatest part of which were planned by Lord W--'s
sister and another lady, who was at that time mistress to the prime
minister. The first was a wit, but homely in person; the other a
woman of great beauty and masculine understanding; and a particular
friendship subsisted between them, though they were both lovers of
power and admiration.

"This lady, who sat at the helm, was extremely elegant, as well
as expensive in her diversions, in many of which we bore a share,
particularly in her parties upon the water, which were contrived in
all the magnificence of taste. In the course of these amusements, a
trifling circumstance occurred, which I shall relate as an instance
of that jealous sensibility which characterised Lord W--'s disposition.
A large company of ladies and gentlemen having agreed to dine at
Vauxhall, and sup at Marble-hall, where we proposed to conclude
the evening with a dance, one barge being insufficient to contain
the whole company, we were divided by lots; in consequence of
which, my husband and I were parted. This separation was equally
mortifying to us both, who, though married, were still lovers; and
my chagrin increased when I perceived that I was doomed to sit by
Sir W. Y--, a man of professed gallantry; for, although Lord W--
had, before his marriage, made his addresses to every woman he saw,
I knew very well he did not desire that any person should make love
to his wife.

"That I might not, therefore, give umbrage, by talking to this
gallant, I conversed with a Scotch nobleman, who, according to common
report, had formerly sighed among my admirers. By these means, in
seeking to avoid one error, I unwittingly plunged myself into a
greater, and disobliged Lord W-- so much, that he could not conceal
his displeasure; nay, so deeply was he offended at my conduct,
that, in the evening, when the ball began, he would scarce deign
to take me by the hand in the course of dancing, and darted such
unkind looks, as pierced me to the very soul. What augmented my
concern, was my ignorance of the trespass I had committed. I was
tortured with a thousand uneasy reflections; I began to fear that
I had mistaken his temper, and given my heart to a man who was
tired of possession; though I resolved to bear without complaining
the misfortune I had entailed upon myself.

"I seized the first opportunity of speaking to him, and thereby
discovered the cause of his chagrin; but, as there was no time for
expostulation, the misunderstanding continued on his side, with such
evident marks of uneasiness, that every individual of the company
made up to me, and inquired about the cause of his disorder; so
that I was fain to amuse their concern, by saying, that he had been
ill the day before, and dancing did not agree with his constitution.
So much was he incensed by this unhappy circumstance of my conduct,
which was void of all intention to offend him, that he determined
to be revenged on me for my indiscretion, and at supper, chancing
to sit between two very handsome ladies, one of whom is lately
dead, and the other, at present, my neighbour in the country, he
affected an air of gaiety, and openly coquetted with them both.

"This was not the only punishment he inflicted on his innocent
wife.  In the course of our entertainment, we engaged in some
simple diversion, in consequence of which the gentlemen were ordered
to salute the ladies; when Lord W--, in performing this command,
unkindly neglected me in my turn; I had occasion for all my discretion
and pride, to conceal from the company the agonies I felt at this
mark of indifference and disrespect. However, I obtained the victory
over myself, and pretended to laugh at his husband-like behaviour,
while the tears stood in my eyes and my heart swelled even to
bursting.

"We broke up about five, after having spent the most tedious evening
I had ever known; and this offended lover went to bed in a state
of sullen silence and disgust. Whatever desire I had to come to an
explanation, I thought myself so much aggrieved by his unreasonable
prejudice, that I could not prevail upon myself to demand a
conference, till after his first nap, when my pride giving way to
my tenderness, I clasped him in my arms, though he pretended to
discourage these advances of my love. I asked how he could be so
unjust as to take umbrage at my civility to a man whom he knew I
had refused for his sake; I chid him for his barbarous endeavours
to awake my jealousy, and used such irresistible arguments in my
own vindication, that he was convinced of my innocence, scaled my
acquittal with a kind embrace, and we mutually enjoyed the soft
transports of a fond reconciliation.

"Never was passion more eager, delicate, or unreserved, than that
which glowed within our breasts. Far from being cloyed with the
possession of each other, our raptures seemed to increase with the
term of our union. When we were separated, though but for a few
hours, by the necessary avocations of life, we were unhappy during
that brief separation, and met again like lovers, who knew no joy
but in one another's presence. How many delicious evenings did
we spend together, in our little apartment, after we had ordered
the candles to be taken away, that we might enjoy the agreeable
reflection of the moon in a fine summer's evening! Such a mild and
solemn scene naturally disposes the mind to peace and benevolence;
but when improved with conversation of the man one loves, it fills
the imagination with ideas of ineffable delight! For my own part,
I can safely say, my heart was so wholly engrossed by my husband,
that I never took pleasure in any diversion where he was not
personally concerned; nor was I ever guilty of one thought repugnant
to my duty and my love.

"In the autumn, we set out for the north, and were met on the road
by the duke and twenty gentlemen, who conducted us to H--n, where
we lived in all imaginable splendour. His grace, at that time,
maintained above a hundred servants, with a band of music, which
always performed at dinner, kept open table, and was visited by a
great deal of company. The economy of his house was superintended
by his eldest sister, a beautiful young lady of an amiable temper,
with whom I soon contracted an intimate friendship. She and the duke
used to rally me upon my fondness for Lord W--, who was a sort of
humourist, and apt to be in a pet, in which case he would leave
the company and go to bed by seven o'clock in the evening. On these
occasions, I always disappeared, giving up every consideration
to that of pleasing my husband, notwithstanding the ridicule
of his relations, who taxed me with having spoiled him with too
much indulgence. But how could I express too much tenderness and
condescension for a man, who doted upon me to such excess, that,
when business obliged him to leave me, he always snatched the first
opportunity to return, and often rode through darkness, storms,
and tempests to my arms?

"Having stayed about seven months in this place, I found myself
in a fair way of being a mother, and that I might be near my own
relations in such an interesting situation, I and my dear companion
departed from H--n, not without great reluctance; for I was fond
of the Scots in general, who treated me with great hospitality and
respect; and to this day, they paid me the compliment of saying,
I was one of the best wives in that country which is so justly
celebrated for good women.

"Lord W-- having attended me to my father's house, was obliged
to return to Scotland, to support his interest in being elected
member of Parliament; so that he took his leave of me, with a full
resolution of seeing me again before the time of my lying-in; and
all the comfort I enjoyed in his absence, was the perusal of his
letters, which I punctually received, together with those of his
sister, who, from time to time, favoured me with assurances of his
constancy and devotion. Indeed, these testimonials were necessary
to one of my disposition; for I was none of those who could be
contented with half a heart. I could not even spare one complacent
look to any other woman, but expected the undivided homage of his
love. Had I been disappointed in this expectation, I should, though
a wife, have rebelled or died.

"Meanwhile my parents treated me with great tenderness, intending that
Lord W-- should be settled in a house of his own, and accommodated
with my fortune, and his expectations from the queen were very
sanguine, when I was taken ill, and delivered of a dead child, an
event which affected me extremely. When I understood the extent of
my misfortune, my heart throbbed with such violence, that my breast
could scarce contain it; and my anxiety, being aggravated by the
absence of my lord, produced a dangerous fever, of which he was no
sooner apprised by letter, than he came post from Scotland; but,
before his arrival, I was supposed to be in a fair way.

"During this journey, he was tortured with all that terrible suspense
which prevails in the minds of those who are in danger of losing
that which is most dear to them; and, when he entered the house,
was so much overwhelmed with apprehension, that he durst not inquire
about the state of my health. As for my part, I never closed an eye
from the time on which I expected his return; and, when I heard his
voice, I threw open my curtains, and sat up in the bed to receive
him, though at the hazard of my life. He ran towards me with all
the eagerness of passion, and clasped me in his arms; he kneeled
by the bedside, and kissed my hand a thousand times, and wept
with transports of tenderness and joy. In short, this meeting was
so pathetic as to overcome my enfeebled constitution, and we were
parted by those who were wiser than ourselves, and saw that nothing
was so proper for us as a little repose.

"But how shall I relate the deplorable transition from envied
happiness to excess of misery which I now sustained! My month was
hardly up, when my dear husband was taken ill; perhaps the fatigue
of body, as well as mind, which he had undergone on my account,
occasioned a fatal ferment in his blood, and his health fell
a sacrifice to his love. Physicians were called from London, but
alas!  they brought no hopes of his recovery. By their advice,
he was removed to town, for the convenience of being punctually
attended.  Every moment was too precious to be thrown away; he
was therefore immediately put into the coach, though the day was
far spent; and I, though exceedingly weak, accompanied him in the
journey, which was performed by the light of flambeaus, and rendered
unspeakingly shocking by the dismal apprehension of losing him
every moment.

"At length, however, we arrived at our lodgings in Pall Mall, where
I lay by him on the floor, and attended the issue of his distemper
in all the agonies of horror and despair. In a little time his
malady settled upon his brain, and, in his delirium, he uttered
such dreadful exclamations, as were sufficient to pierce the most
savage heart. What effect then must they have had on mine, which
was fraught with every sentiment of the most melting affection!
It was not a common grief that took possession of my soul; I felt
all the aggravation of the most acute distress. I sometimes ran
down the street in a fit of distraction: I sent for the doctors
every minute: I wearied Heaven with my prayers; even now my heart
aches at the remembrance of what I suffered, and I cannot, without
trembling, proceed with the woeful story.

"After having lain insensible some days, he recovered the use
of speech, and called upon my name, which he had a thousand times
repeated while he was bereft of reason. All hopes of his life were
now relinquished, and I was led to his bedside to receive his last
adieus, being directed to summon all my fortitude, and suppress my
sorrow, that he might not be disturbed by my agitation. I collected
all my resolution to support me in this affecting scene. I saw my
dear lord in extremity. The beauties of his youth were all decayed;
yet his eyes, though languid, retained unspeakable sweetness and
expression. He felt his end approaching, put forth his hand, and,
with a look full of complacency and benevolence, uttered such
a tender tale--good Heaven! how had I deserved such accumulated
affliction, the bare remembrance of which now melts me into tears?
Human nature could not undergo my situation without suffering an
ecstasy of grief. I clasped him in my arms, and kissed him a thousand
times, with the most violent emotions of woe; but I was torn from
his embrace, and in a little time he was ravished for ever from my
view.

"On that fatal morning, which put a period to his life, I saw the
duchess of L-- approach my bed, and, from her appearance, concluded
that he was no more; yet I begged she would not confirm the unhappy
presage by announcing his death; and she accordingly preserved the
most emphatic silence. I got up, and trod softly over his head, as
if I had been afraid of interrupting his repose. Alas! he was no
longer sensible of such disturbance. I was seized with a stupefaction
of sorrow; I threw up the window and, looking around, thought the
sun shone with the most dismal aspect; everything was solitary,
cheerless, and replete with horror.

"In this condition I was, by the direction of my friend, conveyed
to her house, where my faculties were so overpowered by the load
of anguish which oppressed me, that I know not what passed during
the first days of my unhappy widowhood; this only I know, the kind
duchess treated me with all imaginable care and compassion, and
carried me to her country house, where I stayed some months; during
which, she endeavoured to comfort me with all the amusements she
could invent, and laid me under such obligations as shall never be
erased from my remembrance. Yet, notwithstanding all her care and
concern, I was, by my excess of grief, plunged into a languishing
distemper, for which my physicians advised me to drink the Bath
waters.

"In compliance with this prescription, I went thither towards the end
of summer, and found some benefit by adhering to their directions.
Though I seldom went abroad, except when I visited my sister-in-law,
who was there with the princess; and, upon these occasions, I never
failed to attract the notice of the company, who were struck with
the appearance of such a young creature in weeds.  Nor was I free
from the persecution of professed admirers; but, being dead to all
joy, I was deaf to the voice of adulation.

"About Christmas I repaired to my father's house, where my sorrows
were revived by every object that recalled the idea of my dear
lamented lord. But these melancholy reflections I was obliged
to bear, because I had no other home or habitation, being left an
unprovided widow, altogether dependent on the affection of my own
family. During this winter, divers overtures were made to my father
by people who demanded me in marriage; but my heart was not yet
sufficiently weaned from my former passion to admit the thoughts
of another master. Among those that presented their proposals was
a certain young nobleman, who, upon the first news of Lord W--'s
death, came post from Paris, in order to declare his passion. He
made his first appearance in a hired chariot-and-six, accompanied
by a big fat fellow, whom (as I afterwards learned) he had engaged
to sound his praises, with a promise of a thousand pounds, in lieu
of which he paid him forty. Whether it was with a view of screening
himself from the cold, or of making a comfortable medium in case of
being overturned, and falling under his weighty companion, I know
not; but, certain it is, the carriage was stuffed with hay, in such
a manner, that, when he arrived, the servants were at some pains in
rummaging and removing it, before they could come at their master,
or help him to alight. When he was lifted out of the chariot,
he exhibited a very ludicrous figure to the view. He was a thin,
meagre, shivering creature, of a low stature, with little black
eyes, a long nose, sallow complexion, and pitted with the smallpox;
dressed in a coat of light brown frieze, lined with pink-coloured
shag, a monstrous solitaire and bag, and, if I remember right,
a pair of huge jack-boots. In a word, his whole appearance was so
little calculated for inspiring love, that I had, on the strength
of seeing him once before at Oxford, set him down as the last man
on earth whom I would choose to wed; and I will venture to affirm,
that he was in every particular the reverse of my late husband.

"As my father was not at home, he stayed but one evening, and left
his errand with my mother, to whom he was as disagreeable as to
myself; so that his proposal was absolutely rejected, and I heard
no more of him during the space of three whole months, at the
expiration of which I went to town, where this mortifying figure
presented itself again, and renewed his suit, offering such
advantageous terms of settlement, that my father began to relish
the match, and warmly recommended it to my consideration.

"Lord W--'s relations advised me to embrace the opportunity of making
myself independent. All my acquaintance plied me with arguments
to the same purpose. I was uneasy at home, and indifferent to
all mankind. I weighed the motives with the objections, and with
reluctance yielded to the importunity of my friends. In consequence
of this determination, the little gentleman was permitted to visit
me; and the manner of his address did not alter the opinion I had
conceived of his character and understanding. I was even shocked
at the prospect of marrying a man whom I could not love; and, in
order to disburden my own conscience, took an opportunity of telling
him, one evening, as we sat opposite to each other, that it was
not in my power to command my affection, and therefore he could
not expect the possession of my heart, Lord W--'s indulgence having
spoiled me for a wife; nevertheless, I would endeavour to contract
a friendship for him, which would entirely depend upon his own
behaviour.

"To this declaration he replied, to my great surprise, that he did
not desire me to love him; my friendship was sufficient; and next
day repeated this strange instance of moderation in a letter, which
I communicated to my sister, who laughed heartily at the contents,
and persuaded me, that since I could love no man, he was the
properest person to be my husband.

"Accordingly, the wedding clothes and equipage being prepared, the
day--the fatal day--was fixed; on the morning of which I went to
the house of my brother-in-law, duke H--, who loved me tenderly,
and took my leave of the family, a family which I shall always
remember with love, honour, and esteem. His grace received me in
the most affectionate manner, saying at parting, "Lady W--, if he
does not use you well, I will take you back again."

"The bridegroom and I met at Ox-- Chapel, where the ceremony
was performed by the bishop of W--, in presence of his lordship's
mother, my father, and another lady. The nuptial knot being tied,
we set out for my father's house in the  country, and proceeded
full twenty miles on our journey before my lord opened his mouth,
my thoughts having been all that time employed on something quite
foreign to my present situation; for I was then but a giddy girl
of eighteen. At length my father broke silence, and clapping his
lordship on the shoulder, told him he was but a dull bridegroom; upon
which my lord gave him to understand that he was out of spirits.
This dejection continued all the day, notwithstanding the refreshment
of a plentiful dinner which he ate upon the road; and in the evening
we arrived at the place of our destination, where we were kindly
received by my mother, though she had no liking to the match; and,
after supper, we retired to our apartment.

"It was here that I had occasion to perceive the most disagreeable
contrast between my present helpmate and my former lord. Instead
of flying to my arms with all the eagerness of love and rapture,
this manly representative sat moping in a corner, like a criminal
on execution day, and owned he was ashamed to bed with a woman
whose hand he had scarce ever touched.

"I could not help being affected with this pusillanimous behaviour.
I remembered Lord W--, while I surveyed the object before me, and
made such a comparison as filled me with horror and disgust: nay,
to such a degree did my aversion to this phantom prevail, that I
began to sweat with anguish at the thought of being subjected to
his pleasure; and when, after a long hesitation, he ventured to
approach me, I trembled as if I had been exposed to the embraces
of a rattlesnake. Nor did the efforts of his love diminish this
antipathy. His attempts were like the pawings of an imp, sent from
hell to seize and torment some guilty wretch, such as are exhibited
in some dramatic performance, which I have never seen acted without
remembering my wedding-night. By such shadowy, unsubstantial,
vexatious behaviour was I tantalized, and robbed of my repose; and
early next morning I got up, with a most sovereign contempt for my
bedfellow, who indulged himself in bed till eleven.

"Having passed a few days in this place, I went home with him to
his house at Twickenham, and soon after we were presented at court,
when the queen was pleased to say to my lord's mother, she did not
doubt that we should be a happy couple, for I had been a good wife
to my former husband.

"Whatever deficiencies I had to complain of in my new spouse, he
was not wanting in point of liberality. I was presented with a very
fine chariot, studded with silver nails, and such a profusion of
jewels as furnished a joke to some of my acquaintance, who observed,
that I was formerly queen of hearts, but now metamorphosed into
the queen of diamonds. I now also had an opportunity, which I did
not let slip, of paying Lord W--'s debts from my privy purse; and on
that score received the thanks of his elder brother, who, though
he had undertaken to discharge them, delayed the execution of
his purpose longer than I thought they should remain unpaid. This
uncommon splendour attracted the eyes and envy of my competitors,
who were the more implacable in their resentments, because,
notwithstanding my marriage, I was as much as ever followed by the
men of gallantry and pleasure, among whom it is a constant maxim,
that a woman never withholds her affections from her husband,
without an intention to bestow them somewhere else. I never appeared
without a train of admirers, and my house in the country was always
crowded with gay young men of quality.

"Among those who cultivated my good graces with the greatest skill
and assiduity, were the Earl C-- and Mr. S---, brother to Lord
F--. The former of whom, in the course of his addresses, treated
me with an entertainment of surprising magnificence, disposed into
a dinner, supper, and ball, to which I, at his desire, invited
eleven ladies, whom he paired with the like number of his own sex;
so that the whole company amounted to twenty-four. We were regaled
with a most elegant dinner, in an apartment which was altogether
superb, and served by gentlemen only, no livery servant being
permitted to come within the door. In the afternoon we embarked in
two splendid barges, being attended by a band of music in a third;
and enjoyed a delightful evening upon the river till the twilight,
when we returned and began the ball, which was conducted with such
order and taste, that mirth and good-humour prevailed. No dissatisfaction
appeared, except in the countenance of one old maid, since married
to a son of the duke of --, who though she would not refuse to
partake of such an agreeable entertainment, was displeased that
I should have the honour of inviting her. O baleful Envy! thou
self-tormenting fiend! how dost thou predominate in all assemblies,
from the grand gala of a court, to the meeting of simple peasants
at their harvest-home! Nor is the prevalence of this sordid passion
to be wondered at, if we consider the weakness, pride, and vanity
of our sex. The presence of one favourite man shall poison the
enjoyment of a whole company, and produce the most rancorous enmity
betwixt the closest friends.

"I danced with the master of the ball, who employed all the
artillery of his eloquence in making love; yet I did not listen to
his addresses, for he was not to my taste, though he possessed an
agreeable person, and a good acquired understanding; but he was
utterly ignorant of that gentle prevailing art which I afterwards
experienced in Mr. S---, and which was the only method he could
have successfully practised in seducing a young woman like me, born
with sentiments of honour, and trained up in the paths of religion
and virtue. This young gentleman was indeed absolutely master of
those insinuating qualifications which few women of passion and
sensibility can resist; and had a person every way adapted for
profiting by these insidious talents. He was well acquainted with
the human heart, conscious of his own power and capacity, and
exercised these endowments with unwearied perseverance. He was
tall and thin, of a shape and size perfectly agreeable to my taste,
with large blue eloquent eyes, good teeth, and a long head turned
to gallantry. His behaviour was the standard of politeness, and all
his advances were conducted with the most profound respect; which
is the most effectual expedient a man can use against us, if he
can find means to persuade us that it proceeds from the excess and
delicacy of his passion. It is no other than a silent compliment,
by which our accomplishments are continually flattered. and pleases
in proportion to the supposed understanding of him who pays it.

"By these arts and advantages this consummate politician in love
began by degrees to sap the foundation of my conjugal faith: he
stole imperceptibly into my affection, and by dint of opportunity,
which he well knew how to improve, triumphed at last over all his
rivals.

"Nor was he the only person that disputed my heart with Earl C--.
That nobleman was also rivalled by Lord C. H--, a Scotchman, who
had been an intimate and relation of my former husband. Him I would
have preferred to most of his competitors, and actually coquetted
with him for some time: but the amour was interrupted by his going
to Ireland; upon which occasion, understanding that he was but
indifferently provided with money, I made him a present of a gold
snuff-box, in which was enclosed a bank-note; a trifling mark
of my esteem, which he afterwards justified by the most grateful,
friendly, and genteel behaviour; and as we corresponded by letters,
I frankly told him, that Mr. S--- had stepped in, and won the palm
from all the rest of my admirers.

"This new favourite's mother and sister, who lived in the neighbourhood,
were my constant companions; and, in consequence of this intimacy,
he never let a day pass without paying his respects to me in person;
nay, so ingenious was he in contriving the means of promoting his
suit, that whether I rode or walked, went abroad or stayed at home,
he was always of course one of the party; so that his design seemed
to engross his whole vigilance and attention. Thus he studied my
disposition, and established himself in my good opinion at the same
time. He found my heart was susceptible of every tender impression,
and saw that I was not free from the vanity of youth; he had already
acquired my friendship and esteem, from which he knew there was
a short and easy transition to love. By his penetration choosing
proper seasons for the theme, he urged it with such pathetic vows
and artful adulation, as well might captivate a young woman of
my complexion and experience, and circumstanced as I was, with a
husband whom I had such reason to despise.

"Though he thus made an insensible progress in my heart, he did
not find my virtue an easy conquest; and I myself was ignorant of
the advantage he had gained with regard to my inclinations, until
I was convinced of his success by an alarm of jealousy which I one
day felt, at seeing him engaged in conversation with another lady.
I forthwith recognized this symptom of love, with which I had
been formerly acquainted, and trembled at the discovery of my own
weakness. I underwent a strange agitation and mixture of contrary
sensations. I was pleased with the passion, yet ashamed of avowing
it even to my own mind. The rights of a husband, though mine was
but a nominal one, occurred to my reflection, and virtue, modesty,
and honour, forbade me to cherish the guilty flame.

"When I encouraged these laudable scruples, and resolved to
sacrifice my love to duty and reputation, my lord was almost every
day employed in riding post to my father, with complaints of my
conduct, which was hitherto irreproachable; though the greatest
grievance which he pretended to have suffered was my refusing to
comply with his desire, when he entreated me to lie, a whole hour
every morning, with my neck uncovered, that, by gazing, he might
quiet the perturbation of his spirits. From this request you may
judge of the man, as well as of the regard I must entertain for
his character and disposition.

"During the whole summer I was besieged by my artful undoer, and
in the autumn set out with my lord for Bath, where, by reason of
the intimacy that subsisted between our families, we lived in the
same house with my lover and his sister, who, with another agreeable
young lady, accompanied us in this expedition. By this time Mr.
S-- had extorted from me a confession of a mutual flame, though I
assured him that it should never induce me to give up the valuable
possession of an unspotted character, and a conscience void of offence.
I offered him all the enjoyment he could reap from an unreserved
intercourse of souls, abstracted from any sensual consideration.
He eagerly embraced the platonic proposal, because he had sagacity
enough to foresee the issue of such chimerical contracts, and
knew me too well to think he could accomplish his purpose without
seeming to acquiesce in my own terms, and cultivating my tenderness
under the specious pretext.

"In consequence of this agreement, we took all opportunities of
seeing each other in private; and these interviews were spent in
mutual protestations of disinterested love. This correspondence,
though dangerous, was, on my side, equally innocent and endearing;
and many happy hours we passed, before my sentiments were discovered.
At length my lover was taken ill, and then my passion burst out
beyond the power of concealment; my grief and anxiety became so
conspicuous in my countenance, and my behaviour was so indiscreet,
that everybody in the house perceived the situation of my thoughts,
and blamed my conduct accordingly.

"Certain it is, I was extremely imprudent, though intentionally
innocent. I have lain whole nights by my lord, who teased and
tormented me for that which neither I could give nor he could take,
and ruminated on the fatal consequences of this unhappy flame, until
I was worked into a fever of disquiet. I saw there was no safety
but in flight, and often determined to banish myself for ever from
the sight of this dangerous intruder. But my resolution always failed
at the approach of day, and my desire of seeing him as constantly
recurred. So far was I from persisting in such commendable
determinations, that, on the eve of our departure from Bath, I felt
the keenest pangs of sorrow at our approaching separation; and,
as we could not enjoy our private interviews at my house in town,
I promised to visit him at his own apartments, after he had sworn
by all that's sacred, that he would take no sinister advantage
of my condescension, by presuming upon the opportunities I should
give.

"He kept his word, for he saw I trusted to it with fear and
trembling, and perceived that my apprehension was not affected, but
the natural concern of a young creature, distracted between love
and duty, whom, had he alarmed, he would never had seen within his
doors again. Instead of pressing me with solicitations in favour
of his passion, he was more than ever respectful and complaisant;
so that I found myself disengaged of all restraint, conducted the
conversation, shortened and repeated my visits at my own pleasure,
till at last I became so accustomed to this communication, that
his house was as familiar to me as my own.

"Having in this manner secured himself in my confidence, he resumed
the favourite topic of love, and, warming my imagination by gradual
advances on the subject, my heart began to pant; when he saw me
thus moved, he snatched the favourable occasion to practise all his
eloquence and art. I could not resist his energy nor even fly from
the temptation that assailed me, until he had obtained a promise
that he should, at our next meeting, reap the fruits of his tedious
expectation. Upon this condition, I was permitted to retire, and
blessed heaven for my escape, fully determined to continue in the
path of virtue I had hitherto trod, and stifle the criminal flame
by which my peace and reputation were endangered. But his idea,
which reigned in my heart without control, soon baffled all these
prudent suggestions.

"I saw him again; and he reminded me of my promise, which I endeavoured
to evade with affected pleasantry, upon which he manifested the
utmost displeasure and chagrin, shedding some crocodile tears, and
upbraided me with levity and indifference. He observed, that he
had solicited my favour for ten long months without intermission,
and imagined I had held out so long on virtuous motives only; but
now he could plainly perceive that his want of success had been owing
to my want of affection, and that all my professions were insincere.
In a word, he persuaded me that his remonstrances were just and
reasonable. I could not see the affliction of a man I loved, when
I knew it was in my power to remove it; and, rather than forfeit
his opinion of my sincerity and love, I consented to his wish.
My heart now flutters at the remembrance of the dear though fatal
indiscretion; yet I reflect without remorse, and even remember it
with pleasure.

"If I could not avoid the censure of the world, I was resolved to
bear it without repining; and sure the guilt, if there was any in
my conduct, was but venial; for I considered myself as a person
absolved of all matrimonial ties, by the insignificance of Lord
--, who, though a nominal husband, was in fact a mere nonentity.
I therefore contracted a new engagement with my lover, to which I
resolved to adhere with the most scrupulous fidelity, without the
least intention of injuring my lord or his relations; for, had our
mutual passion produced any visible effects, I would immediately
have renounced and abandoned my husband for ever, that the fruit
of my love for Mr. S-- might not have inherited, to the detriment
of the right heir. This was my determination, which I thought just,
if not prudent; and for which I have incurred the imputation of
folly, in the opinion of this wise and honest generation, by whose
example and advice I have, since that time, been a little reformed
in point of prudentials, though I still retain a strong tendency
to return to my primitive way of thinking.

"When I quitted Mr. S--, after the sacrifice I had made, and
returned to my own bed, it may, perhaps, be supposed that I slept
but little. True: I was kept awake by the joyful impatience of
revisiting my lover. Indeed I neglected no opportunity of flying
to his arms. When Lord -- was in the country, we enjoyed each
other's company without interruption; but when he resided in town,
our correspondence was limited to stolen interviews, which were
unspeakably delicious, as genuine love presided at the entertainment.

"Such was my happiness in the course of this tender communication,
that to this day I remember it with pleasure, though it has cost me
dear in the sequel, and was at that time enjoyed at a considerable
expense; for I devoted myself so entirely to my lover, who was
desirous of engrossing my time and thoughts, that my acquaintance,
which was very numerous, justly accused me of neglect, and of
consequence cooled in their friendships; but I was 'all for love,
or the world well lost;' and were the same opportunity to offer,
I would act the same conduct over again.

"Some there are who possibly may wonder how I could love twice
with such violence of affection. But all such observers must be
unacquainted with the human heart. Mine was naturally adapted for
the tender passions, and had been so fortunate, so cherished in
its first impressions, that it felt with joy the same sensations
revive, when influenced by the same engaging qualifications. Certain
it is, I loved the second time as well as the first, and better
was impossible. I gave up my all for both: fortune and my father's
favour for the one; reputation, friends, and fortune for the other.
Yet, notwithstanding this intimate connection, I did not relinquish
the world all at once; on the contrary, I still appeared at court,
and attracted the notice and approbation of my royal patroness; I
danced with the P-- of W--; a circumstance which so nearly affected
Mr. S--, who was present, that, in order to manifest his resentment,
he chose the ugliest woman in the ball for his partner; and I no
sooner perceived his uneasiness, than I gave over, with a view of
appeasing his displeasure.

"Without repeating particular circumstances, let it suffice to say,
our mutual passion was a perfect copy of that which had subsisted
between me and my dear Lord W--. It was jealous, melting and delicate,
and chequered with little accident, which serve to animate and
maintain the flame, in its first ardency of rapture. When my lover
was sick, I attended and nursed him with indefatigable tenderness
and care; and during an indisposition, which I caught in the
performance of this agreeable office, he discharged the obligation
with all the warmth of sympathy and love.

"It was, however, judged necessary by the physicians, that
I should use the Bath waters for the recovery of my health; and I
set out for that place, glad of a pretence to be absent from Lord
--, with whom I lived on very unhappy terms. He had, about nine
months after our marriage, desired that we might sleep in separate
beds, and gave a very whimsical reason for this proposal. He said,
the immensity of his love deprived him of the power of gratification,
and that some commerce with an object, to which his heart was not
attached, might, by diminishing the transports of his spirits,
recompose his nerves, and enable him to enjoy the fruits of his
good fortune.

"You may be sure I made no objection to this plan, which was
immediately put into execution. He made his addresses to a nymph
of Drury Lane, whose name, as he told me, was Mrs. Rock. She made
shift to extract some money from her patient; but his infirmity was
beyond the power of her art, though she made some mischief between
us; and I communicated my suspicion to the duke of H--, who intended
to have expostulated with her upon the subject; but she got intimation
of his design, and saved him the trouble by a precipitate retreat.

"After my return from Bath, where Mr. S-- and I had lived happily,
until we were interrupted by the arrival of my husband, his lordship
expressed an inclination to be my bedfellow again. In this particular
I desired to be excused. I would not be the first to propose the
separation, which, though usual in other countries, is contrary to
the custom of England, being unwilling to furnish the least handle
for censure, as my character was still unblemished; yet, when
the proposal came from him, I thought myself entitled to refuse a
reunion; to which I accordingly objected.

"This opposition produced a quarrel, which rose to a state of
perpetual animosity; so that we began to talk of parting. My lord
relished the expedient, agreeing to add three hundred pounds a year
to my pin-money, which, by the bye, was never paid; and I renounced
all state and grandeur, to live in a small house that I hired
at Carshalton, where I passed my time for two months, in the most
agreeable retirement, with my dear lover. At length I was disturbed
by the intrusion of my lord, who molested me with visits and
solicitations to return, pretending that he had changed his mind,
and insisting upon my compliance with his desire.

"I exhausted my invention in endeavours to evade his request; but
he persecuted me without ceasing. So that I was fain to capitulate,
on condition that he should immediately set out for France; and
that he should not presume to approach my bed till our arrival at
Calais. We accordingly departed for that kingdom; and, far from
infringing the least article of our treaty, his lordship did not
insist upon his privilege before we reached the capital of France.

"Meanwhile, I began to feel the effect of my passion in a very
interesting manner, and communicated my discovery to the dear author
of it, who would not leave me in such an affecting situation, but
took the first opportunity of following us to France.

"In our road to Paris, we stopped to visit Chantilly, a magnificent
chateau belonging to the prince of Conde, and there met by accident
with some English noblemen, to whom I was known. The prince and his
sisters invited me very politely into the gallery where they sat.
They complimented me on my person, and seemed to admire my dress,
which was altogether new to them, being a blue English riding-habit,
trimmed with gold, and a hat with a feather. They were particularly
well pleased with my hair which hung down to my waist, and pressed
me to stay a fortnight at their house; an invitation which I was
very much mortified at being obliged to refuse, because my lord
did not understand the French language. I was enchanted with the
place and the company, the women being amiable, and the men polite;
nor were they strangers to my name and story; for Mr. S-- calling
at the same place a few days after, they rallied him on my account.

"When we arrived at Paris, the first thing I did was to metamorphose
myself into a Frenchwoman. I cut off my hair, hid a very good
complexion of my own with rouge, reconciled myself to powder, which I
had never used before, put on a robe with a large hoop, and went
to the Tuileries, full of spirits and joy; for, at that time,
everything conspired to make me happy. I had health, youth, and
beauty, love, vanity, and affluence, and found myself surrounded
with diversions which were gay, new, and agreeable. My appearance
drew upon me the eyes of the whole company, who considered me a
stranger, but not a foreigner, so completely was I equipped in the
fashion of the French; and when they understood who I was, they
applauded my person with the most lavish encomiums, according to
their known politeness.

"After having made a circuit round all the public places of
entertainment in Paris, I was introduced into the company by an
English family, residing in that city; and, among others, became
acquainted with a French lady, whose charms were remarkably attractive.
The duke of K-- was her admirer; but she lived in reputation with
her mother, and an agreeable sister, whose lover was the prince of
C--, for almost every lady in France has her aimant.

"With this charming woman, whose name was Madame de la T--, I often
made parties of pleasure. The duke, Mr. S--, she, and I, used to
meet in the Bois de Boulogne, which is a pleasant wood, at a small
distance from Paris, whither the company repairs in the summer season
for the benefit of the air; and, after having amused ourselves among
the groves, embarked in his grace's equipage, which was extremely
elegant, being a calash drawn by six fine long-tailed greys, adorned
with ribbons, in the French taste; and thus we were conducted to
a little enchanted, or at least enchanting, palace, possessed by
the duke, at one end of the town. The lower apartment, appropriated
to me, was furnished with yellow and silver, the bed surrounded with
looking-glasses, and the door opened into the garden, laid out in
a cradle walk, and intervening parterres of roses and other flowers.
Above-stairs, my female companion lodged in a chamber furnished
with chintz. We supped all together in the saloon, which, though
small, was perfectly elegant. The company was always good-humoured,
the conversation sprightly and joyous, and the scene, though often
repeated, still delightful and entertaining.

"At other times, Mr. S-- and I used to pass our evenings at
the palace of the prince of C--, which his highness lent us for
our accommodation. The apartments opened into the gardens of the
Luxembourg, and were, in point of magnificence, suitable to the
owner. Thither I used to repair in a flaming equipage, on pretence
of visiting, and spent the best part of the night with him who was
dearer to me than all the princes in the world.

"While I was happily engaged in these ravishing parties, my little
lord was employed in his efforts to recover his health by restoratives,
and I know not what; for he still lamented the enfeebling effects
of his passion, and complained that he loved me more like an angel
than a woman, though he strove to govern his affections according
to the doctrines of the Christian religion, as he regulated his
life by the maxims of Charles the Twelfth of Sweden. The meaning
of this declaration I could never learn; and, indeed, I have been
often tempted to believe he had no meaning at all.

"Be that as it will, I found my size visibly increasing, and my
situation extremely uneasy, on account of the perpetual wrangling
which prevailed between us, in consequence of his desiring to sleep
with me again, after we had parted beds for the second time; and,
that I might no longer be exposed to such disagreeable persecutions,
I resolved to leave him, though at the hazard of my life.

"Thus determined, I went to the British ambassador, in a hackney-coach;
and, in order to disguise my youth, which might have prepossessed
him against my judgment, muffled myself up in a black hood, which,
as he said, instead of lending an air of gravity to my countenance,
added a wildness to my looks, which was far from being disagreeable.
He had been a gallant man in his youth, and even then, though well
stricken in years, was not insensible to the power of beauty. This
disposition, perhaps, rendered him more favourable to my cause,
though he first advised me to return to my husband; but finding me
obstinate, he undertook to serve me in my own way, and procured a
protection from the French king, by virtue of which I could live
at Paris unmolested by my lord. Nevertheless, he advised me, if I
was determined to leave him, to make the best of my way to England
and sue for a divorce. I relished his opinion, and concealed myself
about three days in Paris, during which I borrowed some linen;
for, as it was impossible to convey anything out of my own house
without suspicion, I had neither clothes for my accommodation, nor
a servant to wait on me.

"In this solitary condition, I took the road to Flanders, after
I had put my lord upon a wrong scent, by writing a letter to him,
dated at Calais, and travelled through an unknown country, without
any other attendant than the postillion, being subjected to this
inconvenience by the laws of France, which are so severe in some
particulars, that, if any person had been apprehended with me, he
would have suffered death for going off with a man's wife; though
any man might go to bed with that same woman, without fear of
incurring any legal punishment.

"I proceeded night and day without intermission, that I might
the sooner reach Flanders, where I knew I should be safe; and as
the nights were excessively cold, I was fain to wrap myself up in
flannel, which I bought for the purpose, as I had no clothes to keep
me warm, and travelled in an open chaise. While we passed through
dreary woods, quite remote from the habitations of men, I was not
without apprehension of being stripped and murdered by the postillion;
and, in all probability, owed my safety to the indigence of my
appearance, which might also protect me in two miserable places,
where I was obliged to lie, before I got out of the territories of
France; for, as I could not reach the great towns where I intended
to lodge, I was under the necessity of putting up at little wretched
hovels, where no provision was to be had, but sour brown bread, and
sourer cheese; and everything seemed to denote the dens of despair
and assassination.

"I made shift, however, to subsist on this fare, uncomfortable as
it was, confiding on the meanness of my equipage for the security
of my person; and at length arriving at Brussels, fixed my quarters
in the Hotel de Flandre (so well known to the English since), where
I thought myself extremely happy in the accomplishment of my flight.

"I had not been two full days in this place, when I was blessed
with the sight of my lover, who followed me on the wings of love,
in pursuance of the plan we had projected before my departure
from Paris. Here we concerted measures for proceeding to England.
I hired a tall fine Liegeoise for my maid, and setting out for
Ostend, we embarked in a vessel, in which Mr. S-- had bespoke our
passage. Our voyage was short and prosperous, and our time most
agreeably spent in the company of my dear partner, who was a most
engaging man in all respects, as I dare say my Lady C-- has since
found him.

"I assumed a fictitious name, took private lodgings in Poland-street,
retained lawyers, and commenced a suit for separation against my
lord. I communicated the reasons of my elopement to my father, who
was shocked and surprised at my conduct, which he condemned with
expressions of sorrow and resentment. But the step was taken; nor
did I repent of what I had done, except on his account.

"In the morning after my arrival at London, I waited upon the lord
chief justice, to whom I complained of the usage I had received
from my lord, whose temper was teasing, tiresome, and intolerably
capricious. Indeed, his behaviour was a strange compound of madness
and folly, seasoned with a small proportion of sense. No wonder
then, that I, who am hot and hasty, should be wretched, under the
persecution of such a perverse humourist, who used to terrify me,
and scold at me the whole night without intermission, and shake my
pillow from time to time, that I might not sleep, while he tormented
me with his disagreeable expostulations. I have been often frightened
almost out of my senses, at seeing him convulsed with the most
unreasonable passion; and chagrined to the highest degree of disgust,
to find, by repeated observation, his disposition so preposterous,
that his satisfaction and displeasure never depended upon the cause
he had to be satisfied or disobliged; but, on the contrary, when
he had most reason to be pleased, he was always most discontented,
and very often in good-humour when he had reason enough for vexation.

"While I lived in Poland-street, I was engaged with lawyers, and
so often visited by my father, that I could not dedicate my whole
time as usual to my lover; nor was it convenient that he should be
seen in my company: he therefore took a small house at Camberwell,
whither I went as often as I had an opportunity; and maintained the
correspondence with such eagerness and industry, that, although I
was six months gone with child, I have often, by myself, set out
for his habitation, in a hackney-coach, at eleven o'clock at night,
and returned by six in the morning, that I might be in my own bed
when my father came to see me; for I concealed my amour, as well
as the effects of it, from his knowledge, and frequently took water
from the bridge, that my motions might not be discovered. Nothing
but the most passionate love could have supported my spirits under
such vicissitudes of fatigue, or enabled my admirer to spend whole
days by himself in such a solitary retirement.

"By this time, my lord was arrived in England, and employed in
discovering the place of my retreat; so that I lived in continual
alarm, and provided myself with a speaking-trumpet, which stood
by my bedside, to be used in calling for assistance, in case my
pursuer should make an attack upon my lodgings.

"This situation being extremely uncomfortable, I had no sooner
begun my process against him, than I put myself entirely under the
protection of Mr. S--, who conducted me to the house of a friend of
his who lived in the country, where I was secure from the attempts
of my husband. The world had now given me up, and I had renounced
the world with the most perfect resignation. I weighed in my breast
what I should lose in point of character, with what I suffered
in my peace at home, and found, that my reputation was not to
be preserved, except at the expense of my quiet, for his lordship
was not disposed to make me easy, had I been ever so discreet. I
therefore determined to give up a few ceremonial visits, and empty
professions, for the more substantial enjoyments of life.

"We passed our time very agreeably in various amusements with
this friend of Mr. S--, until the term of my reckoning was almost
expired, then returned to London, and took lodgings in Southampton-street,
where I began to make the preparations for the approaching occasion.
Here I proposed to live with the utmost circumspection. I disguised
my name, saw nobody but my lawyer and lover, and never approached
the window lest I should be discovered by accident.  Notwithstanding
these precautions, my French maid, whom I had sent for some of my
clothes, was dogged in her return, and next morning my lord took
my lodgings by storm. Had he given the assault in his person only,
I make no doubt but he would have suffered a repulse from the
opposition of the Liegeoise, who made all the resistance in her
power; but was obliged to give way to superior numbers. I was at
that time abed, and hearing an unusual noise below, rang my bell,
in order to know the cause of such disturbance. I drew my curtain
at the same time, and who should I see entering my chamber but his
lordship, attended by a constable, and the footman who had discovered
my retreat!

"Such an unexpected visit could not fail to affect me with surprise
and consternation. However, I summoned all my fortitude to my aid,
and perceiving the fellows were about to open my window-shutters,
desired their principal to order them down-stairs. He readily complied
with my request, and sitting down by my bedside, told me with an
air of triumph, that he had found me at last; and I frankly owned,
that I was heartily sorry for his success. Instead of upbraiding
me with my escape, he proceeded to entertain me with all the news
in town, and gave me a minute detail of everything that happened
to him since our parting; among other articles of intelligence,
giving me to understand, that he had challenged Mr. S--, who refused
to fight him, and was in disgrace with the prince of W-- on that
account.

"But here his lordship did not strictly adhere to the naked truth.
He had indeed, before our departure from the country, gone to my
lover, and insisted upon having satisfaction in Hyde Park, two days
from the date of his demand, and at three o'clock in the afternoon;
S--, believing him in earnest, accepted the invitation; though he
observed, that these affairs could not be discussed too soon, and
wished the time of meeting might be an earlier hour. But his lordship
did not choose to alter the circumstances of his first proposal;
and, when he went away, said he should expect him at the appointed
place and time, if it did not rain.

"His antagonist gave me an account of the conversation, when
I assured him the whole business would end in smoke. Accordingly,
my lord sent him a letter on Monday, desiring that the assignation
might be deferred till Thursday, that he might have time to settle
his affairs, and pay S-- a hundred pounds, which he had formerly
borrowed of him. When Thursday came, he was favoured with another
epistle, importing that the challenger had changed his mind, and
would seek satisfaction at law. Thus ended that heroic exploit,
which his lordship now boasted of with such arrogant misrepresentation.

"While he thus regaled me with these interesting particulars, I
was contriving a scheme to frustrate the discovery he had made; so
that I did not contradict his assertions, but told him, that, if
he would go down-stairs, I would rise and come to breakfast. He
consented to this proposal with great cheerfulness; and I own I
was not a little surprised to find him, at this first interview,
in as good a humour as if nothing had happened to interrupt the
felicity of our matrimonial union.

"It cost me some invention to conceal my condition from his notice,
being now within a week of the expected crisis. But I knew I had to
do with a man of no great penetration, and succeeded in my attempt
accordingly. We breakfasted with great harmony, and I invited him
to dinner, after having prevailed upon him to send away his myrmidons,
whom, nevertheless, he ordered to return at eleven o'clock at night.
We conversed together with great gaiety and mirth. When I rallied
him for visiting me in such a dishabille, he stood on tiptoe to
view himself in the glass; and, owning I was in the right, said
he would go and dress himself before dinner. He accordingly went
away, charging my maid to give him entrance at his return; and he
was no sooner gone than I wrote to Mr. S--, giving him an account
of what had happened. Then, without having determined on any certain
plan, I huddled on my clothes, muffled myself up, and calling a
chair, went to the next tavern, where I stayed no longer than was
sufficient to change my vehicle; and, to the astonishment of the
drawers, who could not conceive the meaning of my perturbation,
proceeded to a shop in the neighbourhood, where I dismissed my
second chair, and procured a hackney-coach, in which I repaired
to the lodgings of my lawyer, whom I could trust. Having made him
acquainted with the circumstances of my distress, and consulted
him about a proper place of retreat, after some recollection, he
directed me to a little house in a court, to which, by the assistance
of my lover, my woman and clothes were safely conveyed that same
evening.

"My lord, however, came to dinner, according to invitation, and
did not seem at all alarmed when my maid told him I was gone, but
stepped to my lawyer to know if he thought I should return. Upon
his answering in the affirmative, and advising his lordship to go
back in the meantime, and eat the dinner I had provided, he very
deliberately took his advice, made a very hearty meal, drank his
bottle of wine, and, as I did not return according to his expectation,
withdrew in order to consult his associates. This motion of his
furnished my woman with an opportunity of making her retreat; and,
when he returned at night, the coast was clear, and he found nobody
in the house, but a porter, who had been left to take care of the
furniture. He was so enraged at this disappointment, that he made
a furious noise, which raised the whole neighbourhood, reinforced
his crew with the authority of a justice of the peace, tarried in
the street till three o'clock in the morning, discharged a lodging
he had hired at a barber's shop opposite to the house from which I
had escaped, and retired with the comfortable reflection of having
done everything which a man could do to retrieve me.

"The hurry of spirits and surprise I had undergone in effecting
this retreat, produced such a disorder in my constitution, that I
began to fear I should be delivered before I could be provided with
the necessaries for the occasion. I signified my apprehension to
Mr. S--, who, with infinite care and concern, endeavoured to find
a more convenient place; and, after all his inquiries, was obliged
to fix upon a paltry apartment in the city, though his tenderness
was extremely shocked at the necessity of choosing it. However, there
was no remedy, nor time to be lost, To this miserable habitation
I was carried in a hackney-coach; and, though extremely ill, bore
my fate with spirit and resignation, in testimony of my sincere
and indelible attachment to my lover, for whose case and pleasure,
I could have suffered every inconvenience, and even sacrificed my
life.

"Immediately after I had taken possession of my wretched apartment,
I was constrained by my indisposition to go to bed, and send
for necessary help; and in a few hours a living pledge of my love
and indiscretion saw the light, though the terrors and fatigue I
had undergone had affected this little innocent so severely, that
it scarce discovered any visible signs of life. My grief at this
misfortune was inexpressible. I forthwith despatched a message to
the dear, the anxious father, who flew to my arms, and shared my
sorrow, with all the gentleness of love and parental fondness; yet
our fears were, for that time, happily disappointed by the recovery
of our infant daughter, who was committed to the charge of a nurse
in the neighbourhood; so that I could every day be satisfied in
my inquiries about her health. Thus I continued a whole fortnight
in a state of happiness and tranquility, being blessed with
the conversation and tender offices of my admirer, whose love and
attention I wholly engrossed. In a word, he gave up all business
and amusement, and concentrated all his care and assiduity in
ministering to my ease and satisfaction: and sure I had no cause
to regret what I had suffered on his account.

"But this my agreeable situation was one day disturbed by a most
alarming accident, by which my life was drawn into imminent danger.
The room under my bed-chamber took fire: I immediately smelt it, and
saw the people about me in the utmost perplexity and consternation,
though they would not own the true cause of their confusion, lest
my health should suffer in the fright. Nevertheless, I was so calm
in my inquiries, that they ventured to tell me my suspicion was
but too just; upon which I gave such directions as I thought would
secure me from catching cold, in case there should be a necessity
for removing me; but the fire being happily extinguished, I escaped
that ceremony, which might have cost me my life. Indeed, it was
surprising that the agitation of my spirits did not produce some
fatal effect upon my constitution; and I looked upon my deliverance
as the protection of a particular providence.

"Though I escaped the hazard of a sudden removal, I found it was
high time to change my lodgings, because the neighbours rushing
into the house, upon the alarm of fire, had discovered my situation,
though they were ignorant of my name; and I did not think myself
safe in being the subject of their conjectures. Mr. S--, therefore,
procured another compartment, with better accommodation, to which
I was carried as soon as my health would admit of my removal; and
soon after my lord wrote to me by the hands of my lawyer, earnestly
entreating me to drop my prosecution, and come home; but I would not
comply with his request; and nothing was farther from my intention
than the desire of receiving any favours at his hands.

"Thus repulsed, he set on foot a most accurate search for my person;
in the course of which he is said to have detected several ladies
and young girls, who had reasons for keeping themselves concealed;
and had like to have been very severely handled for his impertinent
curiosity. Being unsuccessful in all his attempts, he entered
into a treaty with one Sir R-- H--, a person of a very indifferent
character, who undertook to furnish him with an infallible expedient
to discover the place of my abode, if he would gratify him with
a bond for a thousand pounds; which being executed accordingly,
this worthy knight advertised me and my maid in the public papers,
offering one hundred pounds as a reward to any person who should
disclose the place of our retirement.

"As soon as the paper fell into my hands, I was again involved in
perplexity; and, being afraid of staying in town, resolved, with the
concurrence of my lover, to accept of an invitation I had received
from the duke of K--, who had by this time arrived in England, with
that lady whom I have already mentioned as one of our parties at
Paris. Having visited my little infant, I next day set out for the
duke's country seat, which is a most elegant chateau, and stands
in a charming situation. Mr. S--- followed in a few days. We met
with a very cordial reception; his grace was civil and good-natured,
lived nobly, and loved pleasure; Madame de la T-- was formed to
please.  There was always a great deal of company in the house;
so that we passed our time agreeably in playing at billiards and
cards, hunting, walking, reading, and conversation.

"But my terms of happiness were generally of short duration. In the
midst of this felicity I was overtaken by a most severe affliction,
in the death of my dear hapless infant, who had engrossed a greater
share of my tenderness than perhaps I even should have paid to the
offspring of a legitimate contract; because the circumstance of her
birth would have been an insurmountable misfortune to her through
the whole course of her life, and rendered her absolutely dependent
on my love and protection.

"While I still lamented the untimely fate of this fair blossom,
Lord -- came down, and demanded me as his wife; but the suit which
I then maintained against him deprived him, for the present, of a
husband's right; and therefore the duke would not deliver me into
his hands.  In six months he repeated his visit and demand; and
an agreement was patched up, in consequence of which I consented
to live in the same house with him, on condition that he should
never desire to sleep with me, or take any other measure to disturb
my peace; otherwise I should be at liberty to leave him again,
and entitled to the provision of a separate maintenance. To these
articles I assented, by the advice of my lawyers, with a view of
obtaining the payment of my pin-money, which I had never received
since our parting, but subsisted on the sale of my jewels, which
were very considerable, and had been presented to me with full
power of alienation. As to my lover, he had no fortune to support
me; and for that reason I was scrupulously cautious of augmenting
his expense.

"We had now enjoyed each other's company for three years, during
which our mutual passions had suffered no abatement, nor had
my happiness been mixed with any considerable alloy, except that
late stroke of providence which I have already mentioned, and the
reflection of the sorrow that my conduct had entailed upon my dear
father, whom I loved beyond expression, and whom nothing could have
compelled me to disoblige but a more powerful flame, that prevailed
over every other consideration. As I was now forced to break off
this enchanting correspondence, it is not to be doubted that our
parting cost us the most acute sensations of grief and disappointment.
However, there was no remedy. I tore myself from his arms, took my
leave of the family, after having acknowledged my obligations to
the duke, and set out for the place of rendezvous, where I was met
by my lord, attended by a steward whom he had lately engaged, and
who was one chief cause of our future separations. My lord, having
quitted his house in town, conducted me to his lodgings in Pall
Mall, and insisted upon sleeping with me the first night; but I
refused to gratify his desire, on the authority of our agreement.

"This dispute produced a quarrel, in consequence of which I attempted
to leave the house. He endeavouring to prevent my retreat, I fairly
locked him in, ran down-stairs, and, calling a hackney-coach, made
the best of my way into the city, to my father's lodgings, where I
lay, the family being in town, though he himself was in the country.
I wrote to him immediately; and, when he came to London, declared
my intention of separating from my lord; in which, seeing me obstinate
and determined, he at length acquiesced, and a formal separation
accordingly ensued, which at that time I thought binding and
immutable.

"I was now sheltered under the wings of an indulgent father, who
had taken me into favour again, on the supposition that my commerce
with Mr. S-- was absolutely at an end. Nevertheless, though we had
separated, in all appearance for ever, we had previously agreed
to maintain our correspondence in private interviews, which should
escape the notice of the world, with which I was again obliged to
keep some measures.

"Our parting at the duke of K--'s house in the country was attended
with all the genuine marks of sincere and reciprocal affection, and
I lived in the sweet hope of seeing him again, in all the transport
of his former passion, when my lawyer, who received my letters,
brought me a billet one night, just as I had gone to bed. Seeing
the superscription of S--'s handwriting, I opened it with all
the impatience of an absent lover; but how shall I describe the
astonishment and consternation with which I was seized, when I perused
the contents! Instead of the most tender vows and protestations,
this fatal epistle began with, Madam, the best thing you can do is
to return to your father, or some cold and killing expression to
that effect.

"Heaven and earth! what did I feel at this dire conjuncture!
the light forsook my eyes, a cold sweat bedewed my limbs, and I
was overwhelmed with such a torrent of sorrow and surprise, that
everybody present believed I would have died under the violent
agitation. They endeavoured to support my spirits with repeated
draughts of strong liquor, which had no sensible effect upon
my constitution, though for eight whole years I had drunk nothing
stronger than water; and I must have infallibly perished in the
first ecstasy of my grief, had it not made its way in a fit of tears
and exclamation, in which I continued all night, to the amazement
of the family, whom my condition had alarmed, and raised from their
repose. My father was the only person who guessed the cause of my
affliction; he said he was sure I had received some ill-usage in
a letter or message from that rascal S--; so he termed him in the
bitterness of passion.

"At mention of that name, my agony redoubled to such a degree that
all who were present wept at sight of my deplorable condition. My
poor father shed a flood of tears, and conjured me to tell him the
cause of my disquiet; upon which, rather than confess the truth, I
amused his concern by pretending that my lover was ill. The whole
family having stayed by me till I was a little more composed, left
me to the care of my maid, who put me into bed about six in the
morning, but I enjoyed no rest. I revolved every circumstance of
my conduct, endeavouring to find out the cause of this fatal change
in S--'s disposition; and as I could recollect nothing which could
justly give offence, concluded that some malicious persons had
abused his ears with stories to my prejudice.

"With this conjecture I got up, and sent my lawyer to him with a
letter, wherein I insisted upon seeing him, that I might have an
opportunity of justifying myself in person; a task which would be
easily performed, as I had never offended, but in loving too well.
I waited with the most anxious impatience for the return of my
messenger, who brought me an answer couched in the coldest terms of
civility which indifference could dictate; acknowledging, however,
that he had nothing to lay to my charge, but that it was for the
good of us both that we should part. He ought to have reflected
on that before, not after I had sacrificed my all for his love! I
was well-nigh distracted by this confirmation of his inconstancy;
and I wonder to this day how I retained the use of my reason under
such circumstances of horror and despair! My grief laid aside all
decorum and restraint; I told my father that S-- was dying, and
that I would visit him with all expedition.

"Startled at the proposal, this careful parent demonstrated the
fatal consequence of such an unguarded step, reminded me of the
difficulty with which he had prevailed upon my mother and uncle to
forgive my former imprudence, observed that his intention was to
carry me into the country next day, in order to effect a perfect
reconciliation; but now I was on the brink of forfeiting all
pretensions to their regard, by committing another fatal error, which
could not possibly be retrieved; and that, for his part, whatever
pangs it might cost him, he was resolved to banish me from his
sight for ever.

"While he uttered this declaration, the tears trickled down his cheeks,
and he seemed overwhelmed with the keenest sorrow and mortification;
so it may be easily conceived what were the impressions of my grief,
reinforced with the affliction of a father whom I dearly loved, and
the consciousness of being the cause of all his disquiet! I was
struck dumb with remorse and woe; and, when I recovered the use
of speech, I told him how sensible I was of his great goodness and
humanity, and owned how little I deserved his favour and affection;
that the sense of my own unworthiness was one cause of my present
distraction; for such was the condition of my fate, that I must either
see S-- or die. I said, though I could not expect his forgiveness,
I was surely worthy of his compassion; that nothing but the most
irresistible passion could have misled me at first from my duty, or
tempted me to incur the least degree of his displeasure; that the
same fatal influence still prevailed, and would, in all probability,
continue to the grave, which was the only abode in which I hoped
for peace.

"While I expressed myself in this manner, my dear good father wept
with the most tender sympathy, and, saying I might do as I pleased,
for he had done with me, quitted the room, leaving me to the
cruel sensations of my own heart, which almost burst with anguish,
upbraiding me with a fault which I could not help committing.
I immediately hired a chariot and six, and would have set out by
myself, had not my father's affection, which all my errors could
not efface, provided an attendant. He saw me quite delirious and
desperate; and therefore engaged a relation of my own to accompany
and take care of me in this rash expedition.

"During this journey, which lasted two days, I felt no remission
of grief and anxiety, but underwent the most intolerable sorrow and
suspense. At last we arrived at a little house called the Hut, on
Salisbury Plain, where, in the most frantic agitation, I wrote a
letter to S--, describing the miserable condition to which I was
reduced by his unkindness, and desiring to see him, with the most
earnest solicitations. This billet I committed to the care of my
attendant, and laid strong injunctions upon him to tell Mr. S--,
my injuries were so great, and my despair so violent, that, if he
did not favour me with a visit, I would go to him, though at his
sister's house, where he then was.

"He received my message with great coldness, and told my friend,
that, if I would return to London without insisting upon the
interview I demanded, he would, in a little time, follow me to town,
and everything should be amicably adjusted; but when the messenger
assured him, that I was too much transported with grief to hear of
such a proposal, he consented to meet me in the middle of Salisbury
Plain, that we might avoid all observation. And though I was little
able to walk, I set out for the place of assignation, my companion
following at a small distance.

"When I saw him leading his horse down the hill, I collected all
my fortitude, and advanced to him with all the speed I could exert;
but when I made an effort to speak, my tongue denied its office,
and so lively was the expression of unutterable sorrow in my
countenance, that his heart, hard as it was, melted at the sight
of my sufferings, which he well knew proceeded from the sincerity
of my love. At length I recovered the use of speech enough to
tell him, that I was come to take my leave; and, when I would have
proceeded, my voice failed me again. But, after a considerable
pause, I found means, with great difficulty, to let him know how
sensible I was of my own incapacity to retrieve his lost affections;
but that I was willing, if possible, to retain his esteem, of which
could I be assured, I would endeavour to compose myself; that I
was determined to leave the kingdom, because I could not bear the
sight of those places where we had been so happy in our mutual love;
and that, till my departure, I hoped he would visit me sometimes,
that I might, by degrees, wean myself from his company; for I should
not be able to survive the shock of being deprived of him all at
once.

"This address may seem very humble to an unconcerned observer;
but love will tame the proudest disposition, as plainly appeared
in my case; for I had naturally as much spirit, or more, than the
generality of people have. Mr. S-- was so much confounded at the
manner of my behaviour, that he scarce knew what answer to make;
for, as he afterwards owned, he expected to hear himself upbraided;
but he was not proof against my tenderness. After some hesitation,
he said, he never meant to forsake me entirely. that his affection
was still unimpaired, and that he would follow me directly to
London. I imposed upon myself, and believed what he said, because
I could not bear to think of parting with him for ever, and returned
to town in a more tranquil state of mind than that in which I had
left my father, though my heart was far from being at ease; my fears
being ingenious enough to foresee, that I should never be able to
overcome his indifference.

"I took lodgings in Mount-street, and my maid having disposed of
herself in marriage, hired another, who supplied her place very
much to my satisfaction. She was a good girl, had a particular
attachment to me, and for many years, during which she lived in my
service, was indefatigably assiduous in contributing to my ease,
or rather in alleviating my affliction. For, though S-- came up
to town according to promise, and renewed a sort of correspondence
with me for the space of five months, his complaisance would extend
no farther; and he gave me to understand, that he had determined
to go abroad with Mr. V--; whom he accordingly accompanied in his
envoying to D--.

"I understood the real cause of this expedition, which, notwithstanding
his oaths and protestations of unabated love and regard, I construed
into a palpable mark of dislike and disrespect; nor could the
repeated assurances I received from him in letters mitigate the
anguish and mortification that preyed upon my heart. I therefore
gave up all hopes of recovering the happiness I had lost.  I told
him on the eve of his departure, that he might exercise his gallantry
a great while, before he would meet with my fellow, in point of
sincerity and love; for I would rather have been a servant in his
house, with the privilege of seeing him, than the queen of England
debarred of that pleasure.

"When he took his leave, and went down-stairs, I shrunk at every
step he made, as if a new wound had been inflicted upon me and
when I heard the door shut behind him, my heart died within me. I
had the satisfaction to hear afterwards, he lamented the loss of
me prodigiously, and that he had never been so happy since. I sat
down to write a letter, in which I forgave his indifference, because
I knew the affections are altogether involuntary, and wished him
all the happiness he deserved. I then walked up and down the room
in the most restless anxiety, was put to bed by my maid, rose at
six, mounted my horse and rode forty miles, in order to fatigue
myself that I might next night enjoy some repose. This exercise I
daily underwent for months together; and, when it did not answer
my purpose, I used to walk round Hyde-park in the evening, when the
place was quite solitary and unvisited by any other human creature.

"In the course of this melancholy perambulation, I was one day
accosted by a very great man, who, after the first salutation, asked
whether or not my intercourse with S-- was at an end, and if I had
any allowance from my husband. To the first of these questions I
replied in the affirmative; and to the last answered, that my lord
did not allow me a great deal; indeed, I might have truly said nothing
at all; but I was too proud to own my indigence. He then expressed
his wonder, how one like me, who had been used to splendour and
affluence from my cradle, could make shift to live in my present
narrow circumstances; and, when I told him that I could make a very
good shift, so I had peace, he seemed to lament my situation, and
very kindly invited me to sup with his wife at his house. I accepted
the invitation, without any apprehension of the consequence;
and, when I went to the place, was introduced into an apartment
magnificently lighted up, I suppose, for my reception.

"After I had stayed alone for some time in this mysterious
situation, without seeing a living soul, my inviter appeared, and
said, he hoped I would not take it amiss that he and I were to
sup by ourselves, as he had something to say, which could not be
so properly communicated before company or servants. I then, for
the first time, perceived his drift, to my no small surprise and
indignation; and, with evident marks of displeasure, told him, I
was sure he had nothing to propose that would be agreeable to my
inclination, and that I would immediately leave the house. Upon
which he gave me to understand, that I could not possibly retire,
because he had sent away my chair, and all his servants were disposed
to obey his orders.

"Incensed at this declaration, which I considered as an insult, I
answered, with an air of resolution, it was very well; I despised
his contrivance, and was afraid of nothing. Seeing me thus alarmed,
he assured me I had no reason to be afraid; that he had loved me
long, and could find no other opportunity of declaring his passion.
He said the Q-- had told him that Lord -- had renewed his addresses
to me; and, as he understood from my own mouth, my correspondence
with S-- was absolutely broke off, he thought himself as well
entitled as another to my regard. In conclusion, he told me that I
might command his purse, and that he had power enough to bring me
into the world again with eclat. To these advances I replied, that
he was very much mistaken in his opinion of my character, if he
imagined I was to be won by any temptations of fortune; and very
frankly declared, that I would rather give myself to a footman,
than sell myself to a prince.

"Supper being served, we sat down together; but I would neither eat
nor drink anything, except a little bread and water; for I was an
odd whimsical girl, and it came into my head, that he might perhaps
have mixed something in the victuals or wine, which would alter
my way of thinking. In short, finding himself baffled in all his
endeavours, he permitted me about twelve o'clock to depart in peace,
and gave up his suit as a desperate cause.

"This uncomfortable life did I lead for a whole twelvemonth, without
feeling the least abatement of my melancholy. Finding myself worn
to a skeleton, I resumed my former resolution of trying to profit
by change of place, and actually went abroad, with no other attendant
than my woman, and the utmost indifference for life. My intention
was to have gone to the south of France, where I thought I could
have subsisted on the little I had left, which amounted to five
hundred pounds, until the issue of my law-suit, by which I hoped
to obtain some provision from my lord; and, without all doubt,
my expectation would have been answered, had I put this my plan
in execution; but, being at Paris, from whence I proposed to set
forward in a few days, I sent to M. K--, who had been formerly
intimate with my father, and shown me many civilities during my
first residence in France.

"This gentleman favoured me with a visit, and, when I made him
acquainted with my scheme, dissuaded me from it, as an uncomfortable
determination. He advised me to stay at Paris, where, with good
economy, I could live as cheap as in any other place, and enjoy
the conversation and countenance of my friends, among which number
he declared himself one of the most faithful. He assured me, that
I should be always welcome to his table, and want for nothing. He
promised to recommend me as a lodger to a friend of his, with whom
I would live in a frugal and decent manner; and observed, that, as
the woman was well known and esteemed by all the English company in
Paris, it would be the most reputable step I could take, considering
my youth and situation, to lodge with a creditable person, who could
answer for my conduct. Thus persuaded, I very simply followed his
advice; I say simply, because, notwithstanding his representations,
I soon found my money melt away, without any prospect of a fresh
supply. In lieu of this, however, I passed my time very agreeably
in several English and some French families, where, in a little
time, I became quite intimate, saw a great deal of company, and was
treated with the utmost politeness and regard; yet, in the midst
of these pleasures, many a melancholy sigh would rise at the
remembrance of my beloved S--, whom, for several years, I could
not recollect without emotion; but time, company, amusements, and
change of place, in a great measure dissipated these ideas, and
enabled me to bear my fate with patience and resignation.

"On my last arrival at Paris, I was surrounded by a crowd of
professed admirers, who sighed and flattered in the usual forms;
but, besides that my heart was not in a condition to contract new
engagements, I was prepossessed against them all, by supposing that
they presumed upon the knowledge of my indiscretion with S--; and
therefore rejected their addresses with detestation and disdain;
for, as I have already observed, I was not to be won but by the
appearance of esteem, and the most respectful carriage; and though,
by a false step, I had, in my own opinion, forfeited my title to
the one, I was resolved to discourage the advances of any man who
seemed deficient in the other.

"In this manner my lovers were one by one repulsed, almost as soon
as they presented themselves, and I preserved the independence of
my heart, until I became acquainted with a certain peer, whom I
often saw at the house of Mrs. P--, an English lady then resident
at Paris. This young nobleman professed himself deeply enamoured
of me, in a style so different from that of my other admirers, that
I heard his protestations without disgust; and, though my inclinations
were still free, could not find in my heart to discountenance his
addresses, which were preferred with the most engaging modesty,
disinterestedness, and respect.

"By these never-failing arts, he gradually conquered my indifference,
and gained the preference in my esteem from Lord C-- and the prince
of C--, who were at that time his rivals. But what contributed more
than any consideration to his success was his declaring openly, that
he would marry me without hesitation, as soon as I could obtain a
divorce from my present husband, which, in all probability, might
have been easily procured; for, before I left England, Lord -- had
offered me five thousand pounds if I would consent to such a mutual
release, that he might be at liberty to espouse one Miss W--,
of Kent, to whom he then made love upon honourable terms; but I
was fool enough to refuse his proposal, by the advice of S--. And
whether or not his lordship, finding it impracticable to wed his
new mistress, began to make love upon another footing, I know not;
but, certain it is, the mother forbade him the house, a circumstance
which he took so heinously ill, that he appealed to the world in
a public advertisement, beginning with "Whereas, for some time, I
have passionately loved Miss W--, and, upon my not complying with
the mother's proposals, they have turned me out of doors, this is
to justify," etc.

"This declaration, signed with his name, was actually printed in a
number of detached advertisements, which he ordered to be distributed
to the public; and afterwards, being convinced by some of his friends
that he had done a very silly thing, he recalled them at half a
guinea apiece. A copy of one of them was sent to me at Paris, and
I believe my father has now one of the originals in his possession.
After this wise vindication of his conduct, he made an attempt to
carry off the lady from church by force of arms; but she was rescued
by the neighbours, headed by her brother, who, being an attorney,
had like to have made his lordship smart severely for this exploit.

"Meanwhile my new admirer had made some progress in my heart;
and, my finances being exhausted, I was reduced to the alternative
of returning to Lord -- again, or accepting Earl B--'s love. When
my affairs were brought to an issue, I made no hesitation in my
choice, putting myself under the protection of a man of honour whom
I esteemed, rather than suffer every sort of mortification from
a person who was the object of my abhorrence and contempt. From a
mistaken pride, I chose to live in Lord B--'s house, rather than
be maintained at his expense in another place. We spent several
months agreeably in balls and other diversions, visited Lord B--,
who lived at the distance of a few leagues from Paris, and stayed
some days at his house, where the entertainment was, in all
respects, delightful, elegant, and refined. Their habitation was the
rendezvous of the best company in France; and Lady B-- maintained
the same superiority in her own sex, for which her lord is so justly
distinguished among the men.

"About Christmas we set out for England, accompanied by a little
North Briton, who lived with Lord B-- as his companion, and did not
at all approve of our correspondence; whether out of real friendship
for his patron, or apprehension that in time I might supersede his
own influence with my lord, I shall not pretend to determine. Be
that as it will, the frost was so severe, that we were detained ten
days at Calais before we could get out of the harbour; and, during
that time, I reflected seriously on what my new lover proposed. As
he was very young, and unacquainted with the world, I thought my
story might have escaped him; and therefore determined to give him
a faithful detail of the whole, that he might not have anything to
reproach me with in the sequel; besides, I did not think it honest
to engage him to do more for me than he might afterwards perhaps
think I was worth. Accordingly, I communicated to him every particular
of my life; and the narration, far from altering his sentiments,
rather confirmed his good opinion, by exhibiting an undoubted
proof of my frankness and sincerity. In short, he behaved with such
generosity, as made an absolute conquest of my heart. But my love
was of a different kind from that which had formerly reigned within
my breast, being founded upon the warmest gratitude and esteem,
exclusive of any other consideration, though his person was very
agreeable, and his address engaging.

"When we arrived in England, I went directly to his country seat,
about twelve miles from London, where he soon joined me, and we
lived some time in perfect retirement. His relations being greatly
alarmed with the apprehension that Lord -- would bring an action
against him, though he himself desired nothing more, and lived so
easy under that expectation, that they soon laid aside their fears
on his account.

"We were visited by Mr. H. B--, a relation of my lord, and one Mr.
R--, of the Guards, who, with the little Scotchman and my lover, made
an agreeable set, among whom I enjoyed hunting, and all manner of
country diversions. As to Mr. H. B--, if ever there was perfection
in one man, it centred in him; or, at least, he, of all the men I
ever knew, approached the nearest to that idea which I had conceived
of a perfect character. He was both good and great, possessed an
uncommon genius, and the best of hearts. Mr. R-- was a very sociable
man, had a good person, and cultivated understanding; and my lord
was excessively good-humoured; so that, with such companions, no
place could be dull or insipid. For my own part, I conducted the
family; and, as I endeavoured to please and make everybody happy,
I had the good fortune to succeed. Mr. B-- told me, that before
he saw me, he heard I was a fool; but finding, as he was pleased
to say, that I had been egregiously misrepresented, he courted my
friendship, and a correspondence commenced between us.  Indeed,
it was impossible for any person to know him, without entertaining
the utmost esteem and veneration for his virtue.

"After I had lived some time in this agreeable retreat, my husband
began to make a bustle. He sent a message, demanding me from Lord B--;
then came in person, with his nightcap in his pocket, intending to
have stayed all night, had he been asked, and attended by a relation,
whom he assured that I was very fond of him, and detained by force
from his arms. Finding himself disappointed in his expectations,
he commenced a law-suit against Lord B--, though not for a divorce,
as we desired, but with a view to reclaim me as his lawful wife.
His lawyers, however, attempted to prove criminal conversation, in
hopes of extorting money from my lover. But their endeavours were
altogether fruitless; for no servant of Lord B--'s or mine could
with justice say we were ever seen to trespass against modesty and
decorum; so that the plaintiff was nonsuited. While this cause was
depending, all my lover's friends expressed fear and concern for
the issue, while he himself behaved with the utmost resolution, and
gave me such convincing proofs of a strong and steady affection,
as augmented my gratitude, and riveted the ties of my love, which
was unblemished, faithful, and sincere.

"Soon after this event, I was seized with a violent fit of illness,
in which I was visited by my father, and attended by two physicians,
one of whom despaired of my life, and took his leave accordingly;
but Dr. S--, who was the other, persisted in his attendance, and,
in all human appearance, saved my life; a circumstance by which
he acquired a great share of reputation. Yet, notwithstanding all
his assistance, I was confined to my bed for ten weeks; during which
Lord B--'s grief was immoderate, his care and generosity unlimited.
While I lay in this extremity, Mr. S--, penetrated by my melancholy
condition, which revived his tenderness, begged leave to be admitted
to my presence; and Lord B-- would have complied with his request,
had I not been judged too weak to bear the shock of such an interview.
My constitution, however, agreeably disappointed my fears; and
the fever had no sooner left me, than I was removed to a hunting
seat belonging to my lover, from whence, after I had recovered my
strength, we went to B-- castle, where we kept open house. And,
while we remained at this place, Lord B-- received a letter from
Lord --, dated in November, challenging him to single combat in
May, upon the frontiers of France and Flanders. This defiance was
sent in consequence of what had passed between them long before
my indisposition, at a meeting in a certain tavern, where they
quarrelled, and in the fray, my lover threw his antagonist under
the table. I counselled him to take no notice of this rhodomontade,
which I knew was void of all intention of performance; and he was
wise enough to follow my advice, resolved, however, should the
message be repeated, to take the challenger at his word.

"Having resided some time at this place, we returned to the other
country house which he had left, where Lord B-- addicted himself so
much to hunting, and other male diversions, that I began to think
he neglected me, and apprised him of my suspicion, assuring him, at
the same time, that I would leave him as soon as my opinion should
be confirmed. This declaration had no effect upon his behaviour,
which became so remarkably cold, that even Mr. R--, who lived with
us, imagined that his affection was palpably diminished. When I went
to town, I was usually attended by his cousin, or this gentleman,
or both, but seldom favoured with his company; nay, when I repaired
to Bath, for the re-establishment of my health, he permitted me to
go alone; so that I was quite persuaded of his indifference; and
yet I was mistaken in my opinion. But I had been spoiled by the
behaviour of my first husband, and Mr. S--, who never quitted me
for the sake of any amusement, and often resisted the calls of the
most urgent business, rather than part from me, though but for a
few hours. I thought every man who loved me truly would act in the
same manner; and, whether I am right or wrong in my conjectures,
I leave wiser casuists to judge. Certain it is, such sacrifice and
devotion is the most pleasing proof of an admirer's passion; and,
Voyez-moi plus souvent, et ne me donnez rien, is one of my favourite
maxims. A man may give money, because he is profuse; he may be
violently fond, because he is of a sanguine constitution. But, if
he gives me his time, he gives me an unquestionable proof of my
being in full possession of his heart.

"My appearance at Bath, without the company of Lord B--, occasioned
a general surprise, and encouraged the men to pester me with
addresses, every new admirer endeavouring to advance his suit by
demonstrating the unkind and disrespectful behaviour of his lordship.
Indeed, this was the most effectual string they could touch. My
pride and resentment were alarmed, I was weak enough to listen to
one man, who had like to have insinuated himself into my inclinations.
He was tall and large-boned, with white hair, inclining to what
is called sandy, and had the reputation of being handsome, though
I think he scarce deserved that epithet. He possessed a large fortune,
loved mischief, and stuck at nothing for the accomplishment of his
designs, one of his chief pleasures being that of setting any two
lovers at variance. He employed his address upon me with great
assiduity, and knew so well how to manage my resentment, that I
was pleased with his manner, heard his vows without disgust, and,
in a word, promised to deliberate with myself upon his proposals,
and give him an account of my determination in writing.

"Thus resolved, I went to Lord B--, in Wiltshire, whither I
was followed by this pretender to my heart, who visited us on the
footing of an acquaintance; but when I reflected on what I had done,
I condemned my own conduct as indiscreet, though nothing decisive
had passed between us, and began to hate him in proportion to the
self-conviction I felt, perceiving that I had involved myself in
a difficulty from which I should not be easily disengaged. For the
present, however, I found means to postpone my declaration. He
admitted my excuse, and I returned to London with Lord B--, who
was again summoned to the field by his former challenger.

"H--d--n, governor, counsellor, and steward to this little hero,
came to Lord B-- with a verbal message, importing that his lordship
had changed his mind about going to Flanders, but expected to
meet him, on such a day and hour, in the burying-ground near Red
Lion-square. Lord B-- accepted the challenge, and gave me an account
of what had passed; but he had been anticipated by the messenger,
who had already tried to alarm my fears from the consideration of
the consequence, that I might take some measures to prevent their
meeting. I perceived his drift, and told him plainly, that Lord
--had no intention to risk his person, though he endeavoured with
all his might to persuade me, that his principal was desperate and
determined. I knew my little husband too well to think he would
bring matters to any dangerous issue, and was apprehensive of
nothing but foul play, from the villainy of H--d--n, with which I
was equally well acquainted. Indeed, I signified my doubts on that
score to Mr. B--, who would have attended his kinsman to the field,
had he not thought he might be liable to censure, if anything should
happen to Lord B--, because he himself was heir at law: for that
reason he judiciously declined being personally concerned; and we
pitched upon the earl of A--, his lordship's uncle, who willingly
undertook the office.

"At the appointed time they went to the house of rendezvous, where
they had not waited long when the challenger appeared, in a new
pink satin waistcoat, which he had put on for the occasion, with
his sword under his arm. and his steward by him, leaving, in a
hackney-coach at some distance, a surgeon whom he had provided for
the care of his person. Thus equipped he advanced to his antagonist,
and desired him to choose his ground; upon which Lord B-- told him,
that if he must fall, it was not material which grave he should
tumble over.

"Our little hero, finding him so jocose and determined, turned to
Lord A--, and desired to speak with him, that he might disburden
his conscience before they should begin the work of death. They
accordingly went aside; and he gave him to understand, that his
motive for fighting, was Lord B--'s detaining his wife from him by
compulsion. The earl of A-- assured him, he was egregiously mistaken
in his conjecture; that his nephew used no force or undue influence
to keep me in his house; but it could not be expected that he would
turn me out of doors.

"This explanation was altogether satisfactory to Lord --, who said
he was far from being so unreasonable as to expect Lord B-- would
commit such a breach of hospitality; and all he desired was, that
his wife should be left to her own inclinations. Upon these articles,
peace was concluded, and they parted without bloodshed. At least
these are the particulars of the story, as they were related by
Lord A--, with whom I laughed heartily at the adventure, for I never
doubted that the challenger would find some expedient to prevent
the duel, though I wondered how he mustered up resolution enough
to carry it so far.

"That he might not, however, give us any more trouble, we resolved
to go and enjoy ourselves in France. whither I went by myself, in
hopes of being soon joined by my lover, who was obliged to stay
some time longer in England, to settle his affairs. He was so much
affected at our parting, though but for a few weeks, that he was
almost distracted. And this affliction renewed my tenderness for
him, because it was an undoubted proof of his love. I wrote to him
every post from France; and, as I had no secrets, desired him to
take care of all the letters that should come to his house, directed
to me, after my departure from England.

"This was an unfortunate office for him, in the execution of which
he chanced to open a letter from Sir T-- A--, with whom, as I have
already observed, I had some correspondence at Bath. I had according
to my promise, given this gentleman a decisive answer, importing
that I was determined to remain in my present situation; but
as Lord B-- was ignorant of my sentiments in that particular, and
perceived from the letter that something extraordinary had passed
between us, and that I was earnestly solicited to leave him, he
was seized with the utmost consternation and concern; and, having
previously obtained the king's leave to go abroad, set out that
very night for France, leaving his affairs in the greatest confusion.

"Sir T-- A-- hearing I was gone, without understanding the cause of
my departure, took the same route, and both arrived at Dover next
day. They heard of each other's motions. Each bribed the master of
a packet-boat to transport him with expedition; but that depending
upon the wind, both reached Calais at the same time, though in
different vessels. Sir T-- sent his valet-de-chambre post, with a
letter, entreating me to accompany him into Italy, where he would
make me mistress of his whole fortune, and to set out directly for
that country, that he might not lose me by the arrival of Lord B--,
promising to join me on the road, if I would consent to make him
happy. I sent his messenger back with an answer, wherein I expressed
surprise at his proposals, after having signified my resolution to
him before I left England. He was scarce dismissed, when I received
another letter from Lord B--, beseeching me to meet him at Clermont,
upon the road from Calais; and conjuring me to avoid the sight
of his rival, should he get the start of him in travelling. This,
however, was not likely to be the case, as Lord B-- rode post, and
the other was, by his corpulence, obliged to travel in a chaise;
yet, that I might not increase his anxiety, I left Paris immediately
on the receipt of his message, and met him at the appointed place,
where he received me with all the agitation of joy and fear, and
asked if I had ever encouraged Sir T-- A-- in his addresses. I very
candidly told him the whole transaction, at which he was incensed;
but his indignation was soon appeased, when I professed my penitence,
and assured him that I had totally rejected his rival.  Not that
I approved of my behaviour to Sir T--, who, I own, was ill-used in
this affair; but surely it was more excusable to halt here, than
proceed farther in my indiscretion.

"My lover being satisfied with my declaration, we went together
to Paris, being attended by the Scotchman, whom I have already
mentioned, though I believe he was not over and above well pleased to
see matters thus amicably compromised. The furious knight followed
us to the capital; insisted on seeing me in person; told this North
Briton, that I was actually engaged to him; wrote every hour, and
railed at my perfidious conduct. I took no notice of these delirious
transports, which were also disregarded by Lord B--, till, one
night, he was exasperated by the insinuations of Mr. C--, who, I
believe, inflamed his jealousy, by hinting a suspicion that I was
really in love with his rival. What passed betwixt them I know
not, but he sent for me from the opera, by a physician of Paris,
who was a sort of go-between among us all, and who told me, that,
if I did not come home in the instant, a duel would be fought on
my account.

"I was very much shocked at this information; but, by being used
to alarms from the behaviour of Lord --, I had acquired a pretty
good share of resolution, and with great composure entered the room
where Lord B-- was, with his companion, whom I immediately ordered
to withdraw. I then gave his lordship to understand, that I was
informed of what had passed, and thought myself so much injured
by the person who had just quitted the apartment, that I would
no longer live under the same roof with him. Lord B-- raved like
a bedlamite, taxing me with want of candour and affection; but
I easily justified my own integrity, and gave him such assurances
of my love, that his jealousy subsided, and his spirits were
recomposed. Nevertheless, I insisted upon his dismissing Mr. C--,
on pain of my leaving the house, as I could not help thinking he
had used his endeavours to prejudice me in the opinion of my lord.
If his conduct was the result of friendship for his patron, he
certainly acted the part of an honest and trusty adherent. But I
could not easily forgive him, because, a few weeks before, he had,
by my interest, obtained a considerable addition to his allowance;
and even after the steps he had taken to disoblige me, I was not
so much his enemy but that I prevailed upon Lord B-- to double his
salary, that his leaving the family might be no detriment to his
fortune. His lordship having complied with my demand, this gentleman,
after having stayed three days in the house, to prepare for his
departure, during which I would not suffer him to be admitted into
my presence, made his retreat with a fine young girl, who was my
companion; and I have never seen him since that time.

"Sir T-- still continued furious, and would not take a denial,
except from my own mouth, upon which, with the approbation of Lord
B--, I indulged him with an interview. He entered the apartment
with a stern countenance, and told me I had used him ill. I pleaded
guilty to the charge, and begged his pardon accordingly. I attempted
to reason the case with him, but he would hear no arguments except his
own, and even tried to intimidate me with threats; which provoked
me to such a degree, that I defied his vengeance. I told him, that
I feared nothing but the report of my own conscience; that, though
I had acted a simple part, he durst not say there was anything
criminal in my conduct, and that, from his present frantic and
unjust behaviour, I thought myself happy in having escaped him.  He
swore I was the most inflexible of all creatures; asked if nothing
would move me; and when I answered, "Nothing," took his leave, and
never after persecuted me with his addresses; though I have heard
he was vain and false enough to boast of favours, which, upon my
honour, he never received, as he himself, at one time, owned to
Dr. Cantwell, at Paris.

"While he underwent all this frenzy and distraction upon my account,
he was loved with the same violence of passion by a certain Scotch
lady of quality, who, when he followed me to France, pursued him
thither with the same eagerness and expedition. Far from being
jealous of me as a rival, she used to come to my house, implore my
good offices with the object of her love, and, laying herself on
the floor at full length before the fire, weep and cry like a person
bereft of her senses. She bitterly complained that he had never
obliged her but once; and begged, with the most earnest supplications,
that I would give her an opportunity of seeing him at my house.
But I thought proper to avoid her company, as soon as I perceived
her intention.

"We continued at Paris for some time, during which I contracted
an acquaintance with the sister of Madame de la T--. She was the
supposed mistress of the prince of C--, endowed with a great share
of understanding, and loved pleasure to excess, though she maintained
her reputation on a respectable footing, by living with her husband
and mother. This lady, perceiving that I had inspired her lover
with a passion, which gave me uneasiness on her account, actually
practised all her eloquence and art in persuading me to listen to
his love; for it was a maxim with her to please him at any rate.
I was shocked at her indelicate complaisance, and rejected the
proposal as repugnant to my present engagement, which I held as
sacred as any nuptial tie, and much more binding than a forced or
unnatural marriage.

"Upon our return to England, we lived in great harmony and peace,
and nothing was wanting to my happiness, but the one thing to me
the most needful; I mean the enchanting tenderness and delightful
enthusiasm of love. Lord B--'s heart, I believe, felt the
soft impressions; and, for my own part, I loved him with the most
faithful affection. It is not enough to say I wished him well; I
had the most delicate, the most genuine esteem for his virtue; I
had an intimate regard and anxiety for his interest; and felt for
him as if he had been my own son. But still there was a vacancy in
my heart; there was not that fervour, that transport, that ecstasy
of passion which I had formerly known; my bosom was not filled with
the little deity; I could not help recalling to my remembrance the
fond, the ravishing moments I had passed with S--. Had I understood
the conditions of life, those pleasures were happily exchanged
for my present situation, because, if I was now deprived of those
rapturous enjoyments, I was also exempted from the cares and anxiety
that attended them; but I was generally extravagant in my notions
of happiness, and therefore construed my present tranquility into
an insipid languor and stagnation of life.

"While I remained in this inactivity of sentiment, Lord --, having
received a very considerable addition to his fortune, sent a message
to me, promising, that if I would leave Lord B--, he would make
me a present of a house and furniture, where I should live at my
case, without being exposed to his visits, except when I should be
disposed to receive them. This proposal he made in consequence of
what I had always declared, namely, that if he had not reduced me
to the necessity of putting myself under the protection of some
person or other, by depriving me of any other means of subsistence,
I should never have given the world the least cause to scandalize
my reputation; and that I would withdraw myself from my present
dependence, as soon as he should enable me to live by myself. I
was therefore resolved to be as good as my word, and accepted his
offer, on condition that I should be wholly at my own disposal,
and that he should never enter my door but as a visitant or common
friend.

"These articles being ratified by his word and honour, the value
of which I did not then know, a house was furnished according to my
directions; and I signified my intention to Lord B--, who consented
to my removal, with this proviso, that I should continue to see
him.  I wrote also to his relation, Mr. B--, who, in his answer,
observed, that it was too late to advise, when I was actually
determined. All my friends and acquaintance approved of the scheme,
though it was one of the most unjustifiable steps I had ever taken,
being a real act of ingratitude to my benefactor; which I soon
did, and always shall regret and condemn. So little is the world
qualified to judge of private affairs!

"When the time of our parting drew near, Lord B-- became gloomy
and discontented, and even entreated me to postpone my resolution;
but I told him, that now everything was prepared for my reception,
I could not retract without incurring the imputation of folly and
extravagance. On the very day of my departure, Mr. B-- endeavoured,
with all the arguments he could suggest, to dissuade me from
my purpose; and I made use of the same answer which had satisfied
his friend. Finding me determined on removing, he burst out into
a flood of tears, exclaiming, "By God! if Lord B-- can bear it, I
can't." I was thunderstruck at this expression; for though I had
been told that Mr. B-- was in love with me, I gave no credit to
the report, because he had never declared his passion, and this
was the first hint of it that ever escaped him in my hearing.
I was therefore so much amazed at the circumstance of this abrupt
explanation, that I could make no answer; but having taken my leave,
went away, ruminating on the unexpected declaration.

"Lord B--, as I was informed, spoke not a word that whole night,
and took my leaving him so much to heart, that two years elapsed
before he got the better of his grief. This intelligence I
afterwards received from his own mouth, and asked his forgiveness
for my unkind retreat, though I shall never be able to obtain
my own. As for Mr.  B--, he was overwhelmed with sorrow, and made
such efforts to suppress his concern, as had well nigh cost him
his life. Dr. S-- was called to him in the middle of the night,
and found him almost suffocated. He soon guessed the cause, when
he understood that I had left the house. So that I myself was the
only person concerned, who was utterly ignorant of his affection;
for I solemnly declare he never gave me the least reason to suspect
it while I lived with his relation, because he had too much honour
to entertain a thought of supplanting his friend, and too good an
opinion of me to believe he should have succeeded in the attempt.
Though my love for Lord B-- was not so tender and interesting as
the passion I had felt for S--, my fidelity was inviolable, and I
never harboured the most distant thought of any other person, till
after I had resolved to leave him, when, I own, I afforded some
small encouragement to the addresses of a new admirer by telling
him, that I should, in a little time, be my own mistress, though
I was not now at my own disposal.

"I enjoyed my new house as a little paradise. It was accommodated
with all sorts of conveniences; everything was new, and therefore
pleasing, and the whole absolutely at my command. I had the company
of a relation, a very good woman, with whom I lived in the most
amicable manner; was visited by the best people in town--I mean
those of the male sex, the ladies having long ago forsaken me; I
frequented all reputable places of public entertainment, and had a
concert at home once a week; so that my days rolled on in happiness
and quiet, till all my sweets were embittered by the vexatious
behaviour of my husband, who began to importune me again to live
with him; and by the increasing anxiety of Lord B--, who, though
I still admitted his visits, plainly perceived that I wanted to
relinquish his correspondence. This discovery raised such tempests
of jealousy and despair within his breast, that he kept me in continual
alarm. He sent messages to me every hour, signed his letters with
his own blood, raved like a man in ecstasy of madness, railed
at my ingratitude, and praised my conduct by turns. He offered to
sacrifice everything for my love, to leave the kingdom forthwith,
and live with me for ever in any part of the world where I should
choose to reside.

"These were generous and tempting proposals; but I was beset with
counsellors who were not totally disinterested, and who dissuaded
me from embracing the proffers of my lover, on pretence that Lord --
would be highly injured by my compliance. I listened to their advice,
and hardened my heart against Lord B--'s sorrow and solicitations.
My behaviour on this occasion is altogether unaccountable; this was
the only time that ever I was a slave to admonition. The condition
of Lord B-- would have melted any heart but mine, and yet mine was
one of the most sensible. He employed his cousin as an advocate
with me, till that gentleman actually refused the office, telling
him candidly, that his own inclinations were too much engaged to
permit him to perform the task with fidelity and truth. He accordingly
resolved to avoid my presence, until my lord and I should come
to some final determination, which was greatly retarded by the
perseverance of his lordship, who would not resign his hopes, even
when I pretended that another man had engaged my heart, but said,
that in time my affection might return.

"Our correspondence, however, gradually wore off; upon which Mr. B--
renewed his visits, and many agreeable and happy hours we passed
together. Not that he, or any other person whom I now saw, succeeded
to the privilege of a fortunate lover; I knew he loved me to madness;
but I would not gratify his passion any other way than by the most
profound esteem and veneration for his virtues, which were altogether
amiable and sublime; and I would here draw his character minutely,
but it would take up too much time to set forth his merit; the only,
man living of my acquaintance who resembles him, is Lord F--, of
whom I shall speak in the sequel.

"About this time I underwent a very interesting change in the
situation of my heart. I had sent a message to my old lover S--,
desiring he would allow my picture, which was in his possession,
to be copied; and he now transmitted it to me by my lawyer, whom he
directed to ask, if I intended to be at the next masquerade. This
curiosity had a strange effect upon my spirits; my heart fluttered
at the question, and my imagination glowed with a thousand fond
presages. I answered in the affirmative; and we met by accident at
the ball. I could nut behold him without emotion: when he accosted
me, his well-known voice made my heart vibrate, like a musical
chord, when its unison is struck. All the ideas of our past love,
which the lapse of time and absence had enfeebled and lulled to
sleep, now awoke, and were reinspired by his appearance; so that
his artful excuses were easily admitted: I forgave him all that I
had suffered on his account, because he was the natural lord of my
affection; and our former correspondence was renewed.

"I thought myself in a new world of bliss in consequence of this
reconciliation, the rapture of which continued unimpaired for
the space of four months, during which time he was fonder of me,
if possible, than before; repeated his promise of marriage, if
we should ever have it in our power; assured me he had never been
happy since he left me: that he believed no woman loved like me.
And indeed, to have a notion of my passion for that man, you must
first have loved as I did. But, through a strange caprice, I broke
off the correspondence, out of apprehension that he would forsake
me again.  From his past conduct I dreaded what might happen; and
the remembrance of what I had undergone by his inconstancy, filled
my imagination with such horror, that I could not endure the shocking
prospect, and prematurely plunged myself into the danger, rather
than endure the terrors of expectation. I remembered that his
former attachment began in the season of my prosperity, when my
fortune was in the zenith, and my youth in its prime; and that he
had forsaken me in the day of trouble when my life became embarrassed,
and my circumstances were on the decline. I foresaw nothing but
continual persecution from my husband, and feared, that, once the
keener transports of our reconciliation should be over, his affection
would sink under the severity of its trial. In consequence of this
desertion, I received a letter from him, acknowledging that he was
rightly served, but that my retreat gave him inexpressible concern.

"Meanwhile Lord -- continued to act in the character of a fiend,
tormenting me with his nauseous importunities. He prevailed upon
the duke of L-- to employ his influence in persuading me to live
with him; assuring his grace, that I had actually promised to give
him that proof of my obedience, and that I would come home the
sooner for being pressed to compliance by a person of his rank and
character. Induced by these representations, the duke honoured me
with a visit; and, in the course of his exhortations, I understood
how he had been thus misinformed. Upon which I sent for Lord --, and,
in his presence, convicted him of the falsehood, by communicating
to his grace the articles of our last agreement, which he did not
think proper to deny; and the duke, being undeceived, declared,
that he would not have given me the trouble of vindicating myself,
had he not been misled by the insincerity of my lord.

"Baffled in this attempt, he engaged Mr. H-- V--, and afterwards
my own father, in the same task; and though I still adhered to my
first resolution, persisted with such obstinacy in his endeavours
to make me unhappy, that I determined to leave the kingdom.
Accordingly, after I had spent the evening with him at Ranelagh, I
went away about two o'clock in the morning, leaving my companion,
with directions to restore to my lord his house, furniture, plate,
and everything he had given me since our last accommodation; so far
was I, upon this occasion, or at any other time of my life, from
embezzling any part of his fortune. My friend followed my instructions
most punctually: and his lordship knows and will acknowledge the
truth of this assertion.

"Thus have I explained the true cause of my first expedition to
Flanders, whither the world was good-natured enough to say, I followed
Mr. B-- and the whole army, which happened to be sent abroad that
summer. Before my departure, I likewise transmitted to Lord B--
the dressing plate, china, and a very considerable settlement, of
which he had been generous enough to make me a present. This was
an instance of my integrity, which I thought due to a man who had
laid me under great obligations; and though I lived to be refused
a small sum both by him and S--, I do not repent of my disinterested
behaviour; all the revenge I harbour against the last of these
lovers, is the desire of having it in my power to do him good.

"I now found myself adrift in the world again, and very richly
deserved the hardships of my condition, for my indiscretion in
leaving Lord B--, and in trusting to the word of Lord -- without
some further security; but I have dearly paid for my imprudence.
The more I saw into the character of this man, whom destiny hath
appointed my scourge, the more was I determined to avoid his fellowship
and communication; for he and I are, in point of disposition, as
opposite as any two principles in nature. In the first place, he
is one of the most unsocial beings that ever existed; when I was
pleased and happy, he was always out of temper; but if he could find
means to overcast and cloud my mirth, though never so innocent, he
then discovered signs of uncommon satisfaction and content, because,
by this disagreeable temper, he banished all company from his house.
He is extremely weak of understanding, though he possesses a good
share of low cunning, which has so egregiously imposed upon some
people, that they have actually believed him a good-natured easy
creature, and blamed me because I did not manage him to better
purpose; but, upon further acquaintance, they have always found
him obstinate as a mule, and capricious as a monkey. Not that he is
utterly void of all commendable qualities. He is punctual in paying
his debts, liberal when in good humour, and would be well-bred, were
he not subject to fits of absence, during which he is altogether
unconversable; but he is proud, naturally suspicious, jealous,
equally with and without cause, never made a friend, and is an
utter stranger to the joys of intimacy; in short, he hangs like a
damp upon society, and may be properly called Kill-joy, an epithet
which he has justly acquired.  He honoured me with constant professions
of love; but his conduct is so opposite to my sentiments of that
passion, as to have been the prime source of all my misfortunes
and affliction; and I have often wished myself the object of his
hate, in hopes of profiting by a change in his behaviour.

"Indeed, he has not been able to make me more unhappy than I
believe he is in his own mind; for he is literally a self-tormentor,
who never enjoyed one gleam of satisfaction except at the expense
of another's quiet; and yet with this, I had almost called it
diabolical quality, he expects that I should cherish him with all
the tenderness of affection. After he has been at pains to incur my
aversion, he punishes my disgust, by contriving schemes to mortify
and perplex me, which have often succeeded so effectually, as to
endanger my life and constitution; for I have been fretted and frighted
into sundry fits of illness, and then I own I have experienced his
care and concern.

"Over and above the oddities I have mentioned, he is so unsteady
in his economy, that he is always new-modelling his affairs, and
exhausting his fortune, by laying out ten pounds, in order to save
a shilling. He inquires into the character of a servant, after he
has lived two years in his family, and is so ridiculously stocked
with vanity and self-conceit, that, notwithstanding my assurance
before, and the whole series of my conduct since our marriage, which
ought to have convinced him of my dislike, he is still persuaded,
that, at bottom, I must admire and be enamoured of his agreeable
person and accomplishments, and that I would not fail to manifest
my love, were I not spirited against him by his own relations.
Perhaps it might be their interest to foment the misunderstanding
betwixt us; but really they give themselves no trouble about our
affairs; and, so far as I know them, are a very good sort of people.
On the whole, I think I may with justice pronounce my precious
yoke-fellow a trifling, teasing, insufferable, inconsistent creature.

"With the little money which remained of what I had received from
his lordship for house-keeping, I transported myself to Flanders,
and arrived in Ghent a few days after our troops were quartered
in that city, which was so much crowded with these new visitants,
that I should have found it impracticable to procure a lodging,
had I not been accommodated by Lord B--, the duke of A--'s youngest
brother, who very politely gave me up his own. Here I saw my friend
Mr. B--, who was overjoyed at my arrival, though jealous of every
man of his acquaintance; for he loved me with all the ardour of
passion, and I regarded him with all the perfection of friendship,
which, had he lived, in time might have produced love; though
that was a fruit which it never brought forth. Notwithstanding his
earnest solicitations to the contrary, I stayed but a week in Ghent,
from whence I proceeded to Brussels, and fixed my abode in the
Hotel de Flandre, among an agreeable set of gentlemen and ladies,
with whom I spent my time very cheerfully. There was a sort of court
in this city, frequented by all the officers who could obtain
permission to go thither; and the place in general was gay and
agreeable. I was introduced to the best families, and very happy
in my acquaintance; for the ladies were polite, good-tempered, and
obliging, and treated me with the utmost hospitality and respect.
Among others, I contracted a friendship with Madame la comtesse
de C-- and her two daughters, who were very amiable young ladies;
and became intimate with the Princess C-- and Countess W--, lady
of the bedchamber to the queen of Hungary, and a great favourite
of the governor, Monsieur d'H--, in whose house she lived with his
wife, who was also a lady of a very engaging disposition.

"Soon after I had fixed my habitation in Brussels, the company at
our hotel was increased by three officers, who professed themselves
my admirers, and came from Ghent, with a view of soliciting my
love.  This triumvirate consisted of the Scotch earl of --, Lord
R-M--, and another young officer. The first was a man of a very
genteel figure and amorous complexion, danced well, and had a great
deal of good-humour, with a mixture of vanity and self-conceit. The
second had a good face, though a clumsy person, and a very sweet
disposition, very much adapted for the sentimental passion of love.
And the third, Mr. W-- by name, was tall, thin, and well-bred,
with a great stock of good-nature and vivacity. These adventurers
began their addresses in general acts of gallantry, that comprehended
several of my female friends, with whom we used to engage in
parties of pleasure, both in the city and the environs, which are
extremely agreeable. When they thought they had taken the preliminary
steps of securing themselves in my good opinion and esteem, they
agreed to go on without further delay, and that Lord -- should make
the first attack upon my heart

"He accordingly laid siege to me, with such warmth and assiduity,
that I believe he deceived himself, and began to think he was actually
in love; though, at bottom, he felt no impulse that deserved the
sacred name. Though I discouraged him in the beginning, he persecuted
me with his addresses; he always sat by me at dinner, and imparted a
thousand trifles in continual whispers, which attracted the notice
of the company so much, that I began to fear his behaviour would
give rise to some report to my prejudice, and therefore avoided
him with the utmost caution. Notwithstanding all my care, however,
he found means one night, while my maid, who lay in my room, went
downstairs, to get into my chamber after I was abed. Upon which, I
started up, and told him, that, if he should approach me, I would
alarm the house; for I never wanted courage and resolution. Perceiving
my displeasure, he kneeled by the bedside, begged I would have
pity on his sufferings, and swore I should have carte blanche to
the utmost extent of his fortune. To these proposals I made no other
reply, but that of protesting I would never speak to him again,
if he did not quit my apartment that moment; upon which he thought
proper to withdraw; and I never afterwards gave him an opportunity
of speaking to me on the same subject. So that, in a few weeks, he
separated himself from our society; though the ladies of Brussels
considered him as my lover, because, of all the other officers, he
was their greatest favourite.

"His lordship being thus repulsed, Mr. W-- took the field,
and assailed my heart in a very different manner. He said he knew
not how to make love, but was a man of honour, and would keep the
secret, and so forth. To this cavalier address I answered, that
I was not angry as I otherwise should have been, at his blunt
declaration, because I found by his own confession, he did not know
what was due to the sex; and my unhappy situation in some shape
excused him for a liberty which he would not have dreamed of taking,
had not my misfortunes encouraged his presumption. But I would deal
with him in his own way; and, far from assuming the prude, frankly
assured him, that he was not at all to my taste, hoping he would
consider my dislike as a sufficient reason to reject his love.

"Lord R-- began to feel the symptoms of a genuine passion, which
he carefully cherished in silence, being naturally diffident
and bashful; but, by the very means he used to conceal it from
my observation, I plainly discerned the situation of his heart,
and was not at all displeased at the progress I had made in his
inclinations. Meanwhile he cultivated my acquaintance with great
assiduity and respect, attended me in all my excursions, and
particularly in an expedition to Antwerp, with two other gentlemen,
where, in downright gaiete de coeur, we sat for our pictures, which
were drawn in one piece, one of the party being represented in the
dress of a hussar, and another in that of a running footman. This
incident I mention, because the performance, which is now in my
possession, gave birth to a thousand groundless reports circulated
in England at our expense.

"It was immediately after this jaunt that Lord R-- began to disclose
his passion; though he, at the same time, started such objections as
seemed to extinguish his hopes, lamenting that, even if he should
have the happiness to engage my affections, his fortune was
too inconsiderable to support us against the efforts of Lord --,
should he attempt to interrupt our felicity, and that he himself
was obliged to follow the motions of the army. In short, he seemed
to consider my felicity more than his own, and behaved with such
delicacy, as gradually made an impression on my heart. so that,
when we parted, we agreed to renew our correspondence in England.

"In the midst of these agreeable amusements, which I enjoyed in almost
all the different towns of Flanders, I happened to be at Ghent one
day, sitting among a good deal of company, in one of their hotels,
when a post-chaise stopped at the gate; upon which we went to the
windows to satisfy our curiosity, when who should step out of the
convenience, but my little insignificant lord! I no sooner announced
him to the company, than all the gentlemen asked whether they
should stay and protect me, or withdraw; and when I assured them
that their protection was not necessary, one and all of them retired;
though Lord R-- M-- went no farther than the parlour below, being
determined to screen me against all violence and compulsion. I sent
a message to my lord, desiring him to walk up into my apartment; but
although his sole errand was to see and carry me off, he would not
venture to accept of my invitation, till he had demanded me in form
from the governor of the place. That gentleman, being altogether a
stranger to his person and character, referred him to the commanding
officer of the English troops, who was a man of honour, and,
upon his lordship's application, pretended to doubt his identity;
observing, that he had always heard Lord -- represented as a jolly,
corpulent man. He gave him to understand, however, that even granting
him to be the person, I was by no means subject to military law,
unless he could prove that I had ever listed in his Majesty's
service.

"Thus disappointed in his endeavours, he returned to the inn, and,
with much persuasion, trusted himself in my dining-room, after
having stationed his attendants at the door, in case of accidents.
When I asked what had procured me the honour of this visit, he
told me, his business and intention were to carry me home. This
declaration produced a conference, in which I argued the case with
him; and matters were accommodated for the present, by my promising
to be in England some time in September, on condition that he would
permit me to live by myself, as before, and immediately order the
arrears of my pin-money to be paid. He assented to everything I
proposed, returned in peace to his own country, and the deficiencies
of my allowance were made good; while I returned to Brussels, where
I stayed until my departure for England, which I regulated in such
a manner as was consistent with my engagement.

"I took lodgings in Pall-mall, and, sending for my lord, convinced
him of my punctuality, and put him in mind of his promise, when,
to my utter astonishment and confusion, he owned, that his promise
was no more than a decoy to bring me over, and that I must lay my
account with living in his house like a dutiful and obedient wife.
I heard him with the indignation such treatment deserved, upbraiding
him with his perfidious dealing, which I told him would have
determined me against cohabitation with him had I not been already
resolved; and, being destitute of all resource, repaired to Bath,
where I afterwards met with Mr. D-- and Mr. R--, two gentlemen
who had been my fellow-passengers in the yacht from Flanders, and
treated me with great friendship and politeness, without either
talking or thinking of love.

"With these gentlemen, who were as idle as myself, I went to the
jubilee at Preston, which was no other than a great number of people
assembled in a small town, extremely ill-accommodated, to partake
of diversions that were bad imitations of plays, concerts,
and masquerades. If the world should place to the account of my
indiscretion my travelling in this manner with gentlemen to whom
I had no particular attachment, let it also be considered, as an
alleviation, that I always lived in terror of my lord, and consequently
was often obliged to shift my quarters; so that, my finances being
extremely slender, I stood the more in need of assistance and
protection. I was, besides, young, inconsiderate, and so simple, as
to suppose the figure of an ugly man would always secure me from
censure on his account; neither did I ever dream of any man's
addresses, until he made an actual declaration of his love.

"Upon my return to Bath, I was again harassed by Lord --, who came
thither accompanied by my father, whom I was very glad to see,
though he importuned me to comply with my husband's desire, and
for the future keep measures with the world. This remonstrance
about living with my lord, which he constantly repeated, was the
only instance of his unkindness which I ever felt. But all his
admonitions were not of force sufficient to shake my resolution in
that particular; though the debate continued so late, that I told
his lordship, it was high time to retire, for I could not accommodate
him with a bed. He then gave me to understand, that he would stay
where he was; upon which my father took his leave, on pretence of
looking out for a lodging for himself. The little gentleman being
now left with me, began to discover some signs of apprehension in
his looks; but, mustering up all his resolution, he went to the
door, called up three of his servants, whom he placed as sentinels
upon the stairs, and flounced into my elbow-chair, where he
resigned himself to rest. Intending to go to bed, I thought it was
but just and decent that I should screen myself from the intrusion
of his footmen, and with that view bolted the door. Lord --, hearing
himself locked in, started up in the utmost terror and consternation,
kicked the door with his heel, and screamed aloud, as if he had
been in the hands of an assassin. My father, who had not yet quitted
the house, hearing these outcries, ran upstairs again, and, coming
through my bedchamber into the dining-room where we were, found me
almost suffocated with laughter, and his heroic son-in-law staring
like one who had lost his wits, with his hair standing on end.

"When my father asked the meaning of his exclamations, he told him,
with all the symptoms of dismay, that I had locked him in, and he
did not understand such usage. But I explained the whole mystery,
by saying, I had bolted the door because I did not like the company
of his servants, and could not imagine the cause of his panic,
unless he thought I designed to ravish him; an insult than which
nothing was farther from my intention. My father himself could
scarce refrain from laughing at his ridiculous fear; but, seeing
him in great confusion, took pity on his condition, and carried him
off to his own lodgings, after I had given my word that I would not
attempt to escape, but give him audience next morning. I accordingly
kept my promise, and found means to persuade them to leave me at
my own discretion. Next day I was rallied upon the stratagem I had
contrived to frighten Lord --; and a thousand idle stories were told
about this adventure, which happened literally as I have related
it.

"From Bath I betook myself to a small house near Lincoln, which
I had hired of the d-- of A--, because a country life suited best
with my income, which was no more than four hundred pounds a year,
and that not well paid. I continued some months in this retirement,
and saw no company, except Lord R-- M--, who lived in the neighbourhood,
and visited me twice; till, finding myself indisposed, I was
obliged to remove to London, and took lodgings in Maddox-street,
where my garrison was taken by storm by my Lord -- and his steward,
reinforced by Mr. L-- V-- (who, as my lord told me, had a subsidy
of five-and-twenty pounds before he would take the field) and a couple
of hardy footmen. This formidable band rushed into my apartment,
laid violent hands upon me, dragged me down-stairs without gloves
or a cloak, and, thrusting me into a coach that stood at the door,
conveyed me to my lord's lodgings in Gloucester-street. Upon this
occasion, his lordship courageously drew his sword upon my woman,
who attempted to defend me from his insults, and, in all probability,
would have intimidated him from proceeding; for he looked pale
and aghast, his knees knocked together, and he breathed thick and
hard, with his nostrils dilated, as if he had seen a ghost; but he
was encouraged by his mercenary associate, who, for the five-and-twenty
pounds, stood by him in the day of trouble, and spirited him on to
this gallant enterprise.

"In consequence of this exploit, I was cooped up in a paltry apartment
in Gloucester-street, where I was close beset by his lordship and
his worthy steward Mr. H--, with a set of servants that were the
creatures of this fellow, of whom my lord himself stood in awe,
so that I could not help thinking myself in Newgate, among thieves
and ruffians. To such a degree did my terror avail, that I actually
believed I was in danger of being poisoned, and would not receive
any sustenance, except from the hands of one harmless-looking
fellow, a foreigner, who, was my lord's valet-de-chambre. I will
not pretend to say my fears were just; but such was my opinion of
H--, that I never doubted he would put me out of the way, if he
thought my life interfered with his interest. On the second day of
my imprisonment, I was visited by the duke of L--, a friend of my
lord, who found me sitting upon a trunk, in a poor little diningroom
filled with lumber, and lighted with two bits of tallow candle,
which had been left overnight. He perceived in my face a mixture
of rage, indignation, terror, and despair. He compassionated my
sufferings, though he could not alleviate my distress any other
way than by interceding with my tyrant to mitigate my oppression.
Nevertheless, I remained eleven days in this uncomfortable situation:
I was watched like a criminal all day, and one of the servants
walked from one room to another all night, in the nature of a patrol;
while my lord, who lay in the chamber above me, got out of bed and
tripped to the window at the sound of every coach that chanced to
pass through the street. H--, who was consummate in the arts of a
sycophant, began to court my favour, by condoling my affliction,
and assuring me, that the only method by which I could regain my
liberty was a cheerful compliance with the humour of my lord. I
was fully convinced of the truth of this observation; and, though
my temper is altogether averse to dissimulation, attempted to affect
an air of serenity and resignation. But this disguise, I found,
would not answer my purpose; and therefore I had recourse to
the assistance of my maid, who was permitted to attend me in my
confinement. With her I frequently consulted about the means of
accomplishing my escape. In consequence of our deliberations, she
directed a coach and six to be ready at a certain part of the town,
and to wait for me three days in the same place, in case I could
not come before the expiration of that term.

"This previous measure being taken according to my instructions,
the next necessary step was to elude the vigilance of my guard:
and in this manner did I effectuate my purpose. Being by this time
indulged in the liberty of going out in the coach for the benefit
of the air, attended by two footmen, who had orders to watch all
my motions, I made use of this privilege one forenoon, when Lord --
expected some company to dinner, and bade the coachman drive to
the lodgings of a man who wrote with his mouth, intending to give
my spies the slip, on pretence of seeing this curiosity; but they
were too alert in their duty to be thus outwitted, and followed me
up-stairs into the very apartment.

"Disappointed in this hope, I resolved another scheme, which was
attended with success. I bought some olives at an oil-shop; and,
telling the servants I would proceed to St. James's-gate, and take
a turn in the park, broke one of the bottles by the way, complained
of the misfortune when I was set down, and desired my coach might
be cleaned before my return. While my attendants were employed in
this office, I tripped across the Parade to the Horse Guards, and
chanced to meet with an acquaintance in the park, who said, he
saw by my countenance that I was upon some expedition. I owned his
suspicion was just, but, as I had not time to relate particulars,
I quickened my pace, and took possession of a hackney-coach, in
which I proceeded to the vehicle I had appointed to be in waiting.

"While I thus compassed my escape, there was nothing but perplexity
and confusion at home; dinner was delayed till six o'clock; my
lord ran half the town over in quest of his equipage, which at last
returned, with an account of my elopement. My maid was brought to
the question, and grievously threatened; but, like all the women
I ever had, remained unshaken in her fidelity. In the meantime,
I travelled night and day towards my retreat in Lincolnshire, of
which his lordship had not, as yet, got the least intelligence;
and as my coachman was but an inexperienced driver, I was obliged
to make use of my own skill in that exercise, and direct his
endeavours the whole way, without venturing to go to bed, or take
the least repose, until I reached my own habitation. There I lived
in peace and tranquility for the space of six weeks, when I was
alarmed by one of my lord's myrmidons, who came into the neighbourhood,
blustering and swearing that he would carry me off either dead or
alive.

"It is not to be supposed that I was perfectly easy when I was made
acquainted with his purpose and declaration, as my whole family
consisted of no more than a couple of women and one footman.
However, I summoned up my courage, which had been often tried, and
never forsook me in the day of danger; and sent him word, that,
if ever he should presume to approach my house, I would order him
to be shot without ceremony. The fellow did not choose to put me
to the trial, and returned to town without his errand: but as the
place of my abode was now discovered, I laid my account with having a
visit from his employer; I therefore planted spies upon the road,
with a promise of reward to him who should bring me the first
intelligence of his lordship's approach.

"Accordingly, I was one morning apprised of his coming, and, mounting
horse immediately, with my woman and valet, away we rode, in defiance
of winter. In two days I traversed the wilds of Lincolnshire and
hundreds of Essex, crossed the river at Tilbury, breakfasted at
Chatham, by the help of a guide and moonlight arrived at Dover the
same evening, embarked for Calais, in which place I found myself
next day at two o'clock in the afternoon; and being heartily tired
with my journey, betook myself to rest. My maid, who was not able
to travel with such expedition, followed me at an easier pace; and
the footman was so astonished at my perseverance, that he could
not help asking me upon the road, if ever I was weary in my life.
Certain it is, my spirits and resolution have enabled me to undergo
fatigues that are almost incredible. From Calais I went to Brussels,
where I again set up my rest in private lodgings; was again perfectly
well received by the fashionable people of that place; and, by the
interest of my friends, obtained the queen of Hungary's protection
against the persecution of my husband, while I should reside in the
Austrian Netherlands. Thus secured, I lived uncensured, conversing
with the English company, with which this city was crowded; but spent
the most agreeable part of my time with the countess of Calemberg,
in whose house I generally dined and supped. And I also contracted
an intimacy with the princess of Chemay, who was a great favourite
with Madame d'Harrach, the governor's lady.

"I had not been long in this happy situation, when I was disturbed
by the arrival of Lord --, who demanded me of the governor; but
finding me sheltered from his power, he set out for Vienna; and, in
consequence of his representations, strengthened with the duke of
N--'s name, my protection was withdrawn. But, before this application,
he had gone to the camp, and addressed himself to my Lord Stair,
who was my particular friend and ally by my first marriage, desiring
he would compel me to return to his house. His lordship told him,
that I was in no shape subject to his command; but invited him to
dinner, with a view of diverting himself and company at the expense
of his guest. In the evening, he was plied with so many bumpers to
my health, that he became intoxicated, and extremely obstreperous,
insisted upon seeing Lord Stair after he was retired to rest,
and quarrelled with Lord D--, who being a tall, large, raw-boned
Scotchman, could have swallowed him at one mouthful; but he thought
he might venture to challenge him, in hopes of being put under
arrest by the general. Though he reckoned without his host; Lord
Stair knew his disposition, and, in order to punish his presumption,
winked at the affair. The challenger, finding himself mistaken in
his conjecture, got up early in the morning, and went off post for
Vienna. And Lord Stair desired a certain man of quality to make me
a visit, and give me an account of his behaviour.

"Being now deprived of my protection and pin-money, which my generous
husband would no longer pay, I was reduced to great difficulty and
distress. The duchess d'Aremberg, Lord G--, and many other persons
of distinction, interceded in my behalf with his Majesty, who was
then abroad; but he refused to interpose between man and wife. The
countess of Calemberg wrote a letter to my father, in which she
represented my uncomfortable situation, and undertook to answer
for my conduct, in case he would allow me a small annuity, on which
I could live independent of Lord --, who, by all accounts, was a
wretch with whom I could never enjoy the least happiness or quiet,
otherwise she would be the first to advise me to an accommodation. She
gave him to understand, that her character was neither doubtful nor
obscure; and that, if my conduct there had not been irreproachable,
she should not have taken me under her protection. That, as I proposed
to board in a convent, a small sum would answer my occasions; but,
if that should be denied, I would actually go to service, or take
some other desperate step, to avoid the man who was my bane and
aversion.

"To this kind remonstrance my father answered that his fortune would
not allow him to assist me; he had now a young family; and that I
ought, at all events, to return to my husband. By this time, such
was the extremity of my circumstances, that I was forced to pawn
my clothes, and every trifling trinket in my possession, and even
to descend so far as to solicit Mr. S-- for a loan of fifty pounds,
which he refused. Thus was I deserted in my distress by two persons,
to whom, in the season of my affluence, my purse had been always
open. Nothing so effectually subdues a spirit unused to supplicate,
as want. Repulsed in this manner, I had recourse to Lord B--,
who was also, it seems, unable to relieve my necessities. This
mortification I deserved at his hands, though he had once put it
in my power to be above all such paltry applications; and I should
not have been compelled to the disagreeable task of troubling
my friends, had not I voluntarily resigned what he formerly gave
me. As to the other gentleman to whom I addressed myself on this
occasion, I think he might have shown more regard to my situation,
not only for the reasons already mentioned, but because he knew me
too well to be ignorant of what I must have suffered in condescending
to make such a request.

"Several officers, who guessed my adversity, generously offered to
supply me with money; but I could not bring myself to make use of
their friendship, or even to own my distress, except to one person,
of whom I borrowed a small sum. To crown my misfortunes, I was
taken very ill, at a time when there was no other way of avoiding
the clutches of my persecutor but by a precipitate flight. In this
emergency, I applied to a worthy gentleman of Brussels, a very
good friend of mine, but no lover. I say no lover, because every
man is supposed to act in that capacity who befriends a young woman
in distress. This generous Fleming set out with me in the night
from Brussels, and conducted me to the frontier of France. Being
very much indisposed both in mind and body when I was obliged to
undertake this expedition, I should in all probability have sunk
under the fatigue of travelling, had not my spirits been kept up
by the conversation of my companion, who was a man of business and
consequence, and undertook to manage my affairs in such a manner
as would enable me to re-establish my residence in the place I had
left. He was young and active, attended me with the utmost care and
assiduity, and left nothing undone which he thought would contribute
to my ease and satisfaction. I believe his friendship for me was
a little tinctured with another passion; but he was married, and
lived very well with his wife, who was also my friend; so that he
knew I would never think of him in the light of a lover.

"Upon our arrival at Valenciennes, he accommodated me with a
little money, for a little was all I would take, and returned to
his own city, after we had settled a correspondence by letters. I
was detained a day or two in this place by my indisposition, which
increased; but, nevertheless, proceeded to Paris, to make interest
for a protection from the king of France, which that monarch
graciously accorded me, in three days after my first application,
and his minister sent orders to all the governors and intendants
of the province towns, to protect me against the efforts of Lord
--, in whatever place I should choose to reside.

"Having returned my thanks at Versailles for this favour, and tarried
a few days at Paris, which was a place altogether unsuitable to
the low ebb of my fortune, I repaired to Lisle, where I intended
to fix my habitation; and there my disorder recurred with such
violence, that I was obliged to send for a physician, who seemed to
have been a disciple of Sangrado; for he scarce left a drop of blood
in my body, and yet I found myself never a whit the better. Indeed,
I was so much exhausted by these evacuations, and my constitution
so much impaired by fatigue and perturbation of mind, that I had no
other hope of recovering but that of reaching England, and putting
myself under the direction of a physician on whose ability I could
depend.

"With this doubtful prospect, therefore, I determined to attempt a
return to my native air, and actually departed from Lisle, in such
a melancholy, enfeebled condition, that I had almost fainted when
I was put into the coach. But before I resolved upon this journey,
I was reduced to the utmost exigence of fortune, so that I could
scarce afford to buy provisions, had it been in my power to eat,
and should not have been able to defray my travelling expenses, had
I not been generously befriended by Lord R-- H--, who, I am sure,
would have done anything for my case and accommodation, though he
has unjustly incurred the imputation of being parsimonious, and I
had no reason to expect any such favour at his hands.

"In this deplorable state of health I was conveyed to Calais, being
all the way, as it were, in the arms of death, without having swallowed
the least sustenance on the road. So much was my indisposition
augmented by the fatigue of the journey, that I swooned when I was
brought into the inn, and had almost expired before I could receive
the least assistance or advice. However, my spirits were a little
revived by some bread and wine, which I took at the persuasion of
a French surgeon, who, chancing to pass by the door, was called
up to my relief. Having sent my servant to Brussels, to take care
of my clothes, I embarked in the packet-boat, and by the time we
arrived at Dover was almost in extremity.

"Here I found a return coach, in which I was carried to London,
and was put to bed at the house we put up at, more dead than alive.
The people of the inn sent for an apothecary, who administered
some cordial that recalled me to life; and, when I recovered the
use of speech, I told him who I was, and desired him to wait upon
Dr. S--, and inform him of my situation. A young girl, who was
niece to the landlord's wife, seeing me unattended, made a tender
of her service to me, and I accepted the offer, as well as of a
lodging in the apothecary's house, to which I was conveyed as soon
as my strength would admit of my removal. There I was visited by my
physician, who was shocked to find me in such a dangerous condition.
However, having considered my case, he perceived that my indisposition
proceeded from the calamities I had undergone, and encouraged me
with the hope of a speedy cure, provided I could be kept easy and
undisturbed. I was accordingly attended with all imaginable care;
my lord's name being never mentioned in my hearing, because I
considered him as the fatal source of all my misfortunes; and in
a month I recovered my health, by the great skill and tenderness
of my doctor, who now finding me strong enough to encounter fresh
troubles, endeavoured to persuade me, that it would be my wisest
step to return to my husband, whom at that time he had often occasion
to see. But I rejected his proposal, commencing a new lawsuit for
separation, and took a small house in St. James's-square.

"About this time my woman returned from Brussels, but without my
clothes, which were detained on account of the money I owed in that
place; and, asking her dismission from my service, set up shop for
herself. I had not lived many weeks in my new habitation, when my
persecutor renewed his attempts to make himself master of my person;
but I had learned from experience to redouble my vigilance, and
he was frustrated in all his endeavours. I was again happy in the
conversation of my former acquaintance, and visited by a great number
of gentlemen, mostly persons of probity and sense, who cultivated
my friendship, without any other motive of attachment.  Not that I
was unsolicited on the article of love. That was a theme on which
I never wanted orators; and could I have prevailed upon myself
to profit by the advances that were made, I might have managed my
opportunities so as to have set fortune at defiance for the future.
But I was none of these economists who can sacrifice their hearts
to interested considerations.

"One evening, while I was conversing with three or four of my friends,
my lawyer came in, and told me he had something of consequence to
impart; upon which all the gentlemen but one went away. Then he
gave me to understand, that my suit would immediately come to trial;
and, though he hoped the best, the issue was uncertain. That, if
it should be given against me, the decision would inspire my lord
with fresh spirits to disturb my peace, and, therefore, it would
be convenient for me to retire, until the affair should be brought
to a determination.

"I was very much disconcerted at this intelligence; and the gentleman
who stayed, perceiving my concern, asked what I intended to do,
or if he could serve me in any shape, and desired to know whither
I proposed to retreat. I affected to laugh, and answered, "To
a garret, I believe." To this overstrained reasoning he replied,
that if I should, his friendship and regard would find the way to
my apartment; and I had no reason to doubt the sincerity of his
declaration. We consulted about the measures I should take, and I
determined to remove into the country, where I was soon favoured
with a letter from him, wherein he expressed the infinite pleasure
he had in being able to assure me that my suit had been successful,
and that I might appear again with great safety.

"Accordingly, I returned to town in his coach and six, which he had
sent for my convenience, and the same evening went with him to the
masquerade, where we passed the night very agreeably, his spirits,
as well as mine, being elevated to a joyous pitch by the happy
event of my process. This gentleman was a person of great honour,
worth, and good-nature; he loved me extremely, but did not care
that I should know the extent of his passion. On the contrary, he
endeavoured to persuade me, he had laid it down as a maxim, that
no woman should ever have power enough over his heart to give him
the least pain or disquiet. In short, he had made a progress in my
affection, and to his generosity was I indebted for my subsistence
two whole years; during which, he was continually professing this
philosophic indifference, while, at the same time, he was giving
me daily assurances of his friendship and esteem, and treated me
with incessant marks of the most passionate love; so that I concluded
his intention was cold, though his temper was warm. Considering
myself as an encumbrance upon his fortune, I redoubled my endeavours
to obtain a separate maintenance from my lord, and removed from
St.  James's-square to lodgings at Kensington, where I had not long
enjoyed myself in tranquility, before I was interrupted by a very
unexpected visit.

"While I was busy one day dressing in my dining-room, I found his
lordship at my elbow before I was aware of his approach, although
his coach was at the door, and the house already in the possession
of his servants. He accosted me in the usual style, as if we had
parted the night before; and I answered him with an appearance of
the same careless familiarity, desiring him to sit down, while I
retreated to my chamber, locked the door, and fairly went to bed;
being perhaps the first woman who went thither for protection from
the insults of a man. Here, then. I immured myself with my faithful
Abigail. My lord finding me secured, knocked at the door, and through
the keyhole begged to be admitted, assuring me that all he wanted
was a conference. I desired to be excused, though I believed his
assurance; but I had no inclination to converse with him, because
I knew from experience the nature of his conversation, which was so
disagreeable and tormenting, that I would have exchanged it at any
time for a good beating, and thought myself a gainer by the bargain.
However, he persisted in his importunities to such a degree, that
I assented to his proposal, on condition that the duke of L-- should
be present at the interview: and he immediately sent a message
for his grace, while I, in peace, ate my breakfast, conveyed in a
basket, which was hoisted up to the window of my bedchamber.

"The duke was so kind as to come at my lord's request, and, before
I would open the door, gave me his word, that I should be protected
from all violence and compulsion. Thus assured, they were permitted
to enter. My little gentleman, sitting down by my bedside, began
to repeat the old hackneyed arguments he had formerly used, with a
view of inducing me to live with him; and I, on my side, repeated
my former objections, or pretended to listen to his representations,
while my imagination was employed in contriving the means of
effecting an escape, as the duke easily perceived by my countenance.

"Finding all his remonstrances ineffectual, he quitted the chamber,
and left his cause to the eloquence of his grace, who sat with me
a whole half-hour, without exerting himself much in behalf of his
client, because he knew I was altogether obstinate and determined
on that score; but joked upon the behaviour of his lordship, who,
though jealous of most people, had left him alone with me in my
bedchamber, observing, that he must neither have great confidence
in his virtue, or a very bad opinion of him otherwise. In short,
I found means to defer the categorical answer till next day, and
invited the duke and his lordship to dine with me to-morrow. My
wise yoke-fellow seemed to doubt the sincerity of this invitation,
and was very much disposed to keep possession of my house. But,
by the persuasion of his grace, and the advice of H--, who was his
chief counsellor and back, he was prevailed upon to take my word,
and for the present left me.

"They were no sooner retired, than I rose with great expedition,
packed up my clothes, and took shelter in Essex for the first time.
Next day, my lord and his noble friend came to dinner, according
to appointment; and being informed of my escape by my woman, whom
I left in the house, his lordship discovered some signs of discontent,
and insisted upon seeing my papers; upon which my maid produced a
parcel of bills which I owed to different people. Notwithstanding
this disappointment, he sat down to what was provided for dinner,
and with great deliberation ate up a leg of lamb, the best part of
a fowl, and something else, which I do not now remember; and then
very peaceably went away, giving my maid an opportunity of following
me to the place of my retreat.

"My intention was to have sought refuge, as formerly, in another
country; but I was prevented from putting my design in execution
by a fit of illness, during which I was visited by my physician and
some of my own relations, particularly a distant cousin of mine,
whom my lord had engaged in his interests, by promising to recompense
her amply, if she could persuade me to comply with his desire. In
this office she was assisted by the doctor, who was my friend, and
a man of sense, for whom I have the most perfect esteem, though he
and I have often differed in point of opinion. In a word, I was
exposed to the incessant importunities of all my acquaintance, which,
added to the desperate circumstances of my fortune, compelled me
to embrace the terms that were offered, and I again returned to
the domestic duties of a wife.

"I was conducted to my lord's house by an old friend of mine, a
gentleman turned of fifty, of admirable parts and understanding;
he was a pleasing companion, cheerful and humane, and had acquired
a great share of my esteem and respect. In a word, his advice had
great weight in my deliberations, because it seemed to be the result
of experience and disinterested friendship. Without all doubt, he
had an unfeigned concern for my welfare; but, being an admirable
politician, his scheme was to make my interest coincide with his
own inclinations; for I had, unwittingly, made an innovation upon
his heart; and as he thought I should hardly favour his passion
while I was at liberty to converse with the rest of my admirers,
he counselled me to surrender that freedom, well knowing that my
lord would be easily persuaded to banish all his rivals from the
house; in which case, he did not doubt of his being able to insinuate
himself into my affections; because he laid it down as an eternal
truth, that, if any two persons of different sexes were obliged to
live together in a desert, where they would be excluded from all
other human intercourse, they would naturally and inevitably contract
an inclination for each other.

"How just this hypothesis might be, I leave to the determination
of the curious; though, if I may be allowed to judge from my own
disposition, a couple so situated would be apt to imbibe mutual
disgusts from the nature and necessity of their union, unless
their association was at first the effect of reciprocal affection
and esteem. Be this as it will, I honour the gentleman for his
plan, which was ingeniously contrived, and artfully conducted; but
I happened to have too much address for him in the sequel, cunning
as he was, though at first I did not perceive his drift; and his
lordship was much less likely to comprehend his meaning.

"Immediately after this new accommodation, I was carried to a
country house belonging to my lord, and was simple enough to venture
myself, unattended by any servant on whose integrity I could depend,
in the hands of his lordship, and H--, whose villainy I always
dreaded; though, at this time, my apprehensions were considerably
increased by recollecting, that it was not his interest to let
me live in the house, lest his conduct should be inquired into;
and by remembering that the very house to which we were going had
been twice burnt down in a very short space of time, not without
suspicion of his having been the incendiary, on account of some box
of writings which was lost in the conflagration. True it is, this
imputation was never made good; and, perhaps, he was altogether
innocent of the charge, which nevertheless affected my spirits in
such a manner, as rendered me the most miserable of all mortals.
In this terror did I remain, till my consternation was awakened
by the arrival of Mr. B--, a good-natured worthy man, whom my lord
had invited to his house, and I thought would not see me ill-used.
In a few weeks we were joined by Dr. S-- and his lady, who visited
us according to their promise; and it was resolved that we should
set out for Tunbridge, on a party of pleasure, and at our return
examine H--'s accounts.

"This last part of our scheme was not at all relished by our worthy
steward, who therefore determined to overturn our whole plan, and
succeeded accordingly. My lord, all of a sudden, declared himself
against the jaunt we had projected, and insisted upon my staying at
home, without assigning any reason for this peremptory behaviour;
his countenance being cloudy, and, for the space of three days, he
did not open his mouth. At last, he one night entered my bedchamber,
to which he now had free access, with his sword under his arm, and,
if I remember aright, it was ready drawn. I could not help taking
notice of this alarming circumstance, which shocked me the more, as
it happened immediately after a gloomy fit of discontent. However,
I seemed to overlook the incident, and, dismissing my maid, went
to bed; because I was ashamed to acknowledge, even to my own heart,
any dread of a person whom I despised so much. However, the strength
of my constitution was not equal to the fortitude of my mind. I was
taken ill, and the servants were obliged to be called up; while my
lord himself, terrified at my situation, ran upstairs to Mrs. S--,
who was in bed, told her, with evident perturbation of spirits, that
I was very much indisposed, and said, he believed I was frightened
by his entering my chamber with his sword in hand.

"This lady was so startled at his information, that she ran into
my apartment half naked, and as she went down-stairs, asked what
reason could induce him to have carried his sword with him. Upon
which he gave her to understand, that his intention was to kill
the bats. I believe and hope he had no other design than that of
intimidating me; but when the affair happened, I was of a different
opinion. Mrs.  S--, having put on her clothes, sat up all night
by my bedside, and was so good as to assure me that she would not
leave me until I should be safely delivered from the apprehensions
that surrounded me in this house, to which she and the doctor had
been the principal cause of my coming; for my lord had haunted and
importuned them incessantly on this subject, protesting that he
loved me with the most inviolable affection; and all he desired
was, that I would sit at his table, manage his family, and share
his fortune. By these professions, uttered with an air of honesty
and good-nature, he had imposed himself upon them for the best
tempered creature upon earth; and they used all their influence with
me to take him into favour.  This has been the case with a great
many people, who had but a superficial knowledge of his disposition;
but, in the course of their acquaintance, they have never failed
to discern and acknowledge their mistake.

"The doctor, on his return from Tunbridge, to which place he had
made a trip by himself, found me ill abed, and the whole family
in confusion. Surprised and concerned at this disorder, he entered
into expostulation with my lord, who owned, that the cause of his
displeasure and disquiet was no other than jealousy. He had informed
him, that I had been seen to walk out with Mr. Bal-- in a morning;
and that our correspondence had been observed, with many additional
circumstances, which were absolutely false and groundless. This
imputation was no sooner understood, than it was resolved that the
accuser should be examined in presence of us all. He accordingly
appeared, exceedingly drunk, though it was morning, and repeated the
articles of the charge, as an information he had received from a
man who came from town to hang the bells, and was long ago returned
to London.

"This was an instance of his cunning and address, which did not
forsake him even in his hours of intoxication. Had he fixed the
calumny on any one of the servants, he would have been confronted
and detected in his falsehood. Nevertheless, though he could not
be legally convicted, it plainly appeared that he was the author
of this defamation, which incensed Mr. Bal-- to such a degree,
that he could scarce be withheld from punishing him on the spot,
by manual chastisement. However, he was prevailed upon to abstain
from such immediate vengeance, as a step unworthy of his character;
and the affair was brought to this issue, that his lordship should
either part with me or Mr. H--; for I was fully determined against
living under the same roof with such an incendiary.

"This alternative being proposed, my lord dismissed his steward,
and we returned to town with the doctor and Mrs. S--; for I had
imbibed such horror and aversion for this country seat, though one
of the pleasantest in England, that I could not bear to live in it.
We therefore removed to a house in Bond-street, where, according to
the advice of my friends, I exerted my whole power and complaisance
in endeavours to keep my husband in good-humour, but was so
unsuccessful in my attempts, that, if ever he was worse tempered,
more capricious, or intolerable, at one time than at another, this
was the season in which his ill-humour predominated in the most
rancorous degree. I was scarce ever permitted to stir abroad, saw
nobody at home, but my old male friend, whom I have mentioned above;
and the doctor, with his lady, from whose conversation, also, I
was at last excluded.

"Nevertheless, I contrived to steal a meeting now and then with my
late benefactor, for whom I entertained a great share of affection,
exclusive of that gratitude that was due to his generosity. It
was not his fault that I compromised matters with my lord; for he
was as free of his purse as I was unwilling to use it. It would,
therefore, have been unfriendly, unkind, and ungrateful in me, now
that I was in affluence, to avoid all intercourse with a man who
had supported me in adversity. I think people cannot be too shy
and scrupulous in receiving favours; but once they are conferred,
they ought never to forget the obligation. And I was never more
concerned at any incident of my life, than at hearing that this
gentleman did not receive a letter, in which I acknowledged the
last proof of his friendship and liberality which I had occasion
to use, because I have since learned that he suspected me of neglect.

"But to return to my situation in Bond-street. I bore it as well as
I could for the space of three months, during which I lived in the
midst of spies, who were employed to watch my conduct, and underwent
every mortification that malice, power, and folly could inflict.
Nay, so ridiculous, so unreasonable was my tyrant in his spleen,
that he declared he would even be jealous of Heydigger, if there
was no other man to incur his suspicion: he expected that I should
spend my whole time with him tete-a-tete; when I sacrificed my
enjoyment to these comfortable parties, he never failed to lay hold
on some innocent expression of mine, which he made the foundation
of a quarrel; and, when I strove to avoid these disagreeable
misinterpretations by reading or writing, he incessantly teased
and tormented me with the imputation of being peevish, sullen, and
reserved.

"Harassed by this insufferable behaviour, I communicated my case
to Dr. S-- and his lady, intimating that I neither could nor would
expose myself any longer to such usage. The doctor exhorted me to
bear my fate with patience; and Mrs. S-- was silent on the subject;
so that I still hesitated between staying and going, when the
doctor, being one night at supper, happened to have some words
with my lord, who was so violently transported with passion, that
I was actually afraid of going to bed with him; and next morning,
when he awakened, there was such an expression of frantic wildness
in his countenance, that I imagined he was actually distracted.

"This alarming circumstance confirmed me in my resolution of decamping;
and I accordingly moved my quarters to a house in Sackville-street,
where I had lodged when I was a widow. From thence I sent a message
to the duke of L--, desiring he would make my lord acquainted with
the place of my abode, my reasons for removing, and my intention
to defend myself against all his attempts. The first night of this
separation I went to bed by myself with as much pleasure as a man
would feel in going to bed to his mistress whom he had long solicited in
vain, so rejoiced was I to be delivered from my obnoxious bedfellow!

"From these lodgings I soon moved to Brook-street, where I had
not long enjoyed the sweets of my escape, when I was importuned
to return, by a new steward whom my lord had engaged in the room
of H--. This gentleman, who bore a very fair character, made such
judicious representations, and behaved so candidly in the discharge
of his function, that I agreed he should act as umpire in the
difference betwixt us, and once more a reconciliation was effected,
though his lordship began to be dissatisfied even before the execution
of our agreement; in consequence of which he attended me to Bath,
whither I went for the benefit of my health, which was not a little
impaired.

"This accommodation had a surprising effect upon my lover, who,
notwithstanding his repeated declarations, that no woman should
ever gain such an ascendancy over his heart as to be able to give
him pain, suffered all the agonies of disappointed love, when he
now found himself deprived of the opportunities of seeing me, and
behaved very differently from what he had imagined he should. His
words and actions were desperate: one of his expressions to me
was, "It is like twisting my heart-strings, and tearing it out of
my body." Indeed, I never should have acted this part had I foreseen
what he would have suffered; but I protest I believed him, when he
said otherwise, so much, that his declaration on that subject was
the occasion of my giving him up; and it was now too late to retract.

"In our expedition to Bath, I was accompanied by a very agreeable
young lady, with whom I passed my time very happily, amid the
diversions of the place, which screened me, in a good measure,
from the vexatious society of my hopeful partner. From this place
we repaired to his seat in the country, where we spent a few months,
and thence returned again to our house in Bond-street. Here, while
I was confined to my bed by illness, it was supposed my indisposition
was no other than a private lying-in, though I was under the roof
with my lord, and attended by his servants.

"While the distemper continued, my lord, to do him justice, behaved
with all imaginable tenderness and care; and his concern on these
occasions I have already mentioned as a strange inconsistency in
his disposition. If his actions were at all accountable, I should
think he took pains to fret me into a fever first, in order
to manifest his love and humanity afterwards. When I recovered my
strength and spirits, I went abroad, saw company, and should have
been easy, had he been contented; but as my satisfaction increased,
his good-humour decayed, and he banished from his house, one by one,
all the people whose conversation could have made my life agreeable.

"I often expostulated with him on his malignant behaviour, protesting
my desire of living peaceably with him, and begging he would not
lay me under the necessity of changing my measures. He was deaf
to all my remonstrances, though I warned him more than once of the
event, persisted in his maxims of persecution; and, after repeated
quarrels, I again left his house fully determined to suffer all
sorts of extremity, rather than subject myself to the tyranny of
his disposition.

"This year was productive of one fatal event, which I felt with
the utmost sensibility of sorrow, and I shall always remember with
regret:--I mean the death of Mr. B--, with whom I had constantly
maintained an intimate correspondence since the first commencement
of our acquaintance. He was one of the most valuable men, and
promised to be one of the brightest ornaments that this or any
other age had produced. I enjoyed his friendship without reserve;
and such was the confidence he reposed in my integrity, from long
experience of my truth, that he often said he would believe my
bare assertion, even though it should contradict the evidence of
his own senses.  These being the terms upon which we lived, it is
not to be supposed that I bore the loss of him without repining.
Indeed, my grief was unspeakable; and, though the edge of it be
now smoothed by the lenient hand of time, I shall never cease to
cherish his memory with the most tender remembrance.

"During the last period of my living with my lord, I had agreed to
the expediency of obtaining an act of parliament, which would enable
him to pay his debts; on which occasion there was a necessity of
cancelling a deed that subsisted between us, relating to a separate
maintenance, to which, on certain provisions, I was entitled; and this
was to be set aside, so far as it interfered with the above-mentioned
scheme, while the rest of it should remain in force. When this affair
was about to be transacted, my lord very generously insisted upon
my concurrence in annulling the whole settlement; and, when I refused
to comply with this demand, because this was the sole resource I
had against his ill-usage, he would not proceed in the execution
of his plan, though, by dropping it, he hurt nobody but himself;
and he accused me of having receded from my word, after I had drawn
him into considerable expense.

"This imputation of breaking my word, which I defy the whole world
to prove I ever did, incensed me the more, as I myself had proposed
the scheme for his service, although I knew the accomplishment
of it would endanger the validity of my own settlement; and my
indignation was still more augmented by the behaviour of Mr. G--,
who had always professed a regard for my interest, and upon my last
accommodation with my lord, undertaken to effect a reconciliation
between my father and me; but, when he was questioned about the
particulars of this difference, and desired to declare whether his
lordship or I was to blame, he declined the office of arbitrator,
refused to be explicit upon the subject, and by certain shrewd hums
and ha's, signified his disapprobation of my conduct. Yet this very
man, when I imparted to him, in confidence, my intention of making
another retreat, and frankly asked his opinion of my design, seemed
to acquiesce in the justice of it in these remarkable words: "Madam,
if I thought or had hopes of my lord growing better, I would down on
my knees to desire you to stay; but, as I have not, I say nothing."

"If he connived at my conduct in this particular, why should he
disapprove of it when all I asked was but common justice? But he
was a dependant; and therefore I excuse his phlegmatic, not to call
it unfriendly, behaviour. Indeed, he could not be too cautious of
giving offence to his lordship, who sometimes made him feel the
effects of that wrath which other people had kindled; particularly
in consequence of a small adventure which happened about this very
period of time.

"A very agreeable, sprightly, good-natured young man, a near relation
of my lord, happening to be at our house one evening, when there
was a fire in the neighbourhood, we agreed to go and sup at the
tavern en famille; and, having spent the evening with great mirth
and good-humour, this young gentleman, who was naturally facetious,
in taking his leave, saluted us all round. My lord, who had before
entertained some jealousy of his kinsman, was very much provoked by
this trifling incident, but very prudently suppressed his displeasure
till he returned to his own house, where his rage co-operating
with the champagne he had drunk, inflamed him to such a degree of
resolution, that he sprang upon the innocent G--, and collared him
with great fury, though he was altogether unconcerned in the cause
of his indignation.

"This extravagant and frantic behaviour, added to other grievances
under which I laboured, hastened my resolution of leaving him; and
he, to this day, blames his relation as the immediate cause of my
escape, whereas he ought to place it to the account of his own madness
and indiscretion. When I retired to Park-street, he cautioned all
my tradesmen, not even excepting my baker, against giving me credit,
assuring them that he would not pay any debts I should contract;
and the difficulties to which I was reduced, in consequence of
this charitable declaration, together with the reflection of what
I had suffered, and might undergo, from the caprice and barbarity
of his disposition, affected my health so much, that I was again
taken ill, and my life thought in danger.

"My constitution, however, got the better of my distemper, and
I was ordered into the country by my physicians, for the benefit
of the air; so that I found myself under the necessity of keeping
two houses, when I was little able to support one, and set up my
chariot, because I could not defray the expense of a hackney-coach;
for I had as much credit given me as I asked for, notwithstanding
my lord's orders to the contrary.

"Having recruited my spirits in the country, I returned to town,
and was visited by my friends, who never forsook me in adversity,
and in the summer removed to a house in Essex, where I lived a few
months in great tranquility, unmolested by my tyrant, who sometimes
gave me a whole year's respite. Here I used to ride and drive by
turns, as my humour dictated, with horses which were lent me; and
I had the company of my lover, and another gentleman, who was a very
agreeable companion, and of singular service to me in the sequel.

"At last, my lord having received intelligence of the place of
my abode, and his tormenting humour recurring, he set out for my
habitation, and in the morning appeared in his coach and six, attended
by Mr. G-- and another person, whom he had engaged for the purpose,
with several domestics armed. I immediately shut up my doors at
his approach, and refused him admittance, which he endeavoured to
obtain by a succession of prayers and threats; but I was deaf to
both, and resolved to hold out to the last. Seeing me determined,
he began his attack, and his servants actually forced their way into
the house; upon which I retreated up-stairs, and fortified myself
in my apartment, which the assailants stormed with such fury, that
the door began to give way, and I retired into another room.

"Whilst I remained in this post, Mr. G-- demanded a parley, in
which he begged I would favour my lord with an interview, otherwise
he knew not what might be the consequence. To this remonstrance I
replied, that I was not disposed to comply with his request; and
though their design should be murder, I was not at all afraid of
death. Upon this declaration they renewed their attacks, which they
carried on with indifferent success till the afternoon, when my lord,
as if he had been at play, sent a formal message to me, desiring
that all hostilities should cease, till after both parties should
have dined. At the same time, my own servants came for instructions;
and I ordered them to let him have everything which he should call
for, as far as the house would afford.

"He did not fail to make use of this permission; but sitting down
with his companions, ate up my dinner without hesitation, after
he had paid me the compliment of desiring to know what he should
send up to my apartment. Far from having any stomach to partake
of his meal, I sat solitary upon my bed, in a state of melancholy
expectation, having fastened the door of the outward room for my
security, while I kept my chamber open for the convenience of air,
the weather being excessively hot. His lordship, having indulged
his appetite, resumed his attempt, and all of a sudden I heard
a noise in the next room; upon which I started up, and perceiving
that he had got into my ante-chamber, by the help of a bench that
stood under the window, I flung to the door of my room, which I
locked with great expedition, and opening another that communicated
with the staircase, ran out of the house, through a crowd of more
than a hundred people, whom this fray had gathered together.

"Being universally beloved in the neighbourhood, and respected by
my lord's servants, I passed among them untouched, and took refuge
in a neighbouring cottage; while his lordship bawled and roared
for assistance, being afraid to come out as he had gone in. Without
waiting for his deliberations, I changed clothes with the poor
woman who had given me shelter, and in her blue apron and straw
hat sallied out into the fields, intending to seek protection in
the house of a gentleman not far off, though I was utterly ignorant
of the road that led me to it. However, it was my good fortune
to meet with a farmer, who undertook to conduct me to the place;
otherwise I should have missed my way, and in all probability lain
in the fields; for by this time it was eight o'clock at night.

"Under the direction of this guide, I traversed hedges and ditches;
for I would not venture to travel in the highway, lest I should
fall into the hands of my pursuer, and after I had actually tumbled
into the mire, and walked six or seven long miles by the help of
a good spirit, which never failed me on such occasions, I arrived
at the place, and rung the bell at the garden gate for admittance.
Seeing my figure, which was very uncouth, together with my draggled
condition, they denied me entrance; but, when they understood who
I was, immediately opened the door, and I was hospitably entertained,
after having been the subject of mirth, on account of my dress and
adventure.

"Next day I returned and took possession of my house again, where
I resumed my former amusements, which I enjoyed in quiet for the
space of a whole month, waiting with resignation for the issue of
my lawsuit; when, one afternoon, I was apprised of his lordship's
approach by one of my spies, whom I always employed to reconnoitre
the road; and so fortunate was I in the choice of these scouts,
that I never was betrayed by one of them, though they were often
bribed for that purpose. I no sooner received this intelligence,
than I ordered my horse to be saddled, and, mounting, rode out of
sight immediately, directing my course a different way from the
London road. I had not long proceeded in this track, when my career
was all of a sudden stopped by a five-bar gate, which, after some
hesitation, I resolved to leap (my horse being an old hunter), if
I should find myself pursued. However, with much difficulty I made
a shift to open it, and arrived in safety at the house of my very
good friend Mr. G--, who, being a justice of the peace, had promised
me his protection, if it should be wanted.

"Thus secured for the present, I sent out spies to bring information
of his lordship's proceedings, and understood that he had taken
possession of my house, turned my servants adrift, and made himself
master of all my movables, clothes, and papers. As for the papers,
they were of no consequence, but of clothes I had a good stock; and,
when I had reason to believe that he did not intend to relinquish
his conquest, I thought it was high time for me to remove to
a greater distance from his quarters. Accordingly, two days after
my escape, I set out at eleven o'clock at night, in a chariot and
four, which I borrowed of my friend, attended by a footman, who
was a stout fellow, and well armed, I myself being provided with a
brace of good pistols, which I was fully determined to use against
any person who should presume to lay violent hands upon me, except
my lord, for whom a less mortal weapon would have sufficed, such as
a bodkin or a tinder-box. Nothing could be farther from my intention
than the desire of hurting any living creature, much less my husband:
my design was only to defend myself from cruelty and oppression,
which I knew, by fatal experience, would infallibly be my lot,
should he get me into his power. And I thought I had as good a
right to preserve my happiness, as that which every individual has
to preserve his life, especially against a set of ruffians, who
were engaged to rob me of it for a little dirty lucre.

"In the midst of our journey, the footman came up, and told me I
was dogged; upon which I looked out, and, seeing a man riding by
the chariot side, presented one of my pistols out of my window,
and preserved that posture of defence, until he thought proper
to retreat, and rid me of the fears that attended his company. I
arrived in town, and, changing my equipage, hired an open chaise,
in which, though I was almost starved with cold, I travelled
to Reading, which I reached by ten next morning; and from thence
proceeded farther in the country, with a view of taking refuge with
Mrs. C--, who was my particular friend. Here I should have found
shelter, though my lord had been beforehand with me, and endeavoured
to prepossess her against my conduct, had not the house been crowded
with company, among whom I could not possibly have been concealed,
especially from her brother, who was an intimate friend of my
persecutor.

"Things being thus situated, I enjoyed but a very short interview
with her, in which her sorrow and perplexity on my account
appeared with great expression in her countenance; and, though it
was not in her power to afford me the relief I expected, she, in the
most genteel manner, sent after me a small sum of money, thinking
that, considering the hurry in which I left my house, I might have
occasion for it on the road. I was, by this time, benumbed with
cold, fatigued with travelling, and almost fretted to death by my
disappointment. However, this was no time to indulge despondence;
since nobody could or would assist me, I stood the more in need of
my own resolution and presence of mind. After some deliberation,
I steered my course back to London; and, being unwilling to return
by the same road in which I came, as well as impatient to be at the
end of my journey, I chose the Bagshot way, and ventured to cross
the heath by moonlight.

"Here I was attacked by a footpad armed with a broad-sword, who
came up and demanded my money. My stock amounted to twelve guineas;
and I foresaw that should I be stripped of the whole sum, I could
not travel without discovering who I was, and consequently running
the risk of being detected by my pursuer. On these considerations,
I gave the fellow three guineas and some silver; with which he was
so far from being satisfied, that he threatened to search me for
more: but I ordered the coachman to proceed, and by good fortune
escaped that ceremony, though I was under some apprehension of
being overtaken with a pistol bullet in my flight, and therefore
held down my head in the chaise, in imitation of some great men, who
are said to have ducked in the same manner in the day of battle. My
fears happened to be disappointed: I lay at an inn upon the road,
and next day arrived in town, in the utmost difficulty and distress;
for I knew not where to fix my habitation, and was destitute of
all means of support. In this dilemma, I applied to my lawyer, who
recommended me to the house of a tradesman in Westminster, where
I lodged and boarded upon credit, with my faithful Abigail (whom
I shall distinguish by the name of Mrs. S--), for the space of ten
weeks, during which I saw nobody, and never once stirred abroad.

"While I was thus harassed out of all enjoyment of life, and reduced
to the utmost indigence, by the cruelty of my persecutor, who had
even stripped me of my wearing apparel, I made a conquest of Lord
D--, a nobleman who is now dead, and therefore I shall say little
of his character, which is perfectly well known: this only will I
observe, that, next to my own tyrant, he was the person of whom I
had the greatest abhorrence. Nevertheless, when these two came in
competition, I preferred the offers of this new lover, which were
very considerable; and as an asylum was the chief thing I wanted,
agreed to follow him to his country seat, whither I actually sent
my clothes, which I had purchased upon credit.

"However, upon mature deliberation, I changed my mind, and signified
my resolution in a letter, desiring at the same time that my baggage
might be sent back. In consequence of this message, I expected a
visit from him, in all the rage of indignation and disappointment,
and gave orders that he should not be admitted into my house yet,
notwithstanding this precaution, he found means to procure entrance;
and one of the first objects that I saw, next morning, in my
bedchamber, was my lover, armed with a horsewhip, against which,
from the knowledge of the man, I did not think myself altogether
secure; though I was not much alarmed, because I believed myself
superior to him in point of bravery, should the worst come to the
worst. But, contrary to my expectation, and his usual behaviour
to our sex, he accosted me very politely, and began to expostulate
on the contents of my letter. I freely told him, that I had rashly
assented to his proposal, for my own convenience only; that, when
I reflected on what I had done, I thought it ungenerous in me to
live with him upon these terms; and that, as I did not like him,
and could not dissemble, such a correspondence could never tend
to the satisfaction of either. He allowed the inference was just,
though he was very much chagrined at my previous proceeding. He
relinquished his claim, restored my clothes, and never afterwards
upbraided me with my conduct in this affair; though he at one time
owned, that he still loved me, and ever should, because I had used
him ill; a declaration that strongly marks the peculiarity of his
character. As for my own part, I own that my behaviour on this
occasion is no other way excusable, than on account of the miserable
perplexity of my circumstances, which were often so calamitous,
that I wonder I have not been compelled to take such steps as would
have rendered my conduct much more exceptionable than it really
is.

"At last all my hopes were blasted by the issue of my suit, which
was determined in favour of my lord. Even then I refused to yield:
on the contrary, coming out of retirement, I took lodgings in
Suffolk-street, and set my tyrant at defiance. But, being unwilling
to trust my doors to the care of other people, I hired a house in
Conduit-street; and no sooner appeared in the world again, than I
was surrounded by divers and sundry sorts of admirers. I believe
I received the incense and addresses of all kinds under the sun,
except that sort which was most to my liking, a man capable of
contracting and inspiring a mutual attachment; but such a one is
equally rare and inestimable; not but that I own myself greatly
obliged to all those who cultivated my good graces, though they
were very little beholden to me; for where I did not really love,
I could never profess that passion; that sort of dissimulation is
a slavery that no honest nature will undergo. Except one worthy
young man whom I sometimes saw, they were a strange medley of
insignificant beings: one was insipid, another ridiculously affected,
a third void of all education, a fourth altogether inconsistent;
and, in short, I found as many trifling characters among the men,
as ever I observed in my own sex. Some of them I endeavoured to
bring over to my maxims, while they attempted to make a proselyte
of me; but, finding the task impracticable on both sides, we very
wisely dropped each other.

"At length, however, I was blessed with the acquaintance of one
nobleman, who is, perhaps, the first character in England, in point
of honour, integrity, wit, sense, and benevolence; when I have
thus distinguished him, I need scarce mention Lord --. This great,
this good man, possesses every accomplishment requisite to inspire
admiration, love, and esteem. With infinitely more merit than almost
ever fell to one man's share, he manifests such diffidence of his
own qualifications, as cannot fail to prepossess every company in
his favour. He seems to observe nothing, yet sees everything; his
manner of telling a story, and making trifles elegant, is peculiar
to himself; and, though he has a thousand oddities, they serve
only to make him more agreeable. After what I have said, it may be
supposed that I was enamoured of his person; but this was not the
case; love is altogether capricious and fanciful; yet I admire,
honour, and esteem him to the highest degree, and when I observe
that his character resembled that of my dear departed friend Mr.
B--; or rather, that Mr. B--, had he lived, would have resembled
Lord --, I pay the highest compliment I can conceive both to the
living and to the dead.

"In this nobleman's friendship and conversation I thought myself
happy; though I was, as usual, exposed to the indefatigable efforts
of my lord, who, one day, while I was favoured with the company of
this generous friend, appeared at my door in his coach, attended by
another gentleman, who demanded entrance with an air of authority.
A very honest footman, who had been long in my service, ran upstairs
in the utmost consternation, and gave me an account of what had
happened below. Upon which I told him he had nothing to answer for,
and ordered him to keep the door fast shut against all opposition;
though I was so much affected with this unexpected assault, that
Lord -- said he was never more surprised and shocked in his life,
than at the horror which appeared in my countenance, when I saw
the coach stop at my door.

"My little hero being refused admittance, went away, threatening
to return speedily with a reinforcement; and during this interval,
I provided myself with a soldier, whom I placed sentinel at the
door, within side, to guard me from the danger of such assaults
for the future. My lord, true to his promise, marched back with his
auxiliaries, reinforced with a constable, and repeated his demand
of being admitted; and my soldier opening the sash, in order to
answer him, according to my directions, he no sooner perceived the
red coat, than he was seized with such a panic, that he instantly
fled with great precipitation; and, when he recounted the adventure,
like Falstaff in the play, multiplied my guard into a whole file
of musqueteers. He also made a shift to discover the gentleman who
had been so kind as to lend me one of his company, and complained
of him to the duke of N--, in hopes of seeing him broke for his
misdemeanour; but in that expectation he was luckily disappointed.

"Perceiving that in England I should never enjoy peace, but be
continually subject to those alarms and disquiets which had already
impaired my health and spirits, I resolved to repair again to
France, my best refuge and sure retreat from the persecution of my
tyrant. Yet, before I took this step, I endeavoured, by the advice
of my friends, to conceal myself near Windsor; but was in a little
time discovered by my lord, and hunted out of my lurking-place
accordingly. I then removed to Chelsea, where I suffered inconceivable
uneasiness and agitation of mind, from the nature of my situation,
my tranquility being thus incessantly invaded by a man who could
not be satisfied with me, and yet could not live without me. So
that, though I was very much indisposed, I set out for France, by
way of the Hague, as the war had shut up all other communication,
having no other attendant but my woman S--, who, though she dreaded
the sea, and was upon the brink of matrimony, would not quit me in
such a calamitous condition, until I was joined by my footman and
another maid, whom I ordered to follow me with the baggage. But,
before my departure, I sent a message to Lord --, demanding my
clothes, which he had seized in Essex; and, he refusing to deliver
them, I was obliged to equip myself anew, upon credit.

"I was supplied with money for my journey by my good friend L--;
and, after a short and pleasant passage, arrived at the Hague,
where I stayed two months, and parted with S--, on whom I settled
an annuity of five-and-twenty pounds, payable out of the provision
which I had or might obtain from my husband. The same allowance had
I prevailed upon Lord B-- to grant to another maid, who attended
me while I lived in his house.

"I did not much relish the people in Holland, because they seemed
entirely devoted to self-interest, without any taste for pleasure
or politeness; a species of disposition that could not be very agreeable
to me, who always despised money, had an unbounded benevolence of
heart, and loved pleasure beyond every other consideration. When I
say pleasure, I would not be understood to mean sensuality, which
constitutes the supreme happiness of those only who are void of
sentiment and imagination. Nevertheless, I received some civilities
in this place, and, among the rest, the reputation of having for
my lover the king of P--'s minister, who was young and airy, and
visited me often; circumstances that were sufficient to lay me under
the imputation of an amour, which I frequently incurred without
having given the least cause of suspicion.

"Having taken leave of my Dutch friends, I departed from the Hague, in
company with an English woman, whom I had chosen for that purpose,
and arrived at Antwerp with much difficulty and danger, the highway
being infested with robbers. After having reposed myself a few
days in this city, I hired a coach for myself, and set out with my
companion for Brussels; but, before we reached Mechlin, our vehicle
was attacked by two hussars, who, with their sabres drawn, obliged
the coachman to drive into a wood near the road. I at first imagined
that they wanted to examine our passports, but was soon too well
convinced of their design; and, though very much shocked at the
discovery, found resolution enough to suppress my concern, so that
it should not aggravate the terrors of the young woman, who had
almost died with apprehension. I even encouraged her to hope for
the best; and, addressing myself to the robbers in French, begged,
in the most suppliant manner, that they would spare our lives; upon
which one of them, who was a little fellow, assured me, in the same
language, that we had nothing to fear for our persons.

"When we were conveyed in a state of dreadful suspense about
three-quarters of a mile into the wood, the ruffians came into
the coach, and, taking my keys, which I kept ready in my hand for
them, opened three large trunks that contained my baggage, and
emptying them of everything but my hoops and a few books, packed
up their booty in a cloth; then robbed me of my money and jewels,
even to my shoe-buckles and sleeve-buttons, took my footman's laced
hat, and gave it, by way of gratification, to a peasant, who came
from behind the bushes, and assisted them in packing.

"This affair being despatched, they ordered us to return to the
road by a different way from that in which we were carried into the
wood; and mounting their horses, rode off with the plunder, though
not before the little fellow, who was the least ferocious of the
two, had come and shaken me by the hand, wishing us a good journey; a
compliment which I heartily returned, being extremely well pleased
with the retreat of two such companions, who had detained us a
whole half-hour; during which, notwithstanding the assurance I had
received, I was in continual apprehension of seeing their operation
concluded with the murder of us all; for I supposed they were of
that gang who had some time before murdered a French officer, and
used a lady extremely ill, after having rifled her of all she had.

"Having thus undergone pillage, and being reduced to the extremity
of indigence in a foreign land, it is not to be supposed that my
reflections were very comfortable; and yet, though I sustained the
whole damage, I was the only person in the company who bore the
accident with any resolution and presence of mind. My coachman
and valet seemed quite petrified with fear; and it was not till I
had repeated my directions that the former drove farther into the
wood, and took the first turning to the right, in order to regain
the road, according to the command of the robbers, which I did not
choose to disobey.

"This misfortune I suffered by the misinformation I received at
Antwerp, where I would have provided myself with an escort, had
not I been assured that there was not the least occasion to put
myself to such extraordinary expense. And, indeed, the robbers took
the only half-hour in which they could have had an opportunity of
plundering us; for we no sooner returned into the highway, than
we met with the French artillery coming from Brussels, which was a
security to us during the rest of our journey. We were afterwards
informed at a small village, that there was actually a large gang
of deserters, who harboured in that wood, from which they made
excursions in the neighbourhood, and kept the peasants in continual
alarms.

"Having proceeded a little way, we were stopped by the artillery
crossing a bridge; and, as the train was very long, must have
been detained till night, had not a soldier informed me, that, if
I would take the trouble to come out of my coach, and apply to the
commandant, he would order them to halt, and allow me to pass. I took
the man's advice, and was by him conducted, with much difficulty,
through the crowd, to some officers, who seemed scarce to deserve
the name; for, when I signified my request, they neither rose up,
nor desired me to sit down; but, lolling in their chairs, with one
leg stretched out, asked, with an air of disrespectful raillery.
where I was going; and when I answered, "To Paris," desired to know
what I would do there.

"I, who am naturally civil where I am civilly used, and saucy enough
where I think myself treated with disregard, was very much piqued
at their insolent and unmannerly behaviour, and began to reply to the
impertinent questions very abruptly; so that a very tart dialogue
would have ensued, had not the conversation been interrupted
by a tall, thin, genteel young French nobleman, an officer in the
army, who, chancing to come in, asked with great politeness, what
I would please to have. I then repeated my desire, and produced
my passports, by which he learned who I was. He immediately gave
orders that my coach should pass; and afterwards visited me at Paris,
having obtained my permission, and taken my address at parting;
while the others, understanding my name and quality, asked pardon
for their impolite carriage, which they told me was owing to the
representation of the soldier, who gave them to understand that I
was a strolling actress.

"I could not help laughing heartily at this mistake, which might
have proceeded from the circumstances of my appearance, my footman
having been obliged to change hats with the peasant, and myself
being without buckles on my shoes and buttons on my riding-skirt,
while my countenance still retained marks of the fear and confusion I
had undergone. After all, perhaps the fellow was a droll, and wanted
to entertain himself at my expense. The day was so far consumed
in these adventures, that I was obliged to take up my lodgings at
Mechlin, where I addressed myself to the intendant, giving him an
account of the disaster I had met with, and desiring I might have
credit at the inn, as our whole company could not raise the value
of a sixpence. This gentleman, though a provincial, was polite in
his way, and not only granted my request, but invited me to lodge
at his own house. I accordingly gave him my company at supper, but
did not choose to sleep at his quarters, because he appeared to be
what the French call un vieux debauche.

"Next day, he sent a trumpet to the general, with a detail of my
misfortune, in hopes of retrieving what I had lost; but, notwithstanding
all possible search, I was fain to put up with my damage, which,
in linen, laces, clothes, and baubles, amounted to upwards of seven
hundred pounds, a loss which never deprived me of one moment's rest;
for, though I lodged at a miserable inn, and lay in a paltry bed,
I slept as sound as if nothing extraordinary had happened, after
I had written to London and Paris, directing that the payment
of my bills of credit might be stopped. Indeed, I know of but two
misfortunes in life capable of depressing my spirits, namely, the
loss of health and friends; all others may be prevented or endured.
The articles of that calamity which I chiefly regretted, were a
picture of Lord W--, and some inimitable letters from Mr. B--.

"From Mechlin I proceeded to Brussels, where, being known, I got
credit for some necessaries, and borrowed twenty guineas to defray
the expense of my journey to Paris. Having consulted with my
friends about the safest method of travelling through Flanders, I
was persuaded to take places in the public voiture; and accordingly
departed, not without fears of finding one part of the country as
much infested with robbers as another. Nor were these apprehensions
assuaged by the conversation of my fellow-travellers, who, being
of the lower sort of people, that delight in exaggerating dangers,
entertained me all the way with an account of all the robberies and
murders which had been committed on that road, with many additional
circumstances of their own invention. After having been two days
exposed to this comfortable conversation, among very disagreeable
company, which is certainly one of the most disagreeable situations
in life, I arrived at Lisle, where, thinking the dangerous part of
the journey was now past, I hired a post-chaise, and in two days
more reached Paris without any further molestation.

"Upon my arrival in the capital, I was immediately visited by my old
acquaintances, who, hearing my disaster, offered me their clothes,
and insisted upon my wearing them, until I could be otherwise
provided. They likewise engaged me in parties, with a view of amusing
my imagination, that I might not grow melancholy in reflecting upon
my loss; and desired me to repeat the particulars of my story forty
times over, expressing great surprise at our not being murdered,
or ravished at least. As for this last species of outrage, the
fear of it never once entered my head, otherwise I should have been
more shocked and alarmed than I really was. But it seems this was
the chief circumstance of my companion's apprehension; and I cannot
help observing, that a homely woman is always more apt to entertain
those fears, than one whose person exposes her to much more imminent
danger. However, I now learned, that the risk I ran was much greater
than I imagined it to be, those ruffians being familiarized to rape
as well as murder.

"Soon after my appearance at Paris, I was favoured with the
addresses of several French lovers; but I never had any taste for
foreigners, or indeed for any amusement of that kind, except such
as were likely to be lasting, and settled upon a more agreeable
footing than that of common gallantry. When I deviated from this
principle, my conduct was the effect of compulsion, and therefore
I was never easy under it, having been reduced to the alternative
of two evils, the least of which I was obliged to choose, as a man
leaps into the sea, in order to escape from a ship that is on fire.

"Though I rejected their love, I did not refuse their company and
conversation; and, though my health was considerably impaired by
the shock I received in my last adventure, which was considerably
greater than I at first imagined, and affected my companion so much,
that she did not recover her spirits till she returned to England, I
say, though I was for some time a valetudinarian, I enjoyed myself
in great tranquility for the space of ten months, during which
I was visited by English, Scotch, and French, of all parties
and persuasions; for pleasure is of no faction, and that was the
chief object of my pursuit; neither was I so ambitious of being a
politician, as to employ my time and thoughts upon subjects which I
did not understand. I had admirers of all sides, and should have
spent my time very much to my liking, had not I felt my funds
sensibly diminish, without any prospect of their being repaired;
for I had been obliged to lay out a great part of the sum allotted
for my subsistence, in supplying my companion, my servant, and
myself with necessaries, in lieu of those which we had lost.

"Having before my eyes the uncomfortable prospect of wanting money
in a strange place, I found myself under the necessity of returning
to England, where I had more resources than I could possibly have
among foreigners; and with that view wrote to Lord --'s agents,
desiring that I might be enabled to discharge my obligations at
Paris, by the payment of my pin-money. Thus a negotiation commenced,
and his lordship promised to remit money for the clearance of my
Paris debts, which amounted to four hundred pounds: but he would not
advance one farthing more, though I gave him to understand, that,
while he protracted the agreement, I must inevitably be adding to
my encumbrances, and that I should be as effectually detained by
a debt of twenty pounds, as if I owed a thousand. Notwithstanding
all my representations, he would not part with one shilling over
the net sum which I at first stipulated; so that all my measures
were rendered abortive, and I found it altogether impracticable to
execute those resolutions I had formed in his favour.

"Thus did he for a mere trifle embarrass the woman for whom he professed
the most unlimited love, and whose principles he pretended to hold
in the utmost veneration. Indeed, his confidence in my integrity
was not without foundation; for many wives, with one half of my
provocation, would have ruined him to all intents and purposes;
whereas, notwithstanding all the extraordinary expenses to which
I had been exposed by his continual persecution, he never paid a
shilling on my account except one thousand pounds, exclusive of the
small allowance which was my due. In a word, so much time elapsed
before my lord could prevail upon himself to advance the bare four
hundred, that I was involved in fresh difficulties, from which I
found it impossible to extricate myself; and though I had occasion
to write a letter to my benefactor Lord --, in which I expressed
my acknowledgment of past favours, I could not venture to solicit
more, even when I was encouraged by a very obliging answer, wherein
he declared, that the good qualities of my mind and heart would
bind him to me in friendship for ever.

"While I ruminated on my uncomfortable situation, which would
neither permit me to return to England, nor to stay much longer
where I was, a young Englishman of immense fortune took Paris in
his way from Italy, accompanied by a most agreeable Scotchman of
very good sense and great vivacity. It was my good or ill fortune
to become acquainted with these gentlemen, who, having seen me at
the opera, expressed a desire of being known to me, and accordingly
favoured me with a visit one afternoon, when the brisk North Briton
engrossed the whole conversation, while the other seemed fearful and
diffident even to a degree of bashfulness, through which, however,
I could discern a delicate sensibility and uncommon understanding.
There was in his person, which was very agreeable, as well as in
his behaviour, a certain naivete that was very pleasing; and, at
this first interview, we relished each other's company so well,
that a sort of intimacy immediately commenced, and was carried on
in a succession of parties of pleasure, in the course of which I
found him fraught with all the tenderness and sentiment that render
the heart susceptible of the most refined love; a disposition that
immediately made me partial to him, while it subjected his own
heart to all the violent impressions of a passion, which I little
imagined our correspondence would have produced.

"Nevertheless, I was far from being displeased with my conquest,
because his person and qualifications, as well as his manner
of address, were very much to my liking, and recommended him in a
particular manner to my affection. Indeed, he made greater progress
in my heart than I myself suspected; for there was something
congenial in our souls, which, from our first meeting, I believe,
had attracted us, unknown to ourselves, under the notions of friendship
and regard, and now disclosed itself in the most passionate love.

"I listened to his addresses, and we were truly happy. His
attachment was the quintessence of tenderness and sincerity, while
his generosity knew no bounds. Not contented with having paid twelve
hundred pounds on my account, in the space of one fortnight, he
would have loaded me with present after present, had I not absolutely
refused to accept such expensive marks of his munificence. I
was even mortified at those instances of his liberality, which my
situation compelled me to receive, lest, being but little acquainted
with my disposition, he should suspect me of being interested in
my love, and judge my conduct by the malicious reports of common
fame, which, he afterwards owned, had at first obtained such credit
with him, that he believed our mutual attachment would not be of
long duration. But, in this particular, he was soon undeceived.
His heart, though naturally adapted for the melting passion, had
hitherto escaped untouched by all the ladies of Italy and France;
and, therefore, the first impressions were the more deeply fixed.
As he was unpractised in the ways of common gallantry and deceit,
the striking simplicity in his character was the more likely
to engage the heart of one who knew the perfidy of the world, and
despised all the farce and bombast of fashionable profession, which
I had always considered as the phrase of vanity and ostentation,
rather than the genuine language of love. Besides, gratitude had
a considerable share in augmenting my affection, which manifested
itself in such a warm, cordial, artless manner, as increased his
esteem, and riveted his attachment; for he could easily perceive,
from the whole tenor of my conduct, that my breast was an utter
stranger to craft and dissimulation; yet I was at first fearful of
contracting any engagement with him, because, being younger than
me, he might be more apt to change, and the world might be malicious
enough to suppose I had practised upon his inexperience; but,
conscious of my own integrity, I set slander at defiance, trusting
to my own behaviour, and his natural probity, for the continuance
of his love. Though we did not live together in the same house,
the greatest part of our time was spent in each other's company;
we dined and supped at the same table, frequented public places,
went upon parties to the country, and never parted, but for a few
hours in the night, which we passed in the utmost impatience to
meet again.

"In this agreeable manner did the days roll on, when my felicity
was interrupted by a fit of jealousy with which I happened to
be seized.  I had contracted an acquaintance with a young married
lady, who, though her personal attractions were but slender, was
upon the whole an agreeable, cheerful, good-natured companion,
with a little dash of the coquette in her composition. This woman
being in very indigent circumstances, occasioned by some losses
her husband had sustained, no sooner had an opportunity of seeing
and conversing with my lover, than she formed the design of making
a conquest of him. I should have forgiven her for this scheme,
whatever pangs it might have cost me, had I believed it the effect
of real passion; but I knew her too well to suppose her heart was
susceptible of love, and accordingly resented it. In the execution
of her plan, she neglected nothing which she thought capable of
engaging his attention. She took all opportunities of sitting near
him at table, ogled him in the most palpable manner, directed her
whole discourse to him, trod upon his toes; nay, I believe, squeezed
his hand. My blood boiled at her, though my pride, for some time,
enabled me to conceal my uneasiness; till at length her behaviour
became so arrogant and gross, that I could no longer suppress my
indignation, and one day told my lover that I would immediately
renounce his correspondence.

"He was greatly alarmed at this unexpected declaration; and, when
he understood the cause of it, assured me, that, for the future, he
would never exchange one word with her. Satisfied with this mark
of his sincerity and regard, I released him from his promise, which
he could not possibly keep, while she and I lived upon any terms;
and we continued to visit each other as usual, though she still
persisted in her endeavours to rival me in his affection, and
contracted an intimacy with his companion, who seemed to entertain
a passion for her, that she might have the more frequent opportunities
of being among us; for she had no objection against favouring the
addresses of both. One evening, I remember, we set out in my coach
for the opera; and, in the way, this inamorata was so busy with her
feet, that I was incensed at her behaviour; and, when we arrived
at the place, refused to alight; but, setting them down, declared
my intention of returning home immediately. She was so much pleased
with this intimation, that she could not conceal the joy she felt
at the thoughts of conversing with him, uninterrupted by my presence;
an opportunity with which I had never favoured her before. This open
exultation increased my anger and anxiety. I went home; but, being
still tortured with the reflection of having left them together,
adjusted myself in the glass, though I was too angry to take notice
of my own figure, and without further delay returned to the opera.

"Having inquired for the box in which they sat, I took possession
of one that fronted them, and, reconnoitring them, without being
perceived, had the satisfaction of seeing him removed to as great
a distance from her as the place would permit, and his head turned
another way. Composed by this examination, I joined them without
further scruple, when my young gentleman expressed great joy
at my appearance, and told me he was determined to have left the
entertainment, and come in quest of me, had I not returned at that
instant.

"In our way homewards, my rival repeated her usual hints, and with
her large hoop almost overshadowed my lover from my view; upon which
my jealousy and wrath recurred with such violence, that I pulled
the string as a signal for the coachman to stop, with a view of
getting out, and going home afoot; a step which would have afforded
a new spectacle to the people of Paris. But I reflected in a moment
upon the folly of such a resolution, and soon recollected myself,
by calling my pride to my assistance. I determined, however, that
she should act no more scenes of this kind in my presence, and
that same night insisted upon my lover's dropping all intercourse
and connection with this tormentor. He very cheerfully complied
with my desire, and was even glad of an occasion to break off his
acquaintance with a person about whom I had plagued him so much.

"Thus was I freed from the persecution of one of those creatures,
who, though of little consequence in themselves, are yet the pests
of society, and find means to destroy that harmony which reigns
between two lovers, by the intrusion of a loose appetite, void of
all sensibility and discretion; having no feelings themselves, they
cannot sympathize with those of other people; and do mischief out
of mere wantonness.

"My lover being obliged to go to England, had settled me in a
genteel house in Paris, with a view of returning when his affairs
should be adjusted; but, when the time of his departure approached,
he began to be uneasy at the prospect of separation, and, in order
to alleviate his anxiety, desired me to accompany him to Calais,
where we stayed together three or four days, during which the dread
of parting became more and more intense; so that we determined
upon my following him into England at the first opportunity, where
I should live altogether incog. that I might be concealed from the
inquiries and attempts of my lord. Even after this resolution was
fixed, we parted with all the agonies of lovers who despair of
ever meeting again; and the wind blowing very high after he had
embarked, increased my fears. But, by the return of the packet-boat
I was blessed with the report of his being safe arrived in England,
and had the satisfaction of perusing his letters by every post.

"My admirer being thus detached from me, my thoughts were entirely
employed in concerting some private method of conveying myself to
him. As I would not trust myself in the common packet, for fear of
being discovered, after having revolved divers schemes, I determined
to transport myself in one of the Dutch fishing-boats, though I knew
the passage would be hazardous; but, in a case of such interesting
concern, I overlooked all danger and inconvenience. Before I
put this resolution in practice, I was so fortunate as to hear of
a small English vessel, that arrived in Calais with a prisoner of
war, in which I embarked, with my companion and another lady, who
lived with me for some time afterwards; and, when we came on board,
discovered that the ship was no other than a light collier, and that
her whole company amounted to no more than three men. Nevertheless,
though the sea was so rough, and the weather so unpromising, that
no other boat would venture to put to sea, we set sail, and, between
two storms, in about three hours arrived in safety in Dover.

"From hence my first companion went to her friends in the stage-coach,
while the other lady and I hired an open post-chaise, though it
snowed very hard, and, without any accident, performed our journey
to London, where I met with my lover, who flew to my arms in all
the transports of impatient joy; and, doubtless, I deserved his
affection for the hardships, perils, and difficulties I had undergone
to be with him; for I never scrupled to undertake anything practicable,
in order to demonstrate the sincerity of what I professed. In
consequence of our plan, I assumed a fictitious name, and never
appeared in public, being fully satisfied and happy in the company
and conversation of the man I loved; and, when he went into the
country, contented myself with his correspondence, which he punctually
maintained, in a series of letters, equally sensible, sincere, and
affectionate.

"Upon his return to town for the remainder of the season, he devoted
the greatest part of his time to our mutual enjoyment; left me with
reluctance, when he was called away by indispensable business, and
the civility which was due to his acquaintance, and very seldom
went to any place of public entertainment, because I could not
accompany and share with him in the diversion; nay, so much did I
engross his attention, that one evening, after he had been teased
into an agreement of meeting some friends at a play, he went thither
precisely at the appointed hour, and, as they did not arrive
punctually at the very minute, he returned to me immediately,
as much rejoiced at his escape as if he had met with some signal
deliverance. Nor was his constancy inferior to the ardour of his
love. We went once together to a ball in the Haymarket, where, in
the midst of a thousand fine women, whose charms were enhanced by
the peculiarity of the dresses they wore, he remained unshaken,
unseduced, preserving his attachment for me in spite of all
temptation.

"In the summer, he provided me with a house in the neighbourhood
of his own; but the accommodations being bad, and that country
affording no other place fit for my residence, he brought me home
to his own seat, and, by that step, raised such a universal clamour;
though I saw no company, and led such a solitary life, that nothing
but excessive love could have supported my spirits. Not but that
he gave me as much of his time as he could possibly spare from the
necessary duties of paying and receiving visits, together with the
avocations of hunting, and other country amusements, which I could
not partake. Formerly, indeed, I used to hunt and shoot, but I
had left off both, so that I was now reduced to the alternative of
reading and walking by myself; but love made up for all deficiencies
to me, who think nothing else worth the living for. Had I been
blessed with a partner for life, who could have loved sincerely,
and inspired me with a mutual flame, I would have asked no more
of fate.  Interest and ambition have no share in my composition;
love, which is pleasure, or pleasure, which is love, makes up the
whole. A heart so disposed cannot be devoid of other good qualities;
it must be subject to the impressions of humanity and benevolence,
and enemy to nothing but itself. This you will give me leave to
affirm, in justice to myself, as I have frankly owned my failings
and misconduct.

"Towards the end of summer, my heart was a little alarmed by a
report that prevailed, of my lover's being actually engaged in a
treaty of marriage; however, I gave little credit to this rumour
till I was obliged to go to town about business, and there I heard
the same information confidently affirmed. Though I still considered
it as a vague surmise, I wrote to him an account of what I had
heard; and, in his answer, which is still in my possession, he
assured me, with repeated vows and protestations, that the report
was altogether false. Satisfied with this declaration, I returned
to his house; and, though the tale was incessantly thundered in my
ears, still believed it void of all foundation, till my suspicion
was awakened by a very inconsiderable circumstance.

"One day, on his return from hunting, I perceived he had a very
fine pair of Dresden ruffles on his shirt, which I could not suppose
he would wear at such a rustic exercise; and, therefore, my fears
took the alarm. When I questioned him about this particular of his
dress, his colour changed; and though he attempted to elude my
suspicion, by imputing it to a mistake of his servant, I could not
rest satisfied with this account of the matter, but inquired into
the truth with such eagerness and penetration, that he could not
deny he had been to make a visit. By degrees, I even extorted from
him a confession, that he had engaged himself further than he ought
to have proceeded, without making me acquainted with his design,
though he endeavoured to excuse his conduct, and pacify my displeasure,
by saying, that the affair would not be brought to bear for a great
while, and, perhaps, might never come to a determination but he
was in great confusion, and, indeed, hardly knew what he said.

"I would have quitted his house that moment, had not he beforehand
obtained a promise that I would take no rash resolution of that
kind, and put it out of my power to procure any method of conveyance
by which I could make my retreat. I gave no vent to reproaches,
but only upbraided him with his having permitted me to return, in
ignorance, to the country, after I was once fairly gone; upon which
he swore that he could not bear the thoughts of parting with me.
This declaration was a mystery at that time, but I have been since
so fully satisfied of his reasons for his conduct, that I heartily
acquit him of all injustice to me. And, indeed, it is my sincere
opinion, that, if ever young man deserved to be happy, he is
certainly entitled to that privilege; and, if I may be allowed to
judge, has a heart susceptible of the most refined enjoyment.

"The violence of the grief and consternation which I suffered from
this stroke having a little subsided, I deliberated with myself about
the measures I should take, and determined to leave his house some
day when he should be abroad. I was encouraged in this resolution
by the advice of our Scotch friend, who came about this time from
London, on a visit to his fellow-traveller. We thought such an
abrupt departure would be less shocking than to stay and take a
formal leave of my lover, whose heart was of such a delicate frame,
that, after I told him I should one day withdraw myself in his
absence, he never came home from the chase, or any other avocation,
without trembling with apprehension that I had escaped.

"After he had been some time accustomed to these fears by my previous
intimation, I at length decamped in good earnest, though my heart
ached upon the occasion, because I left him loving and beloved; for
his affection was evident, notwithstanding the step he had taken
by the advice and importunity of all his relations, who laid a
disagreeable restraint upon his inclinations, while they consulted
his interest in every other particular.

"While I halted in the next great town, until I could be supplied
with fresh horses, I was visited by a gentleman who had been
formerly intimate with my lover; but a breach had happened in
their friendship, and he now came to complain of the treatment he
had received. Perceiving that I was not in a humour to listen to
his story, he shifted the conversation to my own, and observed,
that I had been extremely ill-used. I told him that I was of a
different opinion; that it was not only just, but expedient, that
a young man of Mr. --'s fortune should think of making some alliance
to strengthen and support the interest of his family; and that I
had nothing to accuse him of but his letting me remain so long in
ignorance of his intention. He then gave me to understand, that I
was still ignorant of a great part of the ill-usage I had received;
affirming, that, while I lived in his house, he had amused himself
with all the common women in that town, to some of whom this
gentleman had personally introduced him.

"At first, I could not believe this imputation; but he supported
his assertion with so many convincing circumstances, that I could
no longer doubt the truth of them; and I felt so much resentment,
that my love vanished immediately into air. Instead of proceeding
on my journey to London, I went back a considerable way, and sent
a message desiring to see him in a little house, about midway between
his own habitation and the town from whence I came. He obeyed my
summons, and appeared at the place appointed, where I reproached
him with great bitterness. He pleaded guilty to the charge, so far
as acknowledging that he had corresponded with other women lately,
in order to get the better of his affection for me, but the experiment
had failed, and he found that he should be for ever miserable.

"I did not look upon this candid confession as a sufficient atonement
for his past dissimulation, and, in the sharpness of my revenge,
demanded a settlement, which he peremptorily refused; so that for
the present we held each other in the utmost contempt.  Indeed, I
afterwards despised myself for my condescension, which was owing to
the advice of my companion, supported and inflamed by the spirit
of resentment. Nevertheless, he begged that I would return to
his house, or stay all night where I was; but I was deaf to his
entreaties, and, after a great deal of ironical civility on my side,
I took my leave, and went away; yet, before I set out, I looked
back, and saw him on horseback, with such an air of simplicity and
truth, as called up a profound sigh, notwithstanding all that had
passed in our conversation.

"Upon my arrival in London, I took lodgings in Leicester-fields,
and answered a letter which I had some months before received from
my lord, telling him that I would go home to him, without stipulating
for any terms, to try what effect my confidence would have upon
his generosity. He readily embraced the offer, and took a house in
St.  James's-street, where I proposed to comply with his humour in
everything that was consistent with my own peace and tranquility.

"Meanwhile, my lover passed his time very disagreeably in the
country, with his friend, of whom, it seems, he had conceived some
jealousy, which was increased by a letter I wrote to that gentleman,
till he was made acquainted with the contents, which he read over
forty times; and then his passion breaking out with more violence
than ever, he not only expressed his feeling, in an epistle which
I immediately received, but when he came to town suffered such
agonies of despair as I had never seen before, except in Lord B--.
It was then in my power to have taken ample revenge upon him, as
well as upon my insolent rival, who had insisted upon my leaving
his house in a very abrupt manner, though he absolutely refused to
gratify her malice, for he was now disposed to do anything for my
satisfaction.  But I knew his worth, and had too much regard for
his reputation to advise him to act inconsistent with his honour.

"About this time, many tender feelings and sorrowful partings
happened between us, till the marriage knot was tied, when he sent
me a bank-note for a thousand pounds, by way of specimen, as he
called it, of his friendship, and of what he would do for me, should
I ever want his assistance. This mark of his generosity I received
in a most tender billet, which I shall never part with, together
with his picture set in diamonds.

"I now employed my thoughts in keeping measures with my lord; we
lay in the same apartment, and for the first four or five months
I neither dined nor supped abroad above twice; and then he knew
where I was, and approved of my company. But all this complacency
and circumspection had no effect upon his temper, which remained
as capricious and dissatisfied as ever. Nay, to such a provoking
degree did this unhappy humour prevail, that one day, in the
presence of his lawyer, he harangued upon my misconduct since our
last reunion; and very freely affirmed, that every step I had taken
was diametrically opposite to his will.

"Conscious of the pains I had been at to please him, I was so incensed
at these unjust invectives, that, starting up, I told him he was
a little dirty fellow; and would have left the house immediately,
had not his lawyer, and others, who were in the room, interposed,
and by dint of argument and importunity diverted me from my purpose.
By the bye, I have been informed by a person of rank, that my lord
discovered exactly the same disposition in his father's lifetime,
and only changed the subject of his complaint from the word father
to that of wife. Indeed, he takes all opportunities of plaguing my
dear parent, as he has just sagacity enough to know, that this is
the most effectual way he can take to distress me.

"After repeated trials, I have given up all hopes of making him
happy, or of finding myself easy in my situation, and live with him
at present to avoid a greater inconvenience. Not that his ill-nature
is all the grievance of which I complain; exclusive of the personal
disgust I entertain for him, his folly is of that species which
disobliges rather than diverts, and his vanity and affectation
altogether intolerable; for he actually believes himself, or at
least would impose himself upon mankind, as a pattern of gallantry
and taste; and, in point of business. a person of infinite sagacity
and penetration. But the most ridiculous part of his character is
his pretended talent for politics, in which he so deeply concerns
himself, that he has dismissed many a good servant, because
he suspected him of having wrong connections; a theme upon which
he has often quarrelled with me, even almost to parting, accusing
me with holding correspondence with the earls of B-- and C--, and
Mr. H-- V--, though I never had the least acquaintance with any of
these gentlemen, except the earl of C--, to whom I have not spoken
these ten years past.

"In short, I have often been at a loss to know, whether he was more
mad and malicious in those fits of enthusiasm, wherein he seemed
transported with zeal for the commonwealth, and tormented me with
his admonitions out of all temper and patience. At length, however,
I contrived an expedient which freed me from these troublesome
expostulations, and silenced him effectually on the score of politics.
This was no other than an open avowal of being connected with all
those people whom I have named. Indeed, I knew him too well to
believe there was anything solid in his intention or professions,
even when he carried himself so far as to demand a private audience
of the k--, in order to communicate a scheme for suppressing
the rebellion; and that being denied, solicited the duke of D--'s
interest, for permission to raise and head a regiment of Kentish
smugglers. Nay, to such a pitch did his loyalty soar, that he
purchased a firelock of particular mechanism, calculated for the
safety of the bearer, in case he had been placed sentinel at his
Majesty's door, and kept his horses ready caparisoned, with a view
of attending his sovereign to the field. Notwithstanding all these
pompous preparations, had he been put to the proof, he would have
infallibly crept out of his engagements, through some sneaking
evasion, his imagination being very fertile in such saving pretences.
Yet he will talk sometimes so fervently, and even sensibly, on the
subject, that a stranger would mistake him for a man of understanding,
and determined zeal for the good of his country.

"Since my last return to his house, that act of parliament passed,
by which he was enabled to pay his debts, and, among the rest, a
thousand pounds of my contracting, the only burden of that kind I
ever entailed upon him, exclusive of my pin-money, which was never
regularly paid; nor would he have been subject to this, had he
not, by his persecution and pursuit, exposed me to an extraordinary
expense. I have also had it in my power to reward some of my
faithful Abigails; in particular, to relieve from extreme distress
that maid to whom, as I have already observed, Lord B-- granted an
annuity, which she had sold: so that she was reduced to the most
abject poverty; and I found her in a dismal hole, with two infants
perishing for want; a spectacle which drew tears from my eyes, and
indeed could not but make deep impression upon a heart like mine,
which the misery of my fellow-creatures never failed to melt.

"Nor did I upon this occasion forget the attachment and fidelity
of my other woman Mrs. S--, who, hearing I was robbed in my passage
through Flanders, had generously relinquished the allowance I had
settled upon her at parting. The exercise of such acts of humanity
and benevolence, and the pleasure of seeing my dear and tender
parent often, in some measure alleviate the chagrin to which I am
subject from the disagreeable disposition of my lord, who, consistent
with his former inconsistency, upon our last reconciliation,
cheerfully agreed to a proposal I made of having concerts in the
house, and even approved of the scheme with marks of particular
satisfaction. But, before one half of the winter was expired, he
found means to banish all the company, beginning with Lord R-- B--,
who, as he walked up-stairs one evening, was stopped by a footman,
who plainly told him he had orders to say to him in particular,
that his lordship was not at home; yet the very next day, perceiving
that nobleman and me walking together in the park, he joins us
with an air of alacrity, as if no such thing had happened, and even
behaved to Lord R-- with the most fawning complaisance. His deportment
was equally absurd and impertinent to the rest of his friends,
who forsook us gradually, being tired of maintaining any friendly
communication with such a disagreeable composition of ignorance and
arrogance. For my own part, I look upon him as utterly incorrigible;
and, as fate has subjected me to his power, endeavour to make the
bitter draught go down, by detaching myself as much as possible
from the supposition that there is any such existence upon earth.
Indeed, if I had not fatal experience to the contrary, I should be
apt to believe that such a character is not to be found among the
sons of men; because his conduct is altogether unaccountable by
the known rules and maxims of life, and falls entirely under the
poet's observation, when he says,

"'Tis true, no meaning puzzles more than wit."

Her ladyship having thus concluded her story, to the entertainment
of the company, and the admiration of Peregrine, who expressed his
astonishment at the variety of adventures she had undergone, which
was such as he thought sufficient to destroy the most hardy and
robust constitution, and therefore infinitely more than enough to
overwhelm one of her delicate frame; one of the gentlemen present
roundly taxed her with want of candour, in suppressing some circumstances
of her life, which he thought essential in the consideration of
her character.

She reddened at this peremptory charge, which had an evident effect
upon the countenances of the whole audience, when the accuser
proceeded to explain his imputation, by observing, that, in the
course of her narration, she had omitted to mention a thousand acts
of uncommon charity, of which he himself knew her to be guilty;
and that she had concealed a great many advantageous proposals of
marriage, which she might have accepted before she was engaged.

The company were agreeably undeceived by this explanation; which
her ladyship acknowledged in very polite terms, as a compliment
equally genteel and unexpected. And our hero, after having testified
the sense he had of her complaisance and condescension, in regaling
him with a mark of her confidence and esteem, took his leave, and
went home in a state of confusion and perplexity; for, from the
circumstances of the tale he had heard, he plainly perceived, that
her ladyship's heart was too delicate to receive such incense as
he, in the capacity of an admirer, could at present pay; because,
though he had in some measure abridged the empire of Emilia in his own
breast, it was not in his own power to restrain it so effectually,
but that it would interfere with any other sovereign whom his
thoughts should adopt; and unless Lady -- could engross his whole
love, time, and attention, he foresaw that it would be impossible
for him to support the passion which he might have the good fortune
to inspire. He was, moreover, deterred from declaring his love,
by the fate of her former admirers, who seemed to have been wound
up to a degree of enthusiasm, that looked more like the effect of
enchantment, than the inspiration of human attractions; an ecstasy
of passion which he durst not venture to undergo. He, therefore,
resolved to combat with the impressions he had already received,
and, if possible, cultivate her friendship without soliciting her
affection. But, before he could fix upon this determination, he
desired to know the footing on which he stood in her opinion; and,
by the intelligence of Crabtree, obtained in the usual manner,
understood that her sentiments of him were very favourable, though
without the least tincture of love. He would have been transported
with joy, had her thoughts of him been of a more tender texture;
though his reason was better pleased with the information he
received; in consequence of which he mustered up the ideas of his
first passion, and set them in opposition to those of this new
and dangerous attachment; by which means he kept the balance in
equilibrio, and his bosom tolerably quiet.





CHAPTER LXXXII.




He persuades Cadwallader to assume the Character of a Magician, in
which he acquires a great Share of Reputation, by his Responses to
three Females of Distinction, who severally consult the Researches
of his Art.


His heart being thus, as it were, suspended between two objects
that lessened the force of each other's attraction, he took this
opportunity of enjoying some respite, and for the present detached
his sentiments from both, resolving to indulge himself in the exercise
of that practical satire which was so agreeable and peculiar in
his disposition. In this laudable determination he was confirmed
by the repeated suggestions of his friend Cadwallader, who taxed
him with letting his talents rust in indolence, and stimulated
his natural vivacity with a succession of fresh discoveries in the
world of scandal.

Peregrine was now seized with a strange whim, and when he communicated
the conceit to Cadwallader, it in a moment acquired his approbation.
This notion he imparted in a proposal to subject the town to their
ridicule, by giving responses to the character of a professed
conjurer, to be personated by the old misanthrope, whose aspect was
extremely well calculated for the purpose. The plan was immediately
adjusted in all its parts; an apartment hired in a house accommodated
with a public stair, so that people might have free ingress and
egress, without being exposed to observation; and, this tenement
being furnished with the apparatus of a magician, such as globes,
telescopes, a magic-lanthorn, a skeleton, a dried monkey together
with the skins of an alligator, otter, and snake, the conjurer
himself took possession of his castle, after having distributed
printed advertisements containing the particulars of his undertaking.

These bills soon operated according to the wish of the projectors.
As the price of the oracle was fixed at half a guinea, the public
naturally concluded that the author was no common fortune-teller;
and, the very next day, Peregrine found some ladies of his quality
acquaintance infected with the desire of making an experiment upon
the skill of this new conjurer, who pretended to be just arrived
from the Mogul's empire, where he had learned the art from a Brachman
philosopher. Our young gentleman affected to talk of the pretensions
of this sage with ridicule and contempt, and with seeming reluctance
undertook to attend them to his apartment, observing, that it
would be a very easy matter to detect the fellow's ignorance, and
no more than common justice to chastise him for his presumption.
Though he could easily perceive a great fund of credulity in the
company, they affected to espouse his opinion, and, under the notion
of a frolic, agreed that one particular lady should endeavour to
baffle his art, by appearing before him in the dress of her woman,
who should at the same time personate her mistress, and be treated
as such by our adventurer, who promised to squire them to the place.
These measures being concerted, and the appointment fixed for the
next audience-day, Peregrine furnished his friend with the necessary
information, and, when the hour of assignation arrived, conducted
his charge to this oraculous seer.

They were admitted by our hero's valet-de-chambre, whose visage,
being naturally meagre and swarthy, was adorned with artificial
whiskers; so that he became the Persian dress which he wore,
and seemed a very proper master of the ceremonies to an Oriental
necromancer. Having crossed his arms upon his breasts, with an
inclination of the head, he stalked in solemn silence before them
into the penetralia of the temple, where they found the conjurer
sitting at a table, provided with pen, ink, and paper, divers books,
mathematical instruments, and a long white wand lying across the
whole. He was habited in a black gown and fur cap. His countenance,
over and above a double proportion of philosophic gravity, which
he had assumed for the occasion, was improved by a thick beard,
white as snow, that reached to his middle, and upon each shoulder
sat a prodigious large black cat which had been tutored for the
purpose.

Such a figure, which would have startled Peregrine himself, had
not he been concerned in the mystery, could not fail to make an
impression upon those whom he accompanied. The fictitious chambermaid,
in spite of all her natural pertness and vivacity, changed colour
when she entered the room, while the pretended lady, whose intellects
were not quite so enlightened, began to tremble in every joint,
and ejaculate petitions to Heaven for her safety. Their conductor,
advancing to the table, presented his offering, and, pointing to
the maid, told him, that lady desired to know what would be her
destiny in point of marriage. The philosopher, without lifting
up his eyes to view the person in whose behalf he was consulted,
turned his ear to one of the sable familiars that purred upon his
shoulder, and, taking up the pen, wrote upon a detached slip of
paper these words, which Peregrine, at the desire of the ladies,
repeated aloud: "Her destiny will, in a great measure, depend upon
what happened to her about nine o'clock in the morning on the third
day of last December."

This sentence was no sooner pronounced, than the counterfeit lady
screamed, and ran into the ante-chamber, exclaiming, "Christ have
mercy upon us! Sure he is the devil incarnate!" Her mistress, who
followed her with great consternation, insisted upon knowing the
transaction to which the response alluded; and Mrs. Abigail, after
some recollection, gave her to understand that she had an admirer,
who, on that very hour and day mentioned by the cunning man, had
addressed himself to her in a serious proposal of marriage. This
explanation, however, was more ingenious than candid, for the admirer
was no other than the identical Mr. Pickle himself, who was a mere
dragon among the chambermaids, and, in his previous information
communicated to his associate, had given an account of this assignation,
with which he had been favoured by the damsel in question.

Our hero seeing his company very much affected with the circumstance
of the wizard's art, which had almost frightened both mistress
and maid into hysteric fits, pretended to laugh them out of their
fears, by observing, that there was nothing extraordinary in this
instance of his knowledge, which might have been acquired by some of
those secret emissaries whom such impostors are obliged to employ
for intelligence, or imparted by the lover himself, who had, perhaps,
come to consult him about the success of his amour. Encouraged by
this observation, or rather prompted by an insatiable curiosity,
which was proof against all sorts of apprehension, the disguised
lady returned to the magician's own apartment, and, assuming the
air of a pert chambermaid, "Mr. Conjurer," said she, "now you have
satisfied my mistress, will you be as good as to tell me if ever I
shall be married?" The sage, without the least hesitation, favoured
her with an answer, in the following words: "You cannot be married
before you are a widow; and whether or not that will ever be
the case, is a question which my art cannot resolve, because my
foreknowledge exceeds not the term of thirty years."

This reply, which at once cut her off from her pleasing prospect of
seeing herself independent in the enjoyment of youth and fortune,
in a moment clouded her aspect; all her good-humour was overcast,
and she went away, without further inquiry, muttering in the rancour
of her chagrin, that he was a silly impertinent fellow, and a mere
quack in his profession. Notwithstanding the prejudice of this
resentment, her conviction soon recurred; and when the report of
his answers was made to those confederates by whom she had been
deputed to make trial of his skill, they were universally persuaded
that his art was altogether supernatural, though each affected to
treat it with contempt, resolving in her own breast to have recourse
to him in private.

In the meantime, the maid, though laid under the most peremptory
injunctions of secrecy, was so full of the circumstance which
related to her own conduct, that she extolled his prescience, in
whispers, to all acquaintances, assuring them, that he had told
her all the particulars of her life; so that his fame was almost
instantaneously conveyed, through a thousand different channels,
to all parts of the town; and, the very next time he assumed the
chair, his doors were besieged by curious people of all sects and
denominations.

Being an old practitioner in this art, Cadwallader knew it would
be impossible for him to support his reputation in the promiscuous
exercise of fortune-telling, because every person that should come
to consult him would expect a sample of his skill relating to things
past; and it could not be supposed that he was acquainted with the
private concerns of every individual who might apply to him for that
purpose. He, therefore, ordered his minister, whom he distinguished
by the name of Hadgi Rourk, to signify to all those who demanded
entrance, that his price was half a guinea; and that all such as
were not disposed to gratify him with that consideration, would do
well to leave the passage free for the rest.

This declaration succeeded to his wish; for this congregation
consisted chiefly of footmen, chambermaids, prentices, and the lower
class of tradesmen, who could not afford to purchase prescience
at such a price; so that, after fruitless offers of shillings and
half-crowns, they dropped off one by one, and left the field open
for customers of a higher rank.

The first person of this species who appeared was dressed like the
wife of a substantial tradesman; but this disguise could not screen
her from the penetration of the conjurer, who at first sight knew
her to be one of the ladies of whose coming he had been apprised
by Peregrine, on the supposition that their curiosity was rather
inflamed than allayed by the intelligence they had received from
his first client. This lady approached the philosopher with that
intrepidity of countenance so conspicuous in matrons of her dignified
sphere, and, in a soft voice, asked with a simper, of what complexion
her next child would be? The necromancer, who was perfectly well
acquainted with her private history, forthwith delivered his response
in the following question, written in the usual form: "How long
has Pompey the black been dismissed from your ladyship's service?"

Endued as she was with a great share of that fortitude which is
distinguished by the appellation of effrontery, her face exhibited
some signs of shame and confusion at the receipt of this oracular
interrogation, by which she was convinced of his extraordinary
intelligence; and, accosting him in a very serious tone, "Doctor,"
said she, "I perceive you are a person of great abilities in the
art you profess; and therefore, without pretending to dissemble,
I will own you have touched the true string of my apprehensions.
I am persuaded I need not be more particular in my inquiries. Here
is a purse of money; take it, and deliver me from a most alarming and
uneasy suspense." So saying, she deposited her offering upon the
table, and waited for his answer, with a face of fearful expectation,
while he was employed in writing this sentence for her perusal:
"Though I see into the womb of time, the prospect is not perfectly
distinct: the seeds of future events lie mingled and confused. So
that I am under the necessity of assisting my divination in some
cases, by analogy and human intelligence; and cannot possibly
satisfy your present doubts, unless you will condescend to make me
privy to all those occurrences which you think might have interfered
with the cause of your apprehension."

The lady having read the declaration, affected a small emotion of
shyness and repugnance, and, seating herself upon a settee, after
having cautiously informed herself of the privacy of the apartment,
gave such a detail of the succession of her lovers, as amazed, while
it entertained, the necromancer, as well as his friend Pickle, who,
from a closet in which he had concealed himself, overheard every
syllable of her confession. Cadwallader listened to her story with
a look of infinite importance and sagacity, and, after a short
pause, told her, that he would not pretend to give a categorical
answer, until he should have deliberated maturely upon the various
circumstances of the affair; but, if she would take the trouble of
honouring him with another visit on his next public day, he hoped
he should be able to give her full satisfaction. Conscious of
the importance of her doubts, she could not help commending his
caution, and took her leave, with a promise of returning at the
appointed time. Then the conjurer being joined by his associate,
they gave a loose to their mirth, which having indulged, they began
to concert measures for inflicting some disgraceful punishment on
the shameless and insatiate termagant who had so impudently avowed
her own prostitution.

They were interrupted, however, in their conference, by the arrival
of a new guest, who being announced by Hadgi, our hero retreated
to his lurking-place, and Cadwallader resumed his mysterious
appearance. This new client, though she hid her face in a mask,
could not conceal herself from the knowledge of the conjurer, who,
by her voice, recognised her to be an unmarried lady of his own
acquaintance. She had, within a small compass of time, made herself
remarkable for two adventures, which had not at all succeeded
to her expectation. Being very much addicted to play, she had, at
a certain rout, indulged that passion to such excess, as not only
got the better of her justice, but also of her circumspection, so
that she was unfortunately detected in her endeavours to appropriate
to herself what was not lawfully her due. This small slip was
attended with another indiscretion, which had likewise an unlucky
effect upon her reputation. She had been favoured with the addresses
of one of those hopeful heirs who swarm and swagger about town,
under the denomination of bucks; and, in the confidence of his
honour, consented to be one of a party that made an excursion as far
as Windsor, thinking herself secured from scandal by the company of
another young lady, who had also condescended to trust her person
to the protection of her admirer. The two gallants, in the course
of this expedition, were said to use the most perfidious means to
intoxicate the passions of their mistresses by mixing drugs with
their wine, which inflamed their constitutions to such a degree, that
they fell an easy sacrifice to the appetites of their conductors,
who, upon their return to town, were so base and inhuman as to boast
among their companions of the exploit they had achieved.  Thus the
story was circulated, with a thousand additional circumstances to
the prejudice of the sufferers, one of whom had thought proper to
withdraw into the country, until the scandal raised at her expense
should subside; while the other, who was not so easily put out
of countenance, resolved to outface the report, as a treacherous
aspersion, invented by her lover as an excuse for his own inconstancy;
and actually appeared in public, as usual, till she found herself
neglected by the greatest part of her acquaintance.

In consequence of this disgrace, which she knew not whether to
impute to the card affair, or to the last faux pas she had committed,
she now came to consult the conjurer, and signified her errand, by
asking whether the cause of her present disquiet was of the town or
the country. Cadwallader at once perceiving her allusion, answered
her question in these terms: "This honest world will forgive a
young gamester for indiscretion at play, but a favour granted to
a babbling coxcomb is an unpardonable offence." This response she
received with equal astonishment and chagrin; and, fully convinced
of the necromancer's omniscience, implored his advice, touching
the retrieval of her reputation: upon which he counselled her to
wed with the first opportunity. She seemed so well pleased with his
admonition, that she gratified him with a double fee, and, dropping
a low curtsey, retired.

Our undertakers now thought it high time to silence the oracle for
the day, and Hadgi was accordingly ordered to exclude all comers,
while Peregrine and his friend renewed the deliberations which had
been interrupted, and settled a plan of operations for the next
occasion. Meanwhile it was resolved that Hadgi should not only
exercise his own talents, but also employ inferior agents, in
procuring general intelligence for the support of their scheme; that
the expense of this ministry should be defrayed from the profits
of their professions; and the remainder be distributed to poor
families in distress.





CHAPTER LXXXIII.


