

To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

Without waiting for your answer to my last, I proceed to give you
an account of our journey to London, which has not been wholly
barren of adventure. Tuesday last the 'squire took his place in a
hired coach and four, accompanied by his sister and mine, and Mrs
Tabby's maid, Winifrid Jenkins, whose province it was to support
Chowder on a cushion in her lap. I could scarce refrain from
laughing when I looked into the vehicle, and saw that animal
sitting opposite to my uncle, like any other passenger. The
squire, ashamed of his situation, blushed to the eyes: and,
calling to the postilions to drive on, pulled the glass up in my
face. I, and his servant, John Thomas, attended them on
horseback.

Nothing worth mentioning occurred, till we arrived on the edge of
Marlborough Downs. There one of the four horses fell, in going
down hill at a round trot; and the postilion behind, endeavouring
to stop the carriage, pulled it on one side into a deep rut,
where it was fairly overturned. I had rode on about two hundred
yards before; but, hearing a loud scream, galloped back and
dismounted, to give what assistance was in my power. When I
looked into the coach, I could see nothing distinctly, but the
nether end of Jenkins, who was kicking her heels and squalling
with great vociferation. All of a sudden, my uncle thrust up his
bare pate, and bolted through the window, as nimble as a
grasshopper, having made use of poor Win's posteriors as a step
to rise in his ascent -- The man (who had likewise quitted his
horse) dragged this forlorn damsel, more dead than alive, through
the same opening. Then Mr Bramble, pulling the door off its
hinges with a jerk, laid hold on Liddy's arm, and brought her to
the light; very much frighted, but little hurt. It fell to my
share to deliver our aunt Tabitha, who had lost her cap in the
struggle, and being rather more than half frantic, with rage and
terror, was no bad representation of one of the sister Furies
that guard the gates of hell -- She expressed no sort of concern
for her brother, who ran about in the cold, without his periwig,
and worked with the most astonishing agility, in helping to
disentangle the horses from the carriage: but she cried, in a
tone of distraction, 'Chowder! Chowder! my dear Chowder! my poor
Chowder is certainly killed!'

This was not the case -- Chowder, after having tore my uncle's leg
in the confusion of the fall, had retreated under the scat, and
from thence the footman drew him by the neck; for which good
office, he bit his fingers to the bone. The fellow, who is
naturally surly, was so provoked at this assault, that he saluted
his ribs with a hearty kick, exclaiming, 'Damn the nasty son of a
bitch, and them he belongs to!' A benediction, which was by no
means lost upon the implacable virago his mistress -- Her brother,
however, prevailed upon her to retire into a peasant's house,
near the scene of action, where his head and hers were covered,
and poor Jenkins had a fit. Our next care was to apply some
sticking plaister to the wound in his leg, which exhibited the
impression of Chowder's teeth; but he never opened his lips
against the delinquent -- Mrs Tabby, alarmed at this scene, 'You
say nothing, Matt (cried she); but I know your mind -- I know the
spite you have to that poor unfortunate animal! I know you intend
to take his life away!' 'You are mistaken, upon my honour!
(replied the squire, with a sarcastic smile) I should be
incapable of harbouring any such cruel design against an object
so amiable and inoffensive; even if he had not the happiness to
be your favourite.'

John Thomas was not so delicate. The fellow, whether really
alarmed for his life, or instigated by the desire of revenge,
came in, and bluntly demanded, that the dog should be put to
death; on the supposition, that if ever he should run mad
hereafter, he, who had been bit by him, would be infected -- My
uncle calmly argued upon the absurdity of his opinion, observing,
that he himself was in the same predicament, and would certainly
take the precaution he proposed, if he was not sure he ran no
risque of infection. Nevertheless, Thomas continued obstinate;
and, at length declared, that if the dog was not shot
immediately, he himself would be his executioner -- This
declaration opened the flood-gates of Tabby's eloquence, which
would have shamed the first-rate oratress of Billingsgate. The
footman retorted in the same stile; and the squire dismissed him
from his service, after having prevented me from giving him a
good horse-whipping for his insolence.

The coach being adjusted, another difficulty occurred -- Mrs
Tabitha absolutely refused to enter it again, unless another
driver could be found to take the place of the postilion; who,
she affirmed, had overturned the carriage from malice
aforethought -- After much dispute, the man resigned his place to a
shabby country fellow, who undertook to go as far as Marlborough,
where they could be better provided; and at that place we arrived
about one O'clock, without farther impediment. Mrs Bramble,
however, found new matter of offence; which, indeed, she has a
particular genius for extracting at will from almost every
incident in life. We had scarce entered the room at Marlborough,
where we stayed to dine, when she exhibited a formal complaint
against the poor fellow who had superseded the postilion. She
said he was such a beggarly rascal that he had ne'er a shirt
to his back, and had the impudence to shock her sight by shewing
his bare posteriors, for which act of indelicacy he deserved to
be set in the stocks. Mrs Winifred Jenkins confirmed the assertion,
with respect to his nakedness, observing, at the same time, that
he had a skin as fair as alabaster.

'This is a heinous offence, indeed (cried my uncle) let us hear
what the fellow has to say in his own vindication.' He was
accordingly summoned, and made his appearance, which was equally
queer and pathetic. He seemed to be about twenty years of age, of
a middling size, with bandy legs, stooping shoulders, high
forehead, sandy locks, pinking eyes, flat nose, and long chin --
but his complexion was of a sickly yellow; his looks denoted
famine, and the rags that he wore could hardly conceal what
decency requires to be covered -- My uncle, having surveyed him
attentively, said, with an ironical expression in his
countenance, 'An't you ashamed, fellow, to ride postilion without
a shirt to cover your backside from the view of the ladies in the
coach?' 'Yes, I am, an please your noble honour (answered the
man) but necessity has no law, as the saying is -- And more than
that, it was an accident. My breeches cracked behind, after I had
got into the saddle' 'You're an impudent varlet (cried Mrs Tabby)
for presuming to ride before persons of fashion without a shirt' --
'I am so, an please your worthy ladyship (said he) but I am a
poor Wiltshire lad -- I ha'n't a shirt in the world, that I can
call my own, nor a rag of clothes, and please your ladyship, but
what you see -- I have no friend nor relation upon earth to help me
out -- I have had the fever and ague these six months, and spent
all I had in the world upon doctors, and to keep soul and body
together; and, saving your ladyship's good presence, I han't
broke bread these four and twenty hours.'

Mrs Bramble, turning from him, said, she had never seen such a
filthy tatterdemalion, and bid him begone; observing, that he
would fill the room full of vermin -- Her brother darted a
significant glance at her, as she retired with Liddy into another
apartment, and then asked the man if he was known to any person
in Marlborough? -- When he answered, that the landlord of the inn
had known him from his infancy; mine host was immediately called,
and being interrogated on the subject, declared that the young
fellow's name was Humphry Clinker. That he had been a love
begotten babe, brought up in the work-house, and put out
apprentice by the parish to a country black-smith, who died
before the boy's time was out: that he had for some time worked
under his ostler, as a helper and extra postilion, till he was
taken ill of the ague, which disabled him from getting his bread:
that, having sold or pawned every thing he had in the world for
his cure and subsistence, he became so miserable and shabby, that
he disgraced the stable, and was dismissed; but that he never
heard any thing to the prejudice of his character in other
respects. 'So that the fellow being sick and destitute (said my
uncle) you turned him out to die in the streets.' 'I pay the
poor's rate (replied the other) and I have no right to maintain
idle vagrants, either in sickness or health; besides, such a
miserable object would have brought a discredit upon my house.'

'You perceive (said the 'squire, turning to me) our landlord is a
Christian of bowels -- Who shall presume to censure the morals of
the age, when the very publicans exhibit such examples of
humanity? -- Heark ye, Clinker, you are a most notorious offender --
You stand convicted of sickness, hunger, wretchedness, and want --
But, as it does not belong to me to punish criminals, I will only
take upon me the task of giving you a word of advice. Get a shirt
with all convenient dispatch, that your nakedness may not
henceforward give offence to travelling gentlewomen, especially
maidens in years.'

So saying, he put a guinea into the hand of the poor fellow, who
stood staring at him in silence, with his mouth wide open, till
the landlord pushed him out of the room.

In the afternoon, as our aunt stept into the coach, she observed,
with some marks of satisfaction, that the postilion, who rode
next to her, was not a shabby wretch like the ragamuffin who had
them into Marlborough. Indeed, the difference was very
conspicuous: this was a smart fellow, with a narrow brimmed hat,
with gold cording, a cut bob, a decent blue jacket, leather-breaches,
and a clean linen shirt, puffed above the waist-band.
When we arrived at the Castle, on Spin-hill, where we lay, this
new postilion was remarkably assiduous in bringing in the loose
parcels; and, at length, displayed the individual countenance of
Humphry Clinker, who had metamorphosed himself in this manner, by
relieving from pawn part of his own clothes, with the money he
had received from Mr Bramble.

Howsoever pleased the rest of the company were with such a
favourable change in the appearance of this poor creature it
soured on the stomach of Mrs Tabby, who had not yet digested the
affront of his naked skin -- She tossed her nose in disdain,
saying, she supposed her brother had taken him into favour,
because he had insulted her with his obscenity: that a fool and
his money were soon parted; but that if Matt intended to take the
fellow with him to London, she would not go a foot further that
way -- My uncle said nothing with his tongue, though his looks were
sufficiently expressive; and next morning Clinker did not appear,
so that we proceeded without further altercation to Salthill,
where we proposed to dine -- There, the first person that came to
the side of the coach, and began to adjust the footboard, was no
other than Humphry Clinker -- When I handed out Mrs Bramble, she
eyed him with a furious look, and passed into the house -- My uncle
was embarrassed, and asked him peevishly, what had brought him
hither? The fellow said, his honour had been so good to him, that
he had not the heart to part with him; that he would follow him
to the world's end, and serve him all the days of his life,
without fee or reward.

Mr Bramble did not know whether to chide or laugh at this
declaration -- He foresaw much contradiction on the side of
Tabby; and on the other hand, he could not but be pleased with
the gratitude of Clinker, as well as with the simplicity of his
character -- 'Suppose I was inclined to take you into my service
(said he) what are your qualifications? what are you good for?'
'An please your honour (answered this original) I can read and
write, and do the business of the stable indifferent well -- I can
dress a horse, and shoe him, and bleed and rowel him; and, as for
the practice of sow-gelding, I won't turn my back on e'er a he in
the county of Wilts -- Then I can make hog's puddings and hob-nails,
mend kettles and tin sauce-pans.' -- Here uncle burst out a-laughing;
and inquired what other accomplishments he was master
of -- 'I know something of single-stick, and psalmody (proceeded
Clinker); I can play upon the jew's-harp, sing Black-ey'd Susan,
Arthur-o'Bradley, and divers other songs; I can dance a Welsh
jig, and Nancy Dawson; wrestle a fall with any lad of my inches,
when I'm in heart; and, under correction I can find a hare when
your honour wants a bit of game.' 'Foregad! thou are a complete
fellow (cried my uncle, still laughing) I have a good mind to
take thee into my family -- Prithee, go and try if thou can'st make
peace with my sister -- Thou ha'st given her much offence by
shewing her thy naked tail.'

Clinker accordingly followed us into the room, cap in hand,
where, addressing himself to Mrs Tabitha, 'May it please your
ladyship's worship (cried he) to pardon and forgive my offences,
and, with God's assistance, I shall take care that my tail shall
never rise up in judgment against me, to offend your ladyship
again. Do, pray, good, sweet, beautiful lady, take compassion on a
poor sinner -- God bless your noble countenance; I am sure you are
too handsome and generous to bear malice -- I will serve you on my
bended knees, by night and by day, by land and by water; and all
for the love and pleasure of serving such an excellent lady.'

This compliment and humiliation had some effect upon Tabby; but
she made no reply; and Clinker, taking silence for consent, gave
his attendance at dinner. The fellow's natural aukwardness and
the flutter of his spirits were productive of repeated blunders
in the course of his attendance -- At length, he spilt part of a
custard upon her right shoulder; and, starting back, trod upon
Chowder, who set up a dismal howl -- Poor Humphry was so
disconcerted at this double mistake, that he dropt the china
dish, which broke into a thousand pieces; then, falling down upon
his knees, remained in that posture gaping, with a most ludicrous
aspect of distress. Mrs Bramble flew to the dog, and, snatching
him in her arms, presented him to her brother saying, 'This is
all a concerted scheme against this unfortunate animal, whose
only crime is its regard for me -- Here it is, kill it at once, and
then you'll be satisfied.'

Clinker, hearing these words, and taking them in the literal
acceptation, got up in some hurry, and seizing a knife from the
side-board, cried, 'Not here, an please your ladyship -- It will
daub the room -- Give him to me, and I'll carry him to the ditch by
the roadside' To this proposal he received no other answer, than
a hearty box on the ear, that made him stagger to the other side
of the room. 'What! (said she to her brother) am I to be
affronted by every mangy hound that you pick up on the highway? I
insist upon your sending this rascallion about his business
immediately' 'For God's sake, sister, compose yourself (said my
uncle) and consider that the poor fellow is innocent of any
intention to give you offence' 'Innocent as the babe unborn'
(cried Humphry). 'I see it plainly (exclaimed this implacable
maiden), he acts by your direction; and you are resolved to
support him in his impudence This is a bad return for all the
services I have done you; for nursing you in your sickness,
managing your family, and keeping you from ruining yourself by
your own imprudence -- But now you shall part with that rascal or
me, upon the spot, without farther loss of time; and the world
shall see whether you have more regard for your own flesh and
blood, or for a beggarly foundling taken from the dunghill.'

Mr Bramble's eyes began to glisten, and his teeth to chatter. 'If
stated fairly (said he, raising his voice) the question is,
whether I have spirit to shake off an intolerable yoke, by one
effort of resolution, or meanness enough to do an act of cruelty
and injustice, to gratify the rancour of a capricious woman --
Heark ye, Mrs Tabitha Bramble, I will now propose an alternative
in my turn. Either discard your four-footed favourite, or give me
leave to bid you eternally adieu -- For I am determined that he and
I shall live no longer under the same roof; and to dinner with
what appetite you may' -- Thunderstruck at this declaration, she
sat down in a corner; and, after a pause of some minutes, 'Sure I
don't understand you, Matt! (said she)' 'And yet I spoke in plain
English' answered the 'squire, with a peremptory look. 'Sir
(resumed this virago, effectually humbled), it is your
prerogative to command, and my duty to obey. I can't dispose of
the dog in this place; but if you'll allow him to go in the coach
to London, I give you my word, he shall never trouble you again.'

Her brother, entirely disarmed by this mild reply, declared, she
could ask him nothing in reason that he would refuse; adding, 'I
hope, sister, you have never found me deficient in natural
affection.'

Mrs Tabitha immediately rose, and, throwing her arms about his
neck, kissed him on the cheek: he returned her embrace with great
emotion. Liddy sobbed, Win. Jenkins cackled, Chowder capered, and
Clinker skipped about, rubbing his hands for joy of this
reconciliation.

Concord being thus restored, we finished our meal with comfort;
and in the evening arrived at London, without having met with any
other adventure. My aunt seems to be much mended by the hint she
received from her brother. She has been graciously pleased to
remove her displeasure from Clinker, who is now retained as a
footman; and in a day or two will make his appearance in a new
suit of livery; but as he is little acquainted with London, we
have taken an occasional valet, whom I intend hereafter to hire
as my own servant. We lodge in Goldensquare, at the house of one
Mrs Notion, a decent sort of a woman, who takes great pains to
make us all easy. My uncle proposes to make a circuit of all the
remarkable scenes of this metropolis, for the entertainment of
his pupils; but as both you and I are already acquainted with
most of those he will visit, and with some others he little
dreams of, I shall only communicate what will be in some measure
new to your observation. Remember me to our Jesuitical friends,
and believe me ever,

Dear knight,
Yours affectionately,
J. MELFORD
LONDON, May 24.



To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DOCTOR,

London is literally new to me; new in its streets, houses, and
even in its situation; as the Irishman said, 'London is now gone
out of town.' What I left open fields, producing hay and corn, I
now find covered with streets and squares, and palaces, and
churches. I am credibly informed, that in the space of seven
years, eleven thousand new houses have been built in one quarter
of Westminster, exclusive of what is daily added to other parts
of this unwieldy metropolis. Pimlico and Knightsbridge are now
almost joined to Chelsea and Kensington; and if this infatuation
continues for half a century, I suppose the whole county of
Middlesex will be covered with brick.

It must be allowed, indeed, for the credit of the present age,
that London and Westminster are much better paved and lighted
than they were formerly. The new streets are spacious, regular,
and airy; and the houses generally convenient. The bridge at
Blackfriars is a noble monument of taste and public-spirit. -- I
wonder how they stumbled upon a work of such magnificence and
utility. But, notwithstanding these improvements, the capital is
become an overgrown monster; which, like a dropsical head, will
in time leave the body and extremities without nourishment and
support. The absurdity will appear in its full force, when we
consider that one sixth part of the natives of this whole
extensive kingdom is crowded within the bills of mortality. What
wonder that our villages are depopulated, and our farms in want
of day-labourers? The abolition of small farms is but one cause
of the decrease of population. Indeed, the incredible increase of
horses and black cattle, to answer the purposes of luxury,
requires a prodigious quantity of hay and grass, which are raised
and managed without much labour; but a number of hands will
always be wanted for the different branches of agriculture,
whether the farms be large or small. The tide of luxury has swept
all the inhabitants from the open country -- The poorest squire, as
well as the richest peer, must have his house in town, and make a
figure with an extraordinary number of domestics. The plough-boys,
cow-herds, and lower hinds are debauched and seduced by the
appearance and discourse of those coxcombs in livery, when they
make their summer excursions. They desert their dirt and
drudgery, and swarm up to London, in hopes of getting into
service, where they can live luxuriously and wear fine clothes,
without being obliged to work; for idleness is natural to man --
Great numbers of these, being disappointed in their expectation,
become thieves and sharpers; and London being an immense
wilderness, in which there is neither watch nor ward of any
signification, nor any order or police, affords them lurking-places
as well as prey.

There are many causes that contribute to the daily increase of
this enormous mass; but they may be all resolved into the grand
source of luxury and corruption -- About five and twenty years ago,
very few, even of the most opulent citizens of London, kept any
equipage, or even any servants in livery. Their tables produced
nothing but plain boiled and roasted, with a bottle of port and a
tankard of beer. At present, every trader in any degree of
credit, every broker and attorney, maintains a couple of footmen,
a coachman, and postilion. He has his town-house, and his
country-house, his coach, and his post-chaise. His wife and
daughters appear in the richest stuffs, bespangled with diamonds.
They frequent the court, the opera, the theatre, and the
masquerade. They hold assemblies at their own houses: they make
sumptuous entertainments, and treat with the richest wines of
Bordeaux, Burgundy, and Champagne. The substantial tradesman, who
wont to pass his evenings at the ale-house for fourpence half-penny,
now spends three shillings at the tavern, while his wife
keeps card-tables at home; she must likewise have fine clothes,
her chaise, or pad, with country lodgings, and go three times a
week to public diversions. Every clerk, apprentice, and even
waiter of tavern or coffeehouse, maintains a gelding by himself,
or in partnership, and assumes the air and apparel of a petit
maitre -- The gayest places of public entertainment are filled with
fashionable figures; which, upon inquiry, will be found to be
journeymen taylors, serving-men, and abigails, disguised like
their betters.

In short, there is no distinction or subordination left -- The
different departments of life are jumbled together -- The hod-carrier,
the low mechanic, the tapster, the publican, the
shopkeeper, the pettifogger, the citizen, and courtier, all tread
upon the kibes of one another: actuated by the demons of
profligacy and licentiousness, they are seen every where
rambling, riding, rolling, rushing, justling, mixing, bouncing,
cracking, and crashing in one vile ferment of stupidity and
corruption -- All is tumult and hurry; one would imagine they were
impelled by some disorder of the brain, that will not suffer them
to be at rest. The foot-passengers run along as if they were
pursued by bailiffs. The porters and chairmen trot with their
burthens. People, who keep their own equipages, drive through the
streets at full speed. Even citizens, physicians, and
apothecaries, glide in their chariots like lightening. The
hackney-coachmen make their horses smoke, and the pavement shakes
under them; and I have actually seen a waggon pass through
Piccadilly at the hand-gallop. In a word, the whole nation seems
to be running out of their wits.

The diversions of the times are not ill suited to the genius of
this incongruous monster, called the public. Give it noise,
confusion, glare, and glitter; it has no idea of elegance and
propriety -- What are the amusements of Ranelagh? One half of the
company are following at the other's tails, in an eternal circle;
like so many blind asses in an olive-mill, where they can neither
discourse, distinguish, nor be distinguished; while the other
half are drinking hot water, under the denomination of tea, till
nine or ten o'clock at night, to keep them awake for the rest of
the evening. As for the orchestra, the vocal music especially, it
is well for the performers that they cannot be heard distinctly.
Vauxhall is a composition of baubles, overcharged with paltry
ornaments, ill conceived, and poorly executed; without any unity
of design, or propriety of disposition. It is an unnatural
assembly of objects, fantastically illuminated in broken masses;
seemingly contrived to dazzle the eyes and divert the imagination
of the vulgar -- Here a wooden lion, there a stone statue; in one
place, a range of things like coffeehouse boxes, covered a-top;
in another, a parcel of ale-house benches; in a third, a puppet-show
representation of a tin cascade; in a fourth, a gloomy cave
of a circular form, like a sepulchral vault half lighted; in a
fifth, a scanty flip of grass-plat, that would not afford pasture
sufficient for an ass's colt. The walks, which nature seems to
have intended for solitude, shade, and silence, are filled with
crowds of noisy people, sucking up the nocturnal rheums of an
aguish climate; and through these gay scenes, a few lamps glimmer
like so many farthing candles.

When I see a number of well dressed people, of both sexes,
sitting on the covered benches, exposed to the eyes of the mob;
and, which is worse, to the cold, raw, night-air, devouring
sliced beef, and swilling port, and punch, and cyder, I can't
help compassionating their temerity; white I despise their want
of taste and decorum; but, when they course along those damp and
gloomy walks, or crowd together upon the wet gravel, without any
other cover than the cope of Heaven, listening to a song, which
one half of them cannot possibly hear, how can I help supposing
they are actually possessed by a spirit, more absurd and
pernicious than any thing we meet with in the precincts of
Bedlam? In all probability, the proprietors of this, and other
public gardens of inferior note, in the skirts of the metropolis,
are, in some shape, connected with the faculty of physic, and the
company of undertakers; for, considering that eagerness in the
pursuit of what is called pleasure, which now predominates
through every rank and denomination of life, I am persuaded that
more gouts, rheumatisms, catarrhs, and consumptions are caught in
these nocturnal pastimes, sub dio, than from all the risques and
accidents to which a life of toil and danger is exposed.

These, and other observations, which I have made in this
excursion, will shorten my stay at London, and send me back with
a double relish to my solitude and mountains; but I shall return
by a different route from that which brought me to town. I have
seen some old friends, who constantly resided in this virtuous
metropolis, but they are so changed in manners and disposition,
that we hardly know or care for one another -- In our journey from
Bath, my sister Tabby provoked me into a transport of passion;
during which, like a man who has drank himself pot-valiant, I
talked to her in such a stile of authority and resolution, as
produced a most blessed effect. She and her dog have been
remarkably quiet and orderly ever since this expostulation. How
long this agreeable calm will last, Heaven above knows -- I flatter
myself, the exercise of travelling has been of service to my
health; a circumstance which encourages me to-proceed in my
projected expedition to the North. But I must, in the mean time,
for the benefit and amusement of my pupils, explore the depths of
this chaos; this misshapen and monstrous capital, without head or
tail, members or proportion.

Thomas was so insolent to my sister on the road, that I was
obliged to turn him off abruptly, betwixt Chippenham and
Marlborough, where our coach was overturned. The fellow was
always sullen and selfish; but, if he should return to the
country, you may give him a character for honesty and sobriety;
and, provided he behaves with proper respect to the family, let
him have a couple of
guineas in the name of

Yours always,
MATT. BRAMBLE
LONDON, May 20.



To Miss LAETITIA WILLIS, at Gloucester.

MY DEAR LETTY,

Inexpressible was the pleasure I received from yours of the 25th,
which was last night put into my hands by Mrs Brentford, the
milliner, from Gloucester -- I rejoice to hear that my worthy
governess is in good health, and, still more, that she no longer
retains any displeasure towards her poor Liddy. I am sorry you
have lost the society of the agreeable Miss Vaughn; but, I hope
you won't have cause much longer to regret the departure of your
school companions, as I make no doubt but your parents will, in a
little time, bring you into the world, where you are so well
qualified to make a distinguished figure. When that is the case,
I flatter myself you and I shall meet again, and be happy
together; and even improve the friendship which we contracted in
our tender years. This at least I can promise -- It shall not be for
the want of my utmost endeavours, if our intimacy does not
continue for life.

About five days ago we arrived in London, after an easy journey
from Bath; during which, however, we were overturned, and met
with some other little incidents, which, had like to have
occasioned a misunderstanding betwixt my uncle and aunt; but now,
thank God, they are happily reconciled: we live in harmony
together, and every day make parties to see the wonders of this
vast metropolis, which, however, I cannot pretend to describe;
for I have not as yet seen one hundredth part of its curiosities,
and I am quite in a maze of admiration.

The cities of London and Westminster are spread out into an
incredible extent. The streets, squares, rows, lanes, and alleys,
are innumerable. Palaces, public buildings, and churches rise in
every quarter; and, among these last, St Paul's appears with the
most astonishing pre-eminence. They say it is not so large as, St
Peter's at Rome; but, for my own part, I can have no idea of any
earthly temple more grand and magnificent.

But even these superb objects are not so striking as the crowds
of people that swarm in the streets. I at first imagined that
some great assembly was just dismissed, and wanted to stand aside
till the multitude should pass; but this human tide continues to
flow, without interruption or abatement, from morn till night.
Then there is such an infinity of gay equipages, coaches,
chariots, chaises, and other carriages, continually rolling and
shifting before your eyes, that one's head grows giddy looking at
them; and the imagination is quite confounded with splendour and
variety. Nor is the prospect by water less grand and astonishing
than that by land: you see three stupendous bridges, joining the
opposite banks of a broad, deep, and rapid river; so vast, so
stately, so elegant, that they seem to be the work of the giants;
betwixt them, the whole surface of the Thames is covered with
small vessels, barges, boats, and wherries, passing to and fro;
and below the three bridges, such a prodigious forest of masts,
for miles together, that you would think all the ships in the
universe were here assembled. All that you read of wealth and
grandeur in the Arabian Nights' Entertainment, and the Persian
Tales, concerning Bagdad, Diarbekir, Damascus, Ispahan, and
Samarkand, is here realized.

Ranelagh looks like the inchanted palace of a genie, adorned with
the most exquisite performances of painting, carving, and
gilding, enlightened with a thousand golden lamps, that emulate
the noon-day sun; crowded with the great, the rich, the gay, the
happy, and the fair; glittering with cloth of gold and silver,
lace, embroidery, and precious stones. While these exulting sons
and daughters of felicity tread this round of pleasure, or regale
in different parties, and separate lodges, with fine imperial tea
and other delicious refreshments, their ears are entertained with
the most ravishing delights of music, both instrumental and
vocal. There I heard the famous Tenducci, a thing from Italy -- It
looks for all the world like a man, though they say it is not.
The voice, to be sure, is neither man's nor woman's; but it is
more melodious than either; and it warbled so divinely, that,
while I listened, I really thought myself in paradise.

At nine o'clock, in a charming moonlight evening, we embarked at
Ranelagh for Vauxhall, in a wherry so light and slender that we
looked like so many fairies sailing in a nutshell. My uncle,
being apprehensive of catching cold upon the water, went round in
the coach, and my aunt would have accompanied him, but he would
not suffer me to go by water if she went by land; and therefore
she favoured us with her company, as she perceived I had a
curiosity to make this agreeable voyage -- After all, the vessel
was sufficiently loaded; for, besides the waterman, there was my
brother Jery, and a friend of his, one Mr Barton, a country
gentleman, of a good fortune, who had dined at our house -- The
pleasure of this little excursion was, however, damped, by my
being sadly frighted at our landing; where there was a terrible
confusion of wherries and a crowd of people bawling, and
swearing, and quarrelling, nay, a parcel of ugly-looking fellows
came running into the water, and laid hold of our boat with great
violence, to pull it a-shore; nor would they quit their hold till
my brother struck one of them over the head with his cane. But
this flutter was fully recompensed by the pleasures of Vauxhall;
which I no sooner entered, than I was dazzled and confounded with
the variety of beauties that rushed all at once upon my eye.
Image to yourself, my dear Letty, a spacious garden, part laid
out in delightful walks, bounded with high hedges and trees, and
paved with gravel; part exhibiting a wonderful assemblage of the
most picturesque and striking objects' pavilions, lodges, groves,
grottoes, lawns, temples and cascades; porticoes, colonades, and
rotundos; adorned with pillars, statues, and painting: the whole
illuminated with an infinite number of lamps, disposed in
different figures of suns, stars, and constellations; the place
crowded with the gayest company, ranging through those blissful
shades, or supping in different lodges on cold collations,
enlivened with mirth, freedom, and good humour, and animated by
an excellent band of music. Among the vocal performers I had the
happiness to hear the celebrated Mrs --, whose voice was loud and
shrill, that it made my head ake through excess of pleasure.

In about half an hour after we arrived we were joined by my
uncle, who did not seem to relish the place. People of experience
and infirmity, my dear Letty, see with very different eyes from
those that such as you and I make use of -- Our evening's
entertainment was interrupted by an unlucky accident. In one of
the remotest walks we were surprised with a sudden shower, that
set the whole company a-running, and drove us in heaps, one upon
another, into the rotunda; where my uncle, finding himself wet,
began to be very peevish and urgent to be gone. My brother went
to look for the coach, and found it with much difficulty; but as
it could not hold us all, Mr Barton stayed behind. It was some
time before the carriage could be brought up to the gate, in the
confusion, notwithstanding the utmost endeavours of our new
footman, Humphry Clinker, who lost his scratch periwig, and got a
broken head in the scuffle. The moment we were seated, my aunt
pulled off my uncle's shoes, and carefully wrapped his poor feet
in her capuchin; then she gave him a mouth-ful of cordial, which
she always keeps in her pocket, and his clothes were shifted as
soon as we arrived at lodgings; so that, blessed be God, he
escaped a severe cold, of which he was in great terror.

As for Mr Barton, I must tell you in confidence, he was a little
particular; but, perhaps, I mistake his complaisance; and I wish
I may, for his sake -- You know the condition of my poor heart:
which, in spite of hard usage -- And yet I ought not to complain:
nor will I, till farther information.

Besides Ranelagh and Vauxhall, I have been at Mrs Cornelys'
assembly, which, for the rooms, the company, the dresses, and
decorations, surpasses all description; but as I have no great
turn for card playing, I have not yet entered thoroughly into the
spirit of the place: indeed I am still such a country hoyden,
that I could hardly find patience to be put in a condition to
appear, yet, as I was not above six hours under the hands of the
hair-dresser, who stuffed my head with as much black wool as
would have made a quilted petticoat; and, after all, it was the
smallest head in the assembly, except my aunt's -- She, to be sure,
was so particular with her rumpt gown and petticoat, her scanty
curls, her lappethead, deep triple ruffles, and high stays, that
every body looked at her with surprise: some whispered, and some
tittered; and lady Griskin, by whom we were introduced, flatly
told her, she was twenty good years behind the fashion.

Lady Griskin is a person of fashion, to whom we have the honour
to be related. She keeps a small rout at her own house, never
exceeding ten or a dozen card-tables, but these are frequented by
the best company in town -- She has been so obliging as to
introduce my aunt and me to some of her particular friends of
quality, who treat us with the most familiar good-humour: we have
once dined with her, and she takes the trouble to direct us in
all our motions. I am so happy as to have gained her goodwill to
such a degree, that she sometimes adjusts my cap with her own
hands; and she has given me a kind invitation to stay with her
all the winter. This, however, has been cruelly declined by my
uncle who seems to be (I know not how) prejudiced against the
good lady; for, whenever my aunt happens to speak in her
commendation, I observe that he makes wry faces, though he says
nothing -- Perhaps, indeed, these grimaces may be the effect of
pain arising from the gout and rheumatism, with which he is sadly
distressed -- To me, however, he is always good-natured and
generous, even beyond my wish. Since we came hither, he has made
me a present of a suit of clothes, with trimmings and laces,
which cost more money than I shall mention; and Jery, at his
desire, has given me my mother's diamond crops, which are ordered
to be set a-new; so that it won't be his fault if I do not
glitter among the stars of the fourth or fifth magnitude. I wish
my weak head may not grow giddy in the midst of all this
gallantry and dissipation; though, as yet, I can safely declare,
I could gladly give up all these tumultuous pleasures, for
country solitude, and a happy retreat with those we love; among
whom, my dear Willis will always possess the first place in the
breast of her

Ever affectionate,
LYDIA MELFORD
LONDON, May 31.



To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

I send you this letter, franked by our old friend Barton; who is
as much altered as it was possible for a man of his kidney to be.
Instead of the careless, indolent sloven we knew at Oxford, I
found him a busy talkative politician; a petit-maitre in his
dress, and a ceremonious courtier in his manners. He has not gall
enough in his constitution to be enflamed with the rancour of
party, so as to deal in scurrilous invectives; but, since he
obtained a place, he is become a warm partizan of the ministry,
and sees every thing through such an exaggerating medium, as to
me, who am happily of no party, is altogether incomprehensible --
Without all doubt, the fumes of faction not only disturb the
faculty of reason, but also pervert the organs of sense; and I
would lay a hundred guineas to ten, that if Barton on one side,
and the most conscientious patriot in the opposition on the
other, were to draw, upon honour, the picture of the k[ing] or
m[inisters], you and I, who are still uninfected, and unbiased,
would find both painters equally distant from the truth. One
thing, however, must be allowed for the honour of Barton, he
never breaks out into illiberal abuse, far less endeavours, by
infamous calumnies, to blast the moral character of any
individual on the other side.

Ever since we came hither, he has been remarkably assiduous in
his attention to our family; an attention, which, in a man of his
indolence and avocations, I should have thought altogether odd,
and even unnatural, had not I perceived that my sister Liddy had
made some impression upon his heart. I cannot say that I have any
objection to his trying his fortune in this pursuit: if an
opulent estate and a great flock of good-nature are sufficient
qualifications in a husband, to render the marriage-state happy
for life, she may be happy with Barton; but, I imagine, there is
something else required to engage and secure the affection of a
woman of sense and delicacy: something which nature has denied
our friend -- Liddy seems to be of the same opinion. When he
addresses himself to her in discourse, she seems to listen with
reluctance, and industriously avoids all particular
communication; but in proportion to her coyness, our aunt is
coming. Mrs Tabitha goes more than half way to meet his advances;
she mistakes, or affects to mistake, the meaning of his courtesy,
which is rather formal and fulsome; she returns his compliments
with hyperbolical interest, she persecutes him with her
civilities at table, she appeals to him for ever in conversation,
she sighs, and flirts, and ogles, and by her hideous affectation
and impertinence, drives the poor courtier to the very extremity
of his complaisance; in short, she seems to have undertaken the
siege of Barton's heart, and carries on her approaches in such a
desperate manner, that I don't know whether he will not be
obliged to capitulate. In the mean time, his aversion to this
inamorata struggling with his acquired affability, and his
natural fear of giving offence, throws him into a kind of
distress which is extremely ridiculous.

Two days ago, he persuaded my uncle and me to accompany him to St
James's, where he undertook to make us acquainted with the
persons of all the great men in the kingdom; and, indeed, there
was a great assemblage of distinguished characters, for it was a
high festival at court. Our conductor performed his promise with
great punctuality. He pointed out almost every individual of both
sexes, and generally introduced them to our notice, with a
flourish of panegyrick -- Seeing the king approach, 'There comes
(said he) the most amiable sovereign that ever swayed the sceptre
of England: the delicioe humani generis; Augustus, in patronizing
merit; Titus Vespasian in generosity; Trajan in beneficence; and
Marcus Aurelius in philosophy.' 'A very honest kind hearted
gentleman (added my uncle) he's too good for the times. A king of
England should have a spice of the devil in his composition.'
Barton, then turning to the duke of C[umberland], proceeded, --
'You know the duke, that illustrious hero, who trode rebellion
under his feet, and secured us in possession of every thing we
ought to hold dear, as English men and Christians. Mark what an
eye, how penetrating, yet pacific! what dignity in his mien! what
humanity in his aspect -- Even malice must own, that he is one of
the greatest officers in Christendom.' 'I think he is (said Mr
Bramble) but who are these young gentlemen that stand beside
him?' 'Those! (cried our friend) those are his royal nephews; the
princes of the blood. Sweet
young princes! the sacred pledges of the Protestant line; so
spirited, so sensible, so princely' -- 'Yes; very sensible! very
spirited! (said my uncle, interrupting him) but see the queen!
ha, there's the queen! -- There's the queen! let me see -- Let me
see -- Where are my glasses? ha! there's meaning in that eye --
There's sentiment -- There's expression -- Well, Mr Barton, what
figure do you call next?' The next person he pointed out, was the
favourite yearl; who stood solitary by one of the windows --
'Behold yon northern star (said he) shorn of his beams' -- 'What!
the Caledonian luminary, that lately blazed so bright in our
hemisphere! methinks, at present, it glimmers through a fog; like
Saturn without his ring, bleak, and dim, and distant -- Ha, there's
the other great phenomenon, the grand pensionary, that
weathercock of patriotism that veers about in every point of the
political compass, and still feels the wind of popularity in his
tail. He too, like a portentous comet, has risen again above the
court-horizon; but how long he will continue to ascend, it is not
easy to foretell, considering his great eccentricity -- Who are
those two satellites that attend his motions?' When Barton told
him their names, 'To their characters (said Mr Bramble) I am no
stranger. One of them, without a drop of red blood in his veins,
has a cold intoxicating vapour in his head; and rancour enough in
his heart to inoculate and affect a whole nation. The other is (I
hear) intended for a share in the ad[ministratio]n, and the
pensionary vouches for his being duly qualified -- The only
instance I ever heard of his sagacity, was his deserting his
former patron, when he found him declining in power, and in
disgrace with the people. Without principle, talent, or
intelligence, he is ungracious as a hog, greedy as a vulture, and
thievish as a jackdaw; but, it must be owned, he is no hypocrite.
He pretends to no virtue, and takes no pains to disguise his
character -- His ministry will be attended with one advantage, no
man will be disappointed by his breach of promise, as no mortal
ever trusted to his word. I wonder how lord-- first discovered
this happy genius, and for what purpose lord-- has now adopted
him: but one would think, that as amber has a power to attract
dirt, and straws, and chaff, a minister is endued with the same
kind of faculty, to lick up every knave and blockhead in his
way' -- His eulogium was interrupted by the arrival of the old duke
of N--; who, squeezing into the circle with a busy face of
importance, thrust his head into every countenance, as if he had
been in search of somebody, to whom he wanted to impart something
of great consequence -- My uncle, who had been formerly known to
him, bowed as he passed; and the duke seeing himself saluted so
respectfully by a well-dressed person, was not slow in returning
the courtesy -- He even came up, and, taking him cordially by the
hand, 'My dear friend, Mr A-- (said he) I am rejoiced to see you --
How long have you been come from abroad? -- How did you leave our
good friends the Dutch? The king of Prussia don't think of
another war, ah? -- He's a great king! a great conqueror! a very
great conqueror! Your Alexanders and Hannibals were nothing, at
all to him, sir -- Corporals! drummers! dross! mere trash -- Damned
trash, heh?' -- His grace being by this time out of breath, my
uncle took the opportunity to tell him he had not been out of
England, that his name was Bramble, and that he had the honour to
sit in the last parliament but one of the late king, as
representative for the borough of Dymkymraig. 'Odso! (cried the
duke) I remember you perfectly well, my dear Mr Bramble -- You was
always a good and loyal subject -- a stanch friend to
administration -- I made your brother an Irish bishop' -- 'Pardon me,
my lord (said the squire) I once had a brother, but he was a
captain in the army' -- 'Ha! (said his grace) he was so -- He was,
indeed! But who was the Bishop then! Bishop Blackberry -- Sure it
was bishop Blackberry. Perhaps some relation of yours' -- 'Very
likely, my lord (replied my uncle); the Blackberry is the fruit
of the Bramble -- But, I believe, the bishop is not a berry of our
bush' -- 'No more he is -- No more he is, ha, ha, ha! (exclaimed the
duke) there you gave me a scratch, good Mr Bramble, ha, ha, ha! --
Well, I shall be glad to see you at Lincoln's inn-fields -- You
know the way -- Times are altered. Though I have lost the power, I
retain the inclination -- Your very humble servant, good Mr
Blackberry' -- So saying, he shoved to another corner of the room.
'What a fine old gentleman! (cried Mr Barton) what spirits! what
a memory! He never forgets an old friend.' 'He does me too much
honour (observed our squire) to rank me among the number -- Whilst
I sat in parliament, I never voted with the ministry but three
times, when my conscience told me they were in the right:
however, if he still keeps levee, I will carry my nephew thither,
that he may see, and learn to avoid the scene; for, I think, an
English gentleman never appears to such disadvantage, as at the
levee of a minister -- Of his grace I shall say nothing at present,
but that for thirty years he was the constant and common butt of
ridicule and execration. He was generally laughed at as an ape in
politics, whose office and influence served only to render his
folly the more notorious; and the opposition cursed him, as the
indefatigable drudge of a first-mover, who was justly stiled and
stigmatized as the father of corruption: but this ridiculous ape,
this venal drudge, no sooner lost the places he was so ill
qualified to fill, and unfurled the banners of faction, than he
was metamorphosed into a pattern of public virtue; the very
people who reviled him before, now extolled him to the skies, as
a wise, experienced statesman, chief pillar of the Protestant
succession, and corner stone of English liberty. I should be glad
to know how Mr Barton reconciles these contradictions, without
obliging us to resign all title to the privilege of common
sense.' 'My dear sir (answered Barton) I don't pretend to justify
the extravagations of the multitude; who, I suppose, were as wild
in their former censure, as in the present praise: but I shall be
very glad to attend you on Thursday next to his grace's levee;
where, I'm afraid, we shall not be crowded with company; for, you
know, there's a wide difference between his present office of
president of the council, and his former post of first lord
commissioner of the treasury.'

This communicative friend having announced all the remarkable
characters of both sexes, that appeared at court, we resolved to
adjourn, and retired. At the foot of the stair-case, there was a
crowd of lacqueys and chairmen, and in the midst of them stood
Humphry Clinker, exalted upon a stool, with his hat in one hand,
and a paper in the other, in the act of holding forth to the
people -- Before we could inquire into the meaning of this
exhibition, he perceived his master, thrust the paper into his
pocket, descended from his elevation, bolted through the crowd,
and brought up the carriage to the gate.

My uncle said nothing till we were seated, when, after having
looked at me earnestly for some time, he burst out a-laughing,
and asked if I knew upon what subject Clinker was holding forth
to the mob -- 'If (said he) the fellow is turned mountebank, I must
turn him out of my service, otherwise he'll make Merry Andrews of
us all' -- I observed, that, in all probability, he had studied
medicine under his master, who was a farrier.

At dinner, the squire asked him, if he had ever practised physic?
'Yes, and please your honour (said he) among brute beasts; but I
never meddle with rational creatures.' 'I know not whether you
rank in that class the audience you was haranguing in the court
at St. James's, but I should be glad to know what kind of powders
you was distributing; and whether you had a good sale' -- 'Sale,
sir! (cried Clinker) I hope I shall never be base enough to sell
for gold and silver, what freely comes of God's grace. I
distributed nothing, an like your honour, but a word of advice to
my fellows in servitude and sin.' 'Advice! concerning what?'
'Concerning profane swearing, an please your honour; so horrid
and shocking, that it made my hair stand on end.' 'Nay, if thou
can'st cure them Of that disease, I shall think thee a wonderful
doctor indeed' 'Why not cure them, my good master? the hearts of
those poor people are not so stubborn as your honour seems to
think -- Make them first sensible that you have nothing in view but
their good, then they will listen with patience, and easily be
convinced of the sin and folly of a practice that affords neither
profit nor pleasure -- At this remark, our uncle changed colour,
and looked round the company, conscious that his own withers were
not altogether unwrung. 'But, Clinker (said he) if you should
have eloquence enough to persuade the vulgar to resign those
tropes and figures of rhetoric, there will be little or nothing
left to distinguish their conversation from that of their
betters.' 'But then your honour knows, their conversation will be
void of offence; and, at the day of judgment, there will be no
distinction of persons.'

Humphry going down stairs to fetch up a bottle of wine, my uncle
congratulated his sister upon having such a reformer in the
family; when Mrs Tabitha declared, he was a sober civilized
fellow; very respectful, and very industrious; and, she believed,
a good Christian into the bargain. One would think, Clinker must
really have some very extraordinary talent, to ingratiate himself
in this manner with a virago of her character, so fortified
against him with prejudice and resentment; but the truth is,
since the adventure of Salt-hill, Mrs Tabby seems to be entirely
changed. She has left off scolding the servants, an exercise
which was grown habitual, and even seemed necessary to her
constitution; and is become so indifferent to Chowder, as to part
with him in a present to lady Griskin, who proposes to bring the
breed of him into fashion. Her ladyship is the widow of Sir
Timothy Griskin, a distant relation of our family. She enjoys a
jointure of five hundred pounds a-year, and makes shift to spend
three times that sum. Her character before marriage was a little
equivocal; but at present she lives in the bon ton, keeps card-tables,
gives private suppers to select friends, and is visited
by persons of the first fashion -- She has been remarkably civil to
us all, and cultivates my uncle with the most particular regard;
but the more she strokes him, the more his bristles seem to rise --
To her compliments he makes very laconic and dry returns --
T'other day she sent us a pottle of fine strawberries, which he
did not receive without signs of disgust, muttering from the
Aeneid, timeo Danaos et Dona ferentes. She has twice called for
Liddy, of a forenoon, to take an airing in the coach; but Mrs
Tabby was always so alert (I suppose by his direction) that she
never could have the niece without her aunt's company. I have
endeavoured to sound Square-toes on this subject; but he
carefully avoids all explanation.

I have now, dear Phillips, filled a whole sheet, and if you have
read it to an end, I dare say, you are as tired as

Your humble servant,
J. MELFORD
LONDON, June 2.




To Dr LEWIS.

Yes, Doctor, I have seen the British Museum; which is a noble
collection, and even stupendous, if we consider it was made by a
private man, a physician, who was obliged to make his own for
tune at the same time: but great as the collection is, it would
appear more striking if it was arranged in one spacious saloon,
instead of being divided into different apartments, which it does
not entirely fill -- I could wish the series of medals was
connected, and the whole of the animal, vegetable, and mineral
kingdoms completed, by adding to each, at the public expence,
those articles that are wanting. It would likewise be a great
improvement, with respect to the library, if the deficiencies
were made up, by purchasing all the books of character that are
not to be found already in the collection -- They might be classed
in centuries, according to the dates of their publication, and
catalogues printed of them and the manuscripts, for the
information of those that want to consult, or compile from such
authorities. I could also wish, for the honour of the nation,
that there was a complete apparatus for a course of mathematics,
mechanics, and experimental philosophy; and a good salary settled
upon an able professor, who should give regular lectures on these
subjects.

But this is all idle speculation, which will never be reduced to
practice -- Considering the temper of the times, it is a wonder to
see any institution whatsoever established for the benefit of the
Public. The spirit of party is risen to a kind of phrenzy,
unknown to former ages, or rather degenerated to a total
extinction of honesty and candour -- You know I have observed, for
some time, that the public papers are become the infamous
vehicles of the most cruel and perfidious defamation: every
rancorous knave every desperate incendiary, that can afford to
spend half a crown or three shillings, may skulk behind the press
of a newsmonger, and have a stab at the first character in the
kingdom, without running the least hazard of detection or
punishment.

I have made acquaintance with a Mr Barton, whom Jery knew at
Oxford; a good sort of a man, though most ridiculously warped in
his political principles; but his partiality is the less
offensive, as it never appears in the stile of scurrility and
abuse. He is a member of parliament, and a retainer to the court;
and his whole conversation turns upon the virtues and perfections
of the ministers, who are his patrons. T'other day, when he was
bedaubing one of those worthies, with the most fulsome praise, I
told him I had seen the same nobleman characterised very
differently, in one of the daily-papers; indeed, so stigmatized,
that if one half of what was said of him was true, he must be not
only unfit to rule, but even unfit to live: that those
impeachments had been repeated again and again, with the addition
of fresh matter; and that as he had taken no steps towards his
own vindication, I began to think there was some foundation for
the charge. 'And pray, Sir (said Mr Barton), what steps would you
have him take? Suppose he should prosecute the publisher, who
screens the anonymous accuser, and bring him to the pillory for a
libel; this is so far from being counted a punishment, in
terrorem, that it will probably make his fortune. The multitude
immediately take him into their protection, as a martyr to the
cause of defamation, which they have always espoused. They pay his
fine, they contribute to the increase of his stock, his shop is
crowded with customers, and the sale of his paper rises in
proportion to the scandal it contains. All this time the
prosecutor is inveighed against as a tyrant and oppressor, for
having chosen to proceed by the way of information, which is
deemed a grievance; but if he lays an action for damages, he must
prove the damage, and I leave you to judge, whether a gentleman's
character may not be brought into contempt, and all his views in
life blasted by calumny, without his being able to specify the
particulars of the damage he has sustained.

'This spirit of defamation is a kind of heresy, that thrives
under persecution. The liberty of the press is a term of great
efficacy; and like that of the Protestant religion, has often
served the purposes of sedition -- A minister, therefore, must arm
himself with patience, and bear those attacks without repining --
Whatever mischief they may do in other respects, they certainly
contribute, in one particular, to the advantages of government;
for those defamatory articles have multiplied papers in such a
manner, and augmented their sale to such a degree, that the duty
upon stamps and advertisements has made a very considerable
addition to the revenue.' Certain it is, a gentleman's honour is
a very delicate subject to be handled by a jury, composed of men,
who cannot be supposed remarkable either for sentiment or
impartiality -- In such a case, indeed, the defendant is tried, not
only by his peers, but also by his party; and I really think,
that of all patriots, he is the most resolute who exposes himself
to such detraction, for the sake of his country -- If, from the
ignorance or partiality of juries, a gentleman can have no
redress from law, for being defamed in a pamphlet or newspaper, I
know but one other method of proceeding against the publisher,
which is attended with some risque, but has been practised
successfully, more than once, in my remembrance -- A regiment of
horse was represented, in one of the newspapers, as having
misbehaved at Dettingen; a captain of that regiment broke the
publisher's bones, telling him, at the same time, if he went to
law, he should certainly have the like salutation from every
officer of the corps. Governor-- took the same satisfaction on the
ribs of an author, who traduced him by name in a periodical
paper -- I know a low fellow of the same class, who, being turned
out of Venice for his impudence and scurrility, retired to
Lugano, a town of the Grisons (a free people, God wot) where he
found a printing press, from whence he squirted his filth at some
respectable characters in the republic, which he had been obliged
to abandon. Some of these, finding him out of the reach of legal
chastisement, employed certain useful instruments, such as may be
found in all countries, to give him the bastinado; which, being
repeated more than once, effectually stopt the current of his
abuse.

As for the liberty of the press, like every other privilege, it
must be restrained within certain bounds; for if it is carried to
a branch of law, religion, and charity, it becomes one of the
greatest evils that ever annoyed the community. If the lowest
ruffian may stab your good name with impunity in England, will
you be so uncandid as to exclaim against Italy for the practice
of common assassination? To what purpose is our property secured,
if our moral character is left defenceless? People thus baited,
grow desperate; and the despair of being able to preserve one's
character, untainted by such vermin, produces a total neglect of
fame; so that one of the chief incitements to the practice of
virtue is effectually destroyed.

Mr Barton's last consideration, respecting the stamp-duty, is
equally wise and laudable with another maxim which has been long
adopted by our financiers, namely, to connive at drunkenness,
riot, and dissipation, because they inhance the receipt of the
excise; not reflecting, that in providing this temporary
convenience, they are destroying the morals, health, and industry
of the people -- Notwithstanding my contempt for those who flatter
a minister, I think there is something still more despicable in
flattering a mob. When I see a man of birth, education, and
fortune, put himself on a level with the dregs of the people,
mingle with low mechanics, feed with them at the same board, and
drink with them in the same cup, flatter their prejudices,
harangue in praise of their virtues, expose themselves to the
belchings of their beer, the fumes of their tobacco, the
grossness of their familiarity, and the impertinence of their
conversation, I cannot help despising him, as a man guilty of the
vilest prostitution, in order to effect a purpose equally selfish
and illiberal.

I should renounce politics the more willingly, if I could find
other topics of conversation discussed with more modesty and
candour; but the daemon of party seems to have usurped every
department of life. Even the world of literature and taste is
divided into the most virulent factions, which revile, decry, and
traduce the works of one another. Yesterday, I went to return an
afternoon's visit to a gentleman of my acquaintance, at whose
house I found one of the authors of the present age, who has
written with some success -- As I had read one or two of his
performances, which gave me pleasure, I was glad of this
opportunity to know his person; but his discourse and deportment
destroyed all the impressions which his writings had made in his
favour. He took upon him to decide dogmatically upon every
subject, without deigning to shew the least cause for his
differing from the general opinions of mankind, as if it had been
our duty to acquiesce in the ipse dixit of this new Pythagoras.
He rejudged the characters of all the principal authors, who had
died within a century of the present time; and, in this revision,
paid no sort of regard to the reputation they had acquired --
Milton was harsh and prosaic; Dryden, languid and verbose; Butler
and Swift without humour; Congreve, without wit; and Pope
destitute of any sort of poetical merit -- As for his
contemporaries, he could not bear to hear one of them mentioned
with any degree of applause -- They were all dunces, pedants,
plagiaries, quacks, and impostors; and you could not name a
single performance, but what was tame, stupid, and insipid. It
must be owned, that this writer had nothing to charge his
conscience with, on the side of flattery; for I understand, he
was never known to praise one line that was written, even by
those with whom he lived on terms of good fellowship. This
arrogance and presumption, in depreciating authors, for whose
reputation the company may be interested, is such an insult upon
the understanding, as I could not bear without wincing.

I desired to know his reasons for decrying some works, which had
afforded me uncommon pleasure; and, as demonstration did not seem
to be his talent, I dissented from his opinion with great
freedom. Having been spoiled by the deference and humility of his
hearers, he did not bear contradiction with much temper; and the
dispute might have grown warm, had it not been interrupted by the
entrance of a rival bard, at whose appearance he always quits the
place -- They are of different cabals, and have been at open war
these twenty years -- If the other was dogmatical, this genius was
declamatory: he did not discourse, but harangue; and his orations
were equally tedious and turgid. He too pronounces ex cathedra
upon the characters of his contemporaries; and though he scruples
not to deal out praise, even lavishly, to the lowest reptile in
Grubstreet who will either flatter him in private, or mount the
public rostrum as his panegyrist, he damns all the other writers
of the age, with the utmost insolence and rancour -- One is a
blunderbuss, as being a native of Ireland; another, a half-starved
louse of literature, from the banks of the Tweed; a
third, an ass, because he enjoys a pension from the government; a
fourth, the very angel of
dulness, because he succeeded in a species of writing in which
this Aristarchus had failed; a fifth, who presumed to make
strictures upon one of his performances, he holds as a bug in
criticism, whose stench is more offensive than his sting -- In
short, except himself and his myrmidons, there is not a man of
genius or learning in the three kingdoms. As for the success of
those, who have written without the pale of this confederacy, he
imputes it entirely to want of taste in the public; not
considering, that to the approbation of that very tasteless
public, he himself owes all the consequence he has in life.

Those originals are not fit for conversation. If they would
maintain the advantage they have gained by their writing, they
should never appear but upon paper -- For my part, I am shocked to
find a man have sublime ideas in his head, and nothing but
illiberal sentiments in his heart -- The human soul will be
generally found most defective in the article of candour -- I am
inclined to think, no mind was ever wholly exempt from envy;
which, perhaps, may have been implanted, as an instinct essential
to our nature. I am afraid we sometimes palliate this vice, under
the spacious name of emulation. I have known a person remarkably
generous, humane, moderate, and apparently self-denying, who
could not hear even a friend commended, without betraying marks
of uneasiness; as if that commendation had implied an odious
comparison to his prejudice, and every wreath of praise added to
the other's character, was a garland plucked from his own
temples. This is a malignant species of jealousy, of which I
stand acquitted in my own conscience.

Whether it is a vice, or an infirmity, I leave you to inquire.

There is another point, which I would much rather see determined;
whether the world was always as contemptible, as it appears to me
at present? -- If the morals of mankind have not contracted an
extraordinary degree of depravity, within these thirty years,
then must I be infected with the common vice of old men,
difficilis, querulus, laudator temporis acti; or, which is more
probable, the impetuous pursuits and avocations of youth have
formerly hindered me from observing those rotten parts of human
nature, which now appear so offensively to my observation.

We have been at court, and 'change, and every where; and every
where we find food for spleen, and subject for ridicule -- My new
servant, Humphry Clinker, turns out a great original: and Tabby
is a changed creature -- She has parted with Chowder; and does
nothing but smile, like Malvolio in the play -- I'll be hanged if
she is not acting a part which is not natural to her disposition,
for some purpose which I have not yet discovered.

With respect to the characters of mankind, my curiosity is quite
satisfied: I have done with the science of men, and must now
endeavour to amuse myself with the novelty of things. I am, at
present, by a violent effort of the mind, forced from my natural
bias; but this power ceasing to act, I shall return to my
solitude with redoubled velocity. Every thing I see, and hear,
and feel, in this great reservoir of folly, knavery, and
sophistication, contributes to inhance the value of a country
life, in the sentiments of

Yours always,
MATT. BRAMBLE
LONDON, June 2.



To Mrs MARY JONES, at Brambleton-hall.

DEAR MARY JONES,

Lady Griskin's botler, Mr Crumb, having got 'squire Barton to
frank me a kiver, I would not neglect to let you know how it is
with me, and the rest of the family.

I could not rite by John Thomas, for because he went away in a
huff, at a minutes' warning. He and Chowder could not agree, and
so they fitt upon the road, and Chowder bitt his thumb, and he
swore he would do him a mischief, and he spoke saucy to mistress,
whereby the squire turned him off in gudgeon; and by God's
providence we picked up another footman, called Umphry Klinker; a
good sole as ever broke bread; which shews that a scalded cat may
prove a good mouser, and a hound be staunch, thof he has got
narro hare on his buttocks; but the proudest nose may be bro't to
the grinestone, by sickness and misfortunes.

0 Molly! what shall I say of London? All the towns that ever I
beheld in my born-days, are no more than Welsh barrows and
crumlecks to this wonderful sitty! Even Bath itself is but a
fillitch, in the naam of God -- One would think there's no end of
the streets, but the land's end. Then there's such a power of
people,
going hurry skurry! Such a racket of coxes! Such a noise, and
haliballoo! So many strange sites to be seen! O gracious! my poor
Welsh brain has been spinning like a top ever since I came
hither! And I have seen the Park, and the paleass of Saint
Gimses, and the king's and the queen's magisterial pursing, and
the sweet young princes, and the hillyfents, and pye bald ass,
and all the rest of the royal family.

Last week I went with mistress to the Tower, to see the crowns
and wild beastis; and there was a monstracious lion, with teeth
half a quarter long; and a gentleman bid me not go near him, if I
wasn't a maid; being as how he would roar, and tear, and play the
dickens -- Now I had no mind to go near him; for I cannot abide
such dangerous honeymils, not I -- but, mistress would go; and the
beast kept such a roaring and bouncing, that I tho't he would
have broke his cage and devoured us all; and the gentleman
tittered forsooth; but I'll go to death upon it, I will, that my
lady is as good a firchin, as the child unborn; and, therefore,
either the gentleman told a fib, or the lion oft to be set in the
stocks for bearing false witness agin his neighbour; for the
commandment sayeth, Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy
neighbour.

I was afterwards of a party at Sadler's-wells, where I saw such
tumbling and dancing upon ropes and wires, that I was frightened
and ready to go into a fit -- I tho't it was all inchantment; and,
believing myself bewitched, began for to cry -- You knows as how
the witches in Wales fly upon broom-sticks: but here was flying
without any broom-stick, or thing in the varsal world, and firing
of pistols in the air, and blowing of trumpets, and swinging, and
rolling of wheel-barrows upon a wire (God bless us!) no thicker
than a sewing-thread; that, to be sure, they must deal with the
devil! -- A fine gentleman, with a pig's-tail, and a golden sord by
his side, come to comfit me, and offered for to treat me with a
pint of wind; but I would not stay; and so, in going through the
dark passage, he began to shew his cloven futt, and went for to
be rude: my fellow-sarvant, Umphry Klinker, bid him be sivil, and
he gave the young man a dowse in the chops; but, I fackins, Mr
Klinker wa'n't long in his debt -- with a good oaken sapling he
dusted his doublet, for all his golden cheese toaster; and,
fipping me under his arm, carried me huom, I nose not how, being
I was in such a flustration -- But, thank God! I'm now vaned from
all such vanities; for what are all those rarities and vagaries
to the glory that shall be revealed hereafter? O Molly! let not
your poor heart be puffed up with vanity.

I had almost forgot to tell you, that I have had my hair cut and
pippered, and singed, and bolstered, and buckled, in the newest
fashion, by a French freezer -- Parley vow Francey -- Vee madmansell
-- I now carries my head higher than arrow private gentlewoman of
Vales. Last night, coming huom from the meeting, I was taken by
lamp-light for an iminent poulterer's daughter, a great beauty --
But as I was saying, this is all vanity and vexation of spirit --
The pleasures of London are no better than sower whey and stale
cyder, when compared to the joys of the new Gerusalem.

Dear Mary Jones! An please God when I return, I'll bring you a
new cap, with a turkey-shell coom, and a pyehouse sermon, that
was preached in the Tabernacle; and I pray of all love, you will
mind your vriting and your spilling; for, craving your pardon,
Molly, it made me suet to disseyffer your last scrabble, which
was delivered by the hind at Bath -- 0, voman! voman! if thou
had'st but the least consumption of what pleasure we scullers
have, when we can cunster the crabbidst buck off hand, and spell
the ethnitch vords without lucking at the primmer. As for Mr
Klinker, he is qualified to be a clerk to a parish -- But I'll say
no more -- Remember me to Saul -- poor sole! it goes to my hart to
think she don't yet know her letters -- But all in God's good time
--  It shall go hard, but I will bring her the A B C in gingerbread;
and that, you nose, will be learning to her taste.

Mistress says, we are going a long gurney to the North; but go
where we will, I shall ever be,

Dear Mary Jones,
Yours with true infection
WIN. JENKINS
LONDON, June 3.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR WAT,

I mentioned in my last, my uncle's design of going to the duke of
N--'s levee; which design has been executed accordingly. His
grace has been so long accustomed to this kind of homage, that
though the place he now fills does not imply the tenth part of
the influence, which he exerted in his former office, he has
given his friends to understand, that they cannot oblige him in
any thing more, than in contributing to support the shadow of
that power, which he no longer retains in substance; and
therefore he has still public days, on which they appear at his
levee.

My uncle and I went thither with Mr Barton, who, being one of the
duke's adherents, undertook to be our introducer -- The room was
pretty well filled with people, in a great variety of dress; but
there was no more than one gown and cassock, though I was told
his grace had, while he was minister, preferred almost every
individual that now filled the bench of bishops in the house of
lords; but in all probability, the gratitude of the clergy is
like their charity, which shuns the light -- Mr Barton was
immediately accosted by a person well stricken in years, tall,
and raw-boned, with a hook-nose, and an arch leer, that
indicated, at least, as much cunning as sagacity. Our conductor
saluted him, by the name of captain C--, and afterwards informed
us he was a man of shrewd parts, whom the government occasionally
employed in secret services. But I have had the history of him
more at large, from another quarter. He had been, many years ago,
concerned in fraudulent practices, as a merchant, in France; and
being convicted of some of them, was sent to the gallies, from
whence he was delivered by the interest of the late duke of
Ormond, to whom he had recommended himself in letter, as his
name-sake and relation -- He was in the sequel, employed by our
ministry as a spy; and in the war of 1740, traversed all Spain,
as well as France, in the disguise of a capuchin, at the extreme
hazard of his life, in as much as the court of Madrid had
actually got scent of him, and given orders to apprehend him at
St Sebastian's, from whence he had fortunately retired but a few
hours before the order arrived. This and other hair-breadth
'scapes he pleaded so effectually as a merit with the English
ministry, that they allowed him a comfortable pension, which he
now enjoys in his old age -- He has still access to all the
ministers, and is said to be consulted by them on many subjects,
as a man of uncommon understanding and great experience -- He is,
in fact, a fellow of some parts, and invincible assurance; and,
in his discourse, he assumes such an air of self-sufficiency, as
may very well impose upon some of the shallow politicians, who
now labour at the helm of administration. But, if he is not
belied, this is not the only imposture of which he is guilty --
They say, he is at bottom not only a Roman-catholic, but really a
priest; and while he pretends to disclose to our state-pilots all
the springs that move the cabinet of Versailles, he is actually
picking up intelligence for the service of the French minister. Be
that as it may, captain C-- entered into conversation with us in
the most familiar manner, and treated the duke's character
without any ceremony -- 'This wiseacre (said he) is still a-bed;
and, I think, the best thing he can do, is to sleep on till
Christmas; for, when he gets up, he does nothing but expose his
own folly. -- Since Grenville was turned out, there has been no
minister in this nation worth the meal that whitened his peri-wig
-- They are so ignorant, they scarce know a crab from a
cauliflower; and then they are such dunces, that there's no
making them comprehend the plainest proposition -- In the beginning
of the war, this poor half-witted creature told me, in a great
fright, that thirty thousand French had marched from Acadie to
Cape Breton -- "Where did they find transports? (said I)"
"Transports (cried he) I tell you they marched by land" -- "By land
to the island of Cape Breton?" "What! is Cape Breton an island?"
"Certainly." "Ha! are you sure of that?" When I pointed it out in
the map, he examined it earnestly with his spectacles; then,
taking me in his arms, "My dear C--! (cried he) you always bring
us good news -- Egad! I'll go directly, and tell the king that Cape
Breton is an island."'

He seemed disposed to entertain us with more anecdotes of this
nature, at the expense of his grace, when he was interrupted by
the arrival of the Algerine ambassador; a venerable Turk, with a
long white beard, attended by his dragoman, or interpreter, and
another officer of his household, who had got no stockings to his
legs -- Captain C-- immediately spoke with an air of authority to a
servant in waiting, bidding him go and tell the duke to rise, as
there was a great deal of company come, and, among others, the
ambassador from Algiers. Then, turning to us, 'This poor Turk
(said he) notwithstanding his grey beard, is a green-horn -- He has
been several years resident in London, and still is ignorant of
our
political revolutions. This visit is intended for the prime
minister of England; but you'll see how this wise duke will
receive it as a mark of attachment to his own person' -- Certain it
is, the duke seemed eager to acknowledge the compliment -- A door
opened, he suddenly bolted out; with a shaving-cloth under his
chin, his face frothed up to the eyes with soap lather; and
running up to the ambassador, grinned hideous in his face -- 'My
dear Mahomet! (said he) God love your long beard, I hope the dey
will make you a horsetail at the next promotion, ha, ha, ha! Have
but a moment's patience, and I'll send to you in a twinkling,' --
So saying, he retired into his den, leaving the Turk in some
confusion. After a short pause, however, he said something to his
interpreter, the meaning of which I had great curiosity to know,
as he turned up his eyes while he spoke, expressing astonishment,
mixed with devotion. We were gratified by means of the
communicative captain C--, who conversed with the dragoman, as an
old acquaintance. Ibrahim, the ambassador, who had mistaken his
grace for the minister's fool, was no sooner undeceived by the
interpreter, than he exclaimed to this effect 'Holy prophet! I
don't wonder that this nation prospers, seeing it is governed by
the counsel of ideots; a series of men, whom all good mussulmen
revere as the organs of immediate inspiration!' Ibrahim was
favoured with a particular audience of short duration; after
which the duke conducted him to the door, and then returned to
diffuse his gracious looks among the crowd of his worshippers.

As Mr Barton advanced to present me to his grace, it was my
fortune to attract his notice, before I was announced -- He
forthwith met me more than half way, and, seizing me by the hand,
'My dear Sir Francis! (cried he) this is so kind -- I vow to God! I
am so obliged -- Such attention to a poor broken minister. Well --
Pray when does your excellency set sail? -- For God's sake have a
care of your health, and cat stewed prunes in the passage. Next to
your own precious health, pray, my dear excellency, take care of
the Five Nations -- Our good friends the Five Nations.  The
Toryrories, the Maccolmacks, the Out-o'the-ways, the Crickets,
and the Kickshaws -- Let 'em have plenty of blankets, and
stinkubus, and wampum; and your excellency won't fail to scour
the kettle, and boil the chain, and bury the tree, and plant the
hatchet -- Ha, ha, ha!' When he had uttered this rhapsody, with his
usual precipitation, Mr Barton gave him to understand, that I was
neither Sir Francis, nor St Francis, but simply Mr Melford,
nephew to Mr Bramble; who, stepping forward, made his bow at the
same time. 'Odso! no more it is Sir Francis -- (said this wise
statesman) Mr Melford, I'm glad to see you -- I sent you an
engineer to fortify your dock -- Mr Bramble -- your servant, Mr
Bramble -- How d'ye, good Mr Bramble? Your nephew is a pretty young
fellow -- Faith and troth, a very pretty fellow! -- His father is my
old friend -- How does he hold it? Still troubled with that damned
disorder, ha?' 'No, my lord (replied my uncle), all his troubles
are over -- He has been dead these fifteen years.' 'Dead! how -- Yes
faith! now I remember: he is dead sure enough -- Well, and how --
does the young gentleman stand for Haverford West? or -- a what
d'ye. My dear Mr Milfordhaven, I'll do you all the service in my
power I hope I have some credit left' -- My uncle then gave him to
understand, that I was still a minor; and that we had no
intention to trouble him at present, for any favour whatsoever --
'I came hither with my nephew (added he) to pay our respects to
your grace; and I may venture to say, that his views and mine are
at least as disinterested as those of any individual in this
assembly.' 'My dear Mr Brambleberry! you do me infinite honour -- I
shall always rejoice to see you and your hopeful nephew, Mr
Milfordhaven -- My credit, such as it is, you may command -- I wish
we had more friends of your kidney.'

Then, turning to captain C--, 'Ha, C--! (said he) what news, C--?
How does the world wag? ha!' 'The world wags much after the old
fashion, my lord (answered the captain): the politicians of
London and Westminster have begun again to wag their tongues
against your grace; and your short-lived popularity wags like a
feather, which the next puff of antiministerial calumny will blow
away' -- 'A pack of rascals (cried the duke) -- Tories, Jacobites,
rebels; one half of them would wag their heels at Tyburn, if they
had their deserts' -- So saying, he wheeled about; and going round
the levee, spoke to every individual, with the most courteous
familiarity; but he scarce ever opened his mouth without making
some blunder, in relation to the person or business of the party
with whom he conversed; so that he really looked like a comedian,
hired to burlesque the character of a minister -- At length, a
person of a very prepossessing appearance coming in, his grace
ran up, and, hugging him in his arms, with the appellation of 'My
dear Ch--s!' led him forthwith into the inner apartment, or
Sanctum Sanctorum of this political temple. 'That (said captain
C--) is my friend C-- T--, almost the only man of parts who has
any concern in the present administration -- Indeed, he would have
no concern at all in the matter, if the ministry did not find it
absolutely necessary to make use of his talents upon some
particular occasions -- As for the common business of the nation,
it is carried on in a constant routine by the clerks of the
different offices, otherwise the wheels of government would be
wholly stopt amidst the abrupt succession of ministers, every one
more ignorant than his predecessor -- I am thinking what a fine
hovel we should be in, if all the clerks of the treasury, the
secretaries, of the war-office, and the admiralty, should take it
in their heads to throw up their places in imitation of the great
pensioner --But, to return to C-- T--; he certainly knows more
than all the ministry and all the opposition, if their heads were
laid together, and talks like an angel on a vast variety of
subjects. He would really be a great man, if he had any
consistency or stability of character -- Then, it must be owned, he
wants courage, otherwise he would never allow himself to be cowed
by the great political bully, for whose understanding he has
justly a very great contempt. I have seen him as much afraid of
that overbearing Hector, as ever schoolboy was of his pedagogue;
and yet this Hector, I shrewdly suspect, is no more than a craven
at bottom -- Besides this defect, C-- has another, which he is at
too little pains to hide -- There's no faith to be given to his
assertions, and no trust to be put in his promises -- However, to
give the devil his due, he's very good-natured; and even
friendly, when close urged in the way of solicitation -- As for
principle, that's out of the question -- In a word, he is a wit and
an orator, extremely entertaining, and he shines very often at
the expence even of those ministers to whom he is a retainer. This
is a mark of great imprudence, by which he has made them all his
enemies, whatever face they may put upon the matter; and sooner
or later he'll have cause to wish he had been able to keep his
own counsel. I have several times cautioned him on this subject;
but 'tis all preaching to the desert -- His vanity runs away with
his discretion' -- I could not help thinking the captain himself
might have been the better for some hints of the same nature -- His
panegyric, excluding principle and veracity, puts me in mind of a
contest I once overheard, in the way of altercation, betwixt two
apple-women in Spring-garden -- One of those viragos having hinted
something to the prejudice of the other's moral character, her
antagonist, setting her hands in her sides, replied -- 'Speak out,
hussy -- I scorn your malice -- I own I'm both a whore and a thief;
and what more have you to say? -- Damn you, what more have you to
say? baiting that, which all the world knows, I challenge you to
say black is the white of my eye' -- We did not wait for Mr T--'s
coming forth; but after captain C-- had characterised all the
originals in waiting, we adjourned to a coffeehouse, where we had
buttered muffins and tea to breakfast, the said captain still
favouring us with his company -- Nay, my uncle was so diverted with
his anecdotes, that he asked him to dinner, and treated him with
a fine turbot, to which he did ample justice -- That same evening I
spent at the tavern with some friends, one of whom let me into C--'s
character, which Mr Bramble no sooner understood, than he
expressed some concern for the connexion he had made, and
resolved to disengage himself from it without ceremony.

We are become members of the Society for the Encouragement of the
Arts, and have assisted at some of their deliberations, which
were conducted with equal spirit and sagacity -- My uncle is
extremely fond of the institution, which will certainly be
productive of great advantages to the public, if, from its
democratical form, it does not degenerate into cabal and
corruption -- You are already acquainted with his aversion to the
influence of the multitude, which, he affirms, is incompatible
with excellence, and subversive of order -- Indeed his detestation
of the mob has been heightened by fear, ever since he fainted in
the room at Bath; and this apprehension has prevented him from
going to the Little Theatre in the Hay-market, and other places
of entertainment, to which, however, I have had the honour to
attend the ladies.

It grates old Square-toes to reflect, that it is not in his power
to enjoy even the most elegant diversions of the capital, without
the participation of the vulgar; for they now thrust themselves
into all assemblies, from a ridotto at St James's, to a hop at
Rotherhithe. I have lately seen our old acquaintance Dick Ivy,
who we imagined had died of dram-drinking; but he is lately
emerged from the Fleet, by means of a pamphlet which he wrote and
published against the government with some success. The sale of
this performance enabled him to appear in clean linen, and he is
now going about soliciting subscriptions for his Poems; but his
breeches are not yet in the most decent order.

Dick certainly deserves some countenance for his intrepidity and
perseverance -- It is not in the power of disappointment, nor even
of damnation, to drive him to despair -- After some unsuccessful
essays in the way of poetry, he commenced brandy-merchant, and I
believe his whole stock ran out through his own bowels; then he
consorted with a milk-woman, who kept a cellar in Petty France:
but he could not make his quarters good; he was dislodged and
driven up stairs into the kennel by a corporal in the second
regiment of foot-guards -- He was afterwards the laureat of
Blackfriars, from whence there was a natural transition to the
Fleet -- As he had formerly miscarried in panegyric, he now turned
his thoughts to satire, and really seems to have some talent for
abuse. If he can hold out till the meeting of the parliament, and
be prepared for another charge, in all probability Dick will
mount the pillory, or obtain a pension, in either of which events
his fortune will be made -- Mean while he has acquired some degree
of consideration with the respectable writers of the age; and as
I have subscribed for his works, he did me the favour t'other
night to introduce me to a society of those geniuses; but I found
them exceedingly formal and reserved -- They seemed afraid and
jealous of one another, and sat in a state of mutual repulsion,
like so many particles of vapour, each surrounded by its own
electrified atmosphere. Dick, who has more vivacity than
judgment, tried more than once to enliven the conversation;
sometimes making an effort at wit, sometimes letting off a pun,
and sometimes discharging a conundrum; nay, at length he started
a dispute upon the hackneyed comparison betwixt blank verse and
rhyme, and the professors opened with great clamour; but, instead
of keeping to the subject, they launched out into tedious
dissertations on the poetry of the ancients; and one of them, who
had been a school-master, displayed his whole knowledge of
prosody, gleaned from Disputer and Ruddiman. At last, I ventured
to say, I did not see how the subject in question could be at all
elucidated by the practice of the ancients, who certainly had
neither blank verse nor rhyme in their poems, which were measured
by feet, whereas ours are reckoned by the number of syllables --
This remark seemed to give umbrage to the pedant, who forthwith
involved himself in a cloud of Greek and Latin quotations, which
nobody attempted to dispel -- A confused hum of insipid
observations and comments ensued; and, upon the whole, I never
passed a duller evening in my life -- Yet, without all doubt, some
of them were men of learning, wit, and ingenuity. As they are
afraid of making free with one another, they should bring each
his butt, or whet-stone, along with him, for the entertainment of
the company -- My uncle says, he never desires to meet with more
than one wit at a time -- One wit, like a knuckle of ham in soup,
gives a zest and flavour to the dish; but more than one serves
only to spoil the pottage -- And now I'm afraid I have given you an
unconscionable mess, without any flavour at all; for which, I
suppose, you will bestow your benedictions upon

Your friend,
and servant
J. MELFORD
LONDON, June 5



To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR LEWIS

Your fable of the monkey and the pig, is what the Italians call
ben trovata: but I shall not repeat it to my apothecary, who is a
proud Scotchman, very thin skinned, and, for aught I know, may
have his degree in his pocket -- A right Scotchman has always two
strings to his bow, and is in utrumque paratus -- Certain it is, I
have not 'scaped a scouring; but, I believe, by means of that
scouring, I have 'scaped something worse, perhaps a tedious fit
of the gout or rheumatism; for my appetite began to flag, and I
had certain croakings in the bowels, which boded me no good -- Nay,
I am not yet quite free of these remembrances, which warn me to
be gone from this centre of infection --

What temptation can a man of my turn and temperament have, to
live in a place where every corner teems with fresh objects of
detestation and disgust? What kind of taste and organs must those
people have, who really prefer the adulterate enjoyments of the
town to the genuine pleasures of a country retreat? Most people,
I know, are originally seduced by vanity, ambition, and childish
curiosity; which cannot be gratified, but in the busy haunts of
men: but, in the course of this gratification, their very organs
of sense are perverted, and they become habitually lost to every
relish of what is genuine and excellent in its own nature.

Shall I state the difference between my town grievances, and my
country comforts? At Brambleton-hall, I have elbow-room within
doors, and breathe a clear, elastic, salutary air -- I enjoy
refreshing sleep, which is never disturbed by horrid noise, nor
interrupted, but in a-morning, by the sweet twitter of the
martlet at my window -- I drink the virgin lymph, pure and
chrystalline as it gushes from the rock, or the sparkling
beveridge, home-brewed from malt of my own making; or I indulge
with cyder, which my own orchard affords; or with claret of the
best growth, imported for my own use, by a correspondent on whose
integrity I can depend; my bread is sweet and nourishing, made
from my own wheat, ground in my own mill, and baked in my own
oven; my table is, in a great measure, furnished from my own
ground; my five-year old mutton, fed on the fragrant herbage of
the mountains, that might vie with venison in juice and flavour;
my delicious veal, fattened with nothing but the mother's milk,
that fills the dish with gravy; my poultry from the barn-door,
that never knew confinement, but when they were at roost; my
rabbits panting from the warren; my game fresh from the moors; my
trout and salmon struggling from the stream; oysters from their
native banks; and herrings, with other sea fish, I can eat in
four hours after they are taken -- My sallads, roots, and potherbs,
my own garden yields in plenty and perfection; the produce of the
natural soil, prepared by moderate cultivation. The same soil
affords all the different fruits which England may call her own,
so that my dessert is every day fresh-gathered from the tree; my
dairy flows with nectarious tildes of milk and cream, from whence
we derive abundance of excellent butter, curds, and cheese; and
the refuse fattens my pigs, that are destined for hams and bacon --
I go to bed betimes, and rise with the sun -- I make shift to pass
the hours without weariness or regret, and am not destitute of
amusements within doors, when the weather will not permit me to
go abroad -- I read, and chat, and play at billiards, cards or
back-gammon -- Without doors, I superintend my farm, and execute
plans of improvements, the effects of which I enjoy with
unspeakable delight -- Nor do I take less pleasure in seeing my
tenants thrive under my auspices, and the poor live comfortably
by the employment which I provide -- You know I have one or two
sensible friends, to whom I can open all my heart; a blessing
which, perhaps, I might have sought in vain among the crowded
scenes of life: there are a few others of more humble parts, whom
I esteem for their integrity; and their conversation I find
inoffensive, though not very entertaining. Finally, I live in the
midst of honest men, and trusty dependents, who, I flatter
myself, have a disinterested attachment to my person. You,
yourself, my dear Doctor, can vouch for the truth of these
assertions.

Now, mark the contrast at London -- I am pent up in frowzy
lodgings, where there is not room enough to swing a cat; and I
breathe the steams of endless putrefaction; and these would,
undoubtedly, produce a pestilence, if they were not qualified by
the gross acid of sea-coal, which is itself a pernicious nuisance
to lungs of any delicacy of texture: but even this boasted
corrector cannot prevent those languid, sallow looks, that
distinguish the inhabitants of London from those ruddy swains
that lead a country-life -- I go to bed after midnight, jaded and
restless from the dissipations of the day -- I start every hour
from my sleep, at the horrid noise of the watchmen bawling the
hour through every street, and thundering at every door; a set of
useless fellows, who serve no other purpose but that of
disturbing the repose of the inhabitants; and by five o'clock I
start out of bed, in consequence of the still more dreadful alarm
made by the country carts, and noisy rustics bellowing green
pease under my window. If I would drink water, I must quaff the
maukish contents of an open aqueduct, exposed to all manner of
defilement; or swallow that which comes from the river Thames,
impregnated with all the filth of London and Westminster -- Human
excrement is the least offensive part of the concrete, which is
composed of all the drugs, minerals, and poisons, used in
mechanics and manufacture, enriched with the putrefying carcasses
of beasts and men; and mixed with the scourings of all the wash-tubs,
kennels, and common sewers, within the bills of mortality.

This is the agreeable potation, extolled by the Londoners, as the
finest water in the universe -- As to the intoxicating potion, sold
for wine, it is a vile, unpalatable, and pernicious
sophistication, balderdashed with cyder, corn-spirit, and the
juice of sloes. In an action at law, laid against a carman for
having staved a cask of port, it appeared from the evidence of
the cooper, that there were not above five gallons of real wine
in the whole pipe, which held above a hundred, and even that had
been brewed and adulterated by the merchant at Oporto. The bread
I cat in London, is a deleterious paste, mixed up with chalk,
alum, and bone-ashes; insipid to the taste, and destructive to
the constitution. The good people are not ignorant of this
adulteration -- but they prefer it to wholesome bread, because it
is whiter than the meal of corn: thus they sacrifice their taste
and their health, and the lives of their tender infants, to a
most absurd gratification of a mis-judging eye; and the miller,
or the baker, is obliged to poison them and their families, in
order to live by his profession. The same monstrous depravity
appears in their veal, which is bleached by repeated bleedings,
and other villainous arts, till there is not a drop of juice left
in the body, and the poor animal is paralytic before it dies; so
void of all taste, nourishment, and savour, that a man might dine
as comfortably on a white fricassee of kid-skin gloves; or chip
hats from Leghorn.

As they have discharged the natural colour from their bread,
their butchers-meat, and poultry, their cutlets, ragouts,
fricassees and sauces of all kinds; so they insist upon having
the complexion of their potherbs mended, even at the hazard of
their lives. Perhaps, you will hardly believe they can be so mad
as to boil their greens with brass halfpence, in order to improve
their colour; and yet nothing is more true -- Indeed, without this
improvement in the colour, they have no personal merit. They are
produced in an artificial soil, and taste of nothing but the
dunghills, from whence they spring. My cabbage, cauliflower, and
'sparagus in the country, are as much superior in flavour to
those that are sold in Covent-garden, as my heath-mutton is to
that of St James's-market; which in fact, is neither lamb nor
mutton, but something betwixt the two, gorged in the rank fens of
Lincoln and Essex, pale, coarse, and frowzy -- As for the pork, it
is an abominable carnivorous animal, fed with horse-flesh and
distillers' grains; and the poultry is all rotten, in consequence
of a fever, occasioned by the infamous practice of sewing up the
gut, that they may be the sooner fattened in coops, in
consequence of this cruel retention.

Of the fish, I need say nothing in this hot weather, but that it
comes sixty, seventy, fourscore, and a hundred miles by land-carriage;
a circumstance sufficient without any comment, to turn
a Dutchman's stomach, even if his nose was not saluted in every
alley with the sweet flavour of fresh mackarel, selling by retail.
This is not the season for oysters; nevertheless, it may not be
amiss to mention, that the right Colchester are kept in slime-pits,
occasionally overflowed by the sea; and that the green
colour, so much admired by the voluptuaries of this metropolis,
is occasioned by the vitriolic scum, which rises on the surface
of the stagnant and stinking water -- Our rabbits are bred and fed
in the poulterer's cellar, where they have neither air nor
exercise, consequently they must be firm in flesh, and delicious
in flavour; and there is no game to be had for love or money.

It must be owned, the Covent-garden affords some good fruit;
which, however, is always engrossed by a few individuals of
overgrown fortune, at an exorbitant price; so that little else
than the refuse of the market falls to the share of the
community; and that is distributed by such filthy hands, as I
cannot look at without loathing. It was but yesterday that I saw
a dirty barrow-bunter in the street, cleaning her dusty fruit
with her own spittle; and, who knows but some fine lady of St
James's parish might admit into her delicate mouth those very
cherries, which had been rolled and moistened between the filthy,
and, perhaps, ulcerated chops of a St Giles's huckster -- I need
not dwell upon the pallid, contaminated mash, which they call
strawberries; soiled and tossed by greasy paws through twenty
baskets crusted with dirt; and then presented with the worst
milk, thickened with the worst flour, into a bad likeness of
cream: but the milk itself should not pass unanalysed, the
produce of faded cabbage-leaves and sour draff, lowered with hot
water, frothed with bruised snails, carried through the streets
in open pails, exposed to foul rinsings, discharged from doors
and windows, spittle, snot, and tobacco-quids from foot
passengers, overflowings from mud carts, spatterings from coach
wheels, dirt and trash chucked into it by roguish boys for the
joke's sake, the spewings of infants, who have slabbered in the
tin-measure, which is thrown back in that condition among the
milk, for the benefit of the next customer; and, finally, the
vermin that drops from the rags of the nasty drab that vends this
precious mixture, under the respectable denomination of milk-maid.

I shall conclude this catalogue of London dainties, with that
table-beer, guiltless of hops and malt, vapid and nauseous; much
fitter to facilitate the operation of a vomit, than to quench
thirst and promote digestion; the tallowy rancid mass, called
butter, manufactured with candle grease and kitchen stuff; and
their fresh eggs, imported from France and Scotland. -- Now, all
these enormities might be remedied with a very little attention
to the article of police, or civil regulation; but the wise
patriots of London have taken it into their heads, that all
regulation is inconsistent with liberty; and that every man ought
to live in his own way, without restraint -- Nay, as there is not
sense enough left among them, to be discomposed by the nuisance I
have mentioned, they may, for aught I care, wallow in the mire of
their own pollution.

A companionable man will, undoubtedly put up with many
inconveniences for the sake of enjoying agreeable society. A
facetious friend of mine used to say, the wine could not be bad,
where the company was agreeable; a maxim which, however, ought to
be taken cum grano salis: but what is the society of London, that
I should be tempted, for its sake, to mortify my senses, and
compound with such uncleanness as my soul abhors? All the people
I see, are too much engrossed by schemes of interest or ambition,
to have any room left for sentiment or friendship. Even in some of
my old acquaintance, those schemes and pursuits have obliterated
all traces of our former connexion -- Conversation is reduced to
party disputes, and illiberal altercation -- Social commerce, to
formal visits and card-playing -- If you pick up a diverting
original by accident, it may be dangerous to amuse yourself with
his oddities -- He is generally a tartar at bottom; a sharper, a
spy, or a lunatic. Every person you deal with endeavours to
overreach you in the way of business; you are preyed upon by idle
mendicants, who beg in the phrase of borrowing, and live upon the
spoils of the stranger -- Your tradesmen are without conscience,
your friends without affection, and your dependents without
fidelity. --

My letter would swell into a treatise, were I to particularize
every cause of offence that fills up the measure of my aversion
to this, and every other crowded city -- Thank Heaven! I am not so
far sucked into the vortex, but that I can disengage myself
without any great effort of philosophy -- From this wild uproar of
knavery, folly, and impertinence, I shall fly with double relish
to the serenity of retirement, the cordial effusions of
unreserved friendship, the hospitality and protection of the
rural gods; in a word, the jucunda oblivia Vitae, which Horace
himself had not taste enough to enjoy. --

I have agreed for a good travelling-coach and four, at a guinea a
day, for three months certain; and next week we intend to begin
our journey to the North, hoping still to be with you by the
latter end of October -- I shall continue to write from every stage
where we make any considerable halt, as often as anything occurs,
which I think can afford you the least amusement. In the mean
time, I must beg you will superintend the oeconomy of Barns, with
respect to my hay and corn harvests; assured that my ground
produces nothing but what you may freely call your own -- On any
other terms I should be ashamed to subscribe myself

Your unvariable friend,
MATT. BRAMBLE
LONDON, June 8.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

In my last, I mentioned my having spent an evening with a society
of authors, who seemed to be jealous and afraid of one another.
My uncle was not at all surprised to hear me say I was
disappointed in their conversation. 'A man may be very
entertaining and instructive upon paper (said he), and
exceedingly dull in common discourse. I have observed, that those
who shine most in private company, are but secondary stars in the
constellation of genius -- A small stock of ideas is more easily
managed, and sooner displayed, than a great quantity crowded
together. There is very seldom any thing extraordinary in the
appearance and address of a good writer; whereas a dull author
generally distinguishes himself by some oddity or extravagance.
For this reason, I fancy, that an assembly of Grubs must be very
diverting.'

My curiosity being excited by this hint, I consulted my friend
Dick Ivy, who undertook to gratify it the very next day, which
was Sunday last. He carried me to dine with S--, whom you and I
have long known by his writings. -- He lives in the skirts of the
town, and every Sunday his house is opened to all unfortunate
brothers of the quill, whom he treats with beef, pudding, and
potatoes, port, punch, and Calvert's entire butt beer. He has
fixed upon the first day of the week for the exercise of his
hospitality, because some of his guests could not enjoy it on any
other, for reasons that I need not explain. I was civilly
received in a plain, yet decent habitation, which opened
backwards into a very pleasant garden, kept in excellent order;
and, indeed, I saw none of the outward signs of authorship,
either in the house or the landlord, who is one of those few
writers of the age that stand upon their own foundation, without
patronage, and above dependence. If there was nothing
characteristic in the entertainer, the company made ample amends
for his want of singularity.

At two in the afternoon, I found myself one of ten messmates
seated at table; and, I question, if the whole kingdom could
produce such another assemblage of originals. Among their
peculiarities, I do not mention those of dress, which may be
purely accidental. What struck me were oddities originally
produced by affectation, and afterwards confirmed by habit. One
of them wore spectacles at dinner, and another his hat flapped;
though (as Ivy told me) the first was noted for having a seaman's
eye, when a bailiff was in the wind; and the other was never
known to labour under any weakness or defect of vision, except
about five years ago, when he was complimented with a couple of
black eyes by a player, with whom he had quarrelled in his drink.
A third wore a laced stocking, and made use of crutches, because,
once in his life, he had been laid up with a broken leg, though
no man could leap over a stick with more agility. A fourth had
contracted such an antipathy to the country, that he insisted
upon sitting with his back towards the window that looked into
the garden, and when a dish of cauliflower was set upon the
table, he snuffed up volatile salts to keep him from fainting;
yet this delicate person was the son of a cottager, born under a
hedge, and had many years run wild among asses on a common. A
fifth affected distraction. When spoke to, he always answered from
the purpose sometimes he suddenly started up, and rapped out a
dreadful oath sometimes he burst out a-laughing -- then he folded
his arms, and sighed and then, he hissed like fifty serpents.

At first I really thought he was mad, and, as he sat near me,
began to be under some apprehensions for my own safety, when our
landlord, perceiving me alarmed, assured me aloud that I had
nothing to fear. 'The gentleman (said he) is trying to act a part
for which he is by no means qualified -- if he had all the
inclination in the world, it is not in his power to be mad. His
spirits are too flat to be kindled into frenzy.' ''Tis no bad p-p-puff,
however  (observed a person in a tarnished laced coat):
aff-ffected in-madness w-will p-pass for w-wit w-with nine-ninet-teen
out of t-twenty.' -- 'And affected stuttering for humour:
replied our landlord, tho', God knows, there is an affinity
betwixt them.' It seems, this wag, after having made some
abortive attempts in plain speaking, had recourse to this defect,
by means of which he frequently extorted the laugh of the
company, without the least expence of genius; and that
imperfection, which he had at first counterfeited, was now become
so habitual, that he could not lay it aside.

A certain winking genius, who wore yellow gloves at dinner, had,
on his first introduction, taken such offence at S--, because he
looked and talked, and ate and drank like any other man, that he
spoke contemptuously of his understanding ever after, and never
would repeat his visit, until he had exhibited the following
proof of his caprice. Wat Wyvil, the poet, having made some
unsuccessful advances towards an intimacy with S--, at last gave
him to understand, by a third person, that he had written a poem
in his praise, and a satire against his person; that if he would
admit him to his house, the first should be immediately sent to
press; but that if he persisted in declining his friendship, he
would publish his satire without delay. S-- replied, that he
looked upon Wyvil's panegyrick, as in effect, a species of
infamy, and would resent it accordingly with a good cudgel; but
if he published the satire, he might deserve his compassion, and
had nothing to fear from his revenge. Wyvil having considered the
alternative, resolved to mortify S-- by printing the panegyrick,
for which he received a sound drubbing. Then he swore the peace
against the aggressor, who, in order to avoid a prosecution at
law, admitted him to his good graces. It was the singularity in
S--'s conduct, on this occasion, that reconciled him to the
yellow-gloved philosopher, who owned he had some genius, and from
that period cultivated his acquaintance.

Curious to know upon what subjects the several talents of my
fellow-guests were employed, I applied to my communicative friend
Dick Ivy, who gave me to understand, that most of them were, or
had been, understrappers, or journeymen, to more creditable
authors, for whom they translated, collated, and compiled, in the
business of bookmaking; and that all of them had, at different
times, laboured in the service of our landlord, though they had
now set up for themselves in various departments of literature.
Not only their talents, but also their nations and dialects were
so various, that our conversation resembled the confusion of
tongues at Babel. We had the Irish brogue, the Scotch accent, and
foreign idiom, twanged off by the most discordant vociferation;
for, as they all spoke together, no man had any chance to be
heard, unless he could bawl louder than his fellows. It must be
owned, however, there was nothing pedantic in their discourse;
they carefully avoided all learned disquisitions, and endeavoured
to be facetious; nor did their endeavours always miscarry -- some
droll repartee passed, and much laughter was excited; and if any
individual lost his temper so far as to transgress the bounds of
decorum, he was effectually checked by the master of the feast,
who exerted a sort of paternal authority over this irritable
tribe.

The most learned philosopher of the whole collection, who had
been expelled the university for atheism, has made great progress
in a refutation of lord Bolingbroke's metaphysical works, which
is said to be equally ingenious, and orthodox; but, in the mean
time, he has been presented to the grand jury as a public
nuisance, for having blasphemed in an ale-house on the Lord's
day. The Scotchman gives lectures on the pronunciation of the
English language, which he is now publishing by subscription.

The Irishman is a political writer, and goes by the name of my
Lord Potatoe. He wrote a pamphlet in vindication of a minister,
hoping his zeal would be rewarded with some place or pension;
but, finding himself neglected in that quarter, he whispered
about, that the pamphlet was written by the minister himself, and
he published an answer to his own production. In this, he
addressed the author under the title of your lordship with such
solemnity, that the public swallowed the deceit, and bought up
the whole impression. The wise politicians of the metropolis
declared they were both masterly performances, and chuckled over
the flimsy reveries of an ignorant garretteer, as the profound
speculations of a veteran statesman, acquainted with all the
secrets of the cabinet. The imposture was detected in the sequel,
and our Hibernian pamphleteer retains no part of his assumed
importance, but the bare title of my lord. and the upper part of
the table at the potatoe-ordinary in Shoelane.

Opposite to me sat a Piedmontese, who had obliged the public with
a humorous satire, intituled, The Ballance of the English Poets,
a performance which evinced the great modesty and taste of the
author, and, in particular, his intimacy with the elegancies of
the English language. The sage, who laboured under the
agrophobia, or horror of green fields, had just finished a
treatise on practical agriculture, though, in fact, he had never
seen corn growing in his life, and was so ignorant of grain, that
our entertainer, in the face of the whole company, made him own,
that a plate of hominy was the best rice pudding he had ever eat.

The stutterer had almost finished his travels through Europe and
part of Asia, without ever budging beyond the liberties of the
King's Bench, except in term-time, with a tipstaff for his
companion; and as for little Tim Cropdale, the most facetious
member of the whole society, he had happily wound up the
catastrophe of a virgin tragedy, from the exhibition of which he
promised himself a large fund of profit and reputation. Tim had
made shift to live many years by writing novels, at the rate of
five pounds a volume; but that branch of business is now
engrossed by female authors, who publish merely for the
propagation of virtue, with so much ease and spirit, and
delicacy, and knowledge of the human heart, and all in the serene
tranquillity of high life, that the reader is not only inchanted
by their genius, but reformed by their morality.

After dinner, we adjourned into the garden, where, I observed, Mr
S-- gave a short separate audience to every individual in a small
remote filbert walk, from whence most of them dropt off one after
another, without further ceremony; but they were replaced by
fresh recruits of the same clan, who came to make an afternoon's
visit; and, among others, a spruce bookseller, called Birkin, who
rode his own gelding, and made his appearance in a pair of new
jemmy boots, with massy spurs of plate. It was not without
reason, that this midwife of the Muses used exercise a-horseback,
for he was too fat to walk a-foot, and he underwent some sarcasms
from Tim Cropdale, on his unwieldy size and inaptitude for
motion. Birkin, who took umbrage at this poor author's petulance
in presuming to joke upon a man so much richer than himself, told
him, he was not so unwieldy but that he could move the Marshalsea
court for a writ, and even overtake him with it, if he did not
very speedily come and settle accounts with him, respecting the
expence of publishing his last ode to the king of Prussia, of
which he had sold but three, and one of them was to Whitfield the
methodist. Tim affected to receive this intimation with good
humour, saying, he expected in a post or two, from Potsdam, a
poem of thanks from his Prussian majesty, who knew very well how
to pay poets in their own coin; but, in the mean time, he
proposed, that Mr Birkin and he should run three times round the
garden for a bowl of punch, to be drank at Ashley's in the
evening, and he would run boots against stockings. The
bookseller, who valued himself upon his mettle, was persuaded to
accept the challenge, and he forthwith resigned his boots to
Cropdale, who, when he had put them on, was no bad representation
of captain Pistol in the play.

Every thing being adjusted, they started together with great
impetuosity, and, in the second round, Birkin had clearly the
advantage, larding the lean earth as he puff'd along. Cropdale
had no mind to contest the victory further; but, in a twinkling,
disappeared through the back-door of the garden, which opened
into a private lane, that had communication with the high road.--
The spectators immediately began to hollow, 'Stole away!' and
Birkin set off in pursuit of him with great eagerness; but he had
not advanced twenty yards in the lane, when a thorn running into
his foot, sent him hopping back into the garden, roaring with
pain, and swearing with vexation. When he was delivered from this
annoyance by the Scotchman, who had been bred to surgery, he
looked about him wildly, exclaiming, 'Sure, the fellow won't be
such a rogue as to run clear away with my boots!' Our landlord,
having reconnoitered the shoes he had left, which, indeed, hardly
deserved that name, 'Pray (said he), Mr Birkin, wa'n't your boots
made of calf-skin?' 'Calf-skin or cow-skin (replied the other)
I'll find a slip of sheep-skin that will do his business -- I lost
twenty pounds by his farce which you persuaded me to buy -- I am
out of pocket five pounds by his damn'd ode; and now this pair of
boots, bran new, cost me thirty shillings, as per receipt -- But
this affair of the boots is felony -- transportation. -- I'll have
the dog indicted at the Old Bailey -- I will, Mr S-- I will be
reveng'd, even though I should lose my debt in consequence of his
conviction.'

Mr S-- said nothing at present, but accommodated him with a pair
of shoes; then ordered his servant to rub him down, and comfort
him with a glass of rum-punch, which seemed, in a great measure,
to cool the rage of his indignation. 'After all (said our
landlord) this is no more than a humbug in the way of wit, though
it deserves a more respectable epithet, when considered as an
effort of invention. Tim, being (I suppose) out of credit with
the cordwainer, fell upon this ingenious expedient to supply the
want of shoes, knowing that Mr Birkin, who loves humour, would
himself relish the joke upon a little recollection. Cropdale
literally lives by his wit, which he has exercised upon all his
friends in their turns. He once borrowed my poney for five or six
days to go to Salisbury, and sold him in Smithfield at his
return. This was a joke of such a serious nature, that, in the
first transports of my passion, I had some thoughts of
prosecuting him for horse-stealing; and even
when my resentment had in some measure subsided, as he
industriously avoided me, I vowed, I would take satisfaction on
his ribs with the first opportunity. One day, seeing him at some
distance in the street, coming towards me, I began to prepare my
cane for action, and walked in the shadow of a porter, that he
might not perceive me soon enough to make his escape; but, in the
very instant I had lifted up the instrument of correction, I
found Tim Cropdale metamorphosed into a miserable blind wretch,
feeling his way with a long stick from post to post, and rolling
about two bald unlighted orbs instead of eyes. I was exceedingly
shocked at having so narrowly escaped the concern and disgrace
that would have attended such a misapplication of vengeance: but,
next day, Tim prevailed upon a friend of mine to come and solicit
my forgiveness, and offer his note, payable in six weeks, for the
price of the poney. This gentleman gave me to understand, that
the blind man was no other than Cropdale, who having seen me
advancing, and guessing my intent, had immediately converted
himself into the object aforesaid -- I was so diverted at the
ingenuity of the evasion, that I agreed to pardon his offence,
refusing his note, however, that I might keep a prosecution for
felony hanging over his head, as a security for his future good
behaviour -- But Timothy would by no means trust himself in my
hands till the note was accepted -- then he made his appearance at
my door as a blind beggar, and imposed in such a manner upon my
man, who had been his old acquaintance and pot-companion, that
the fellow threw the door in his face, and even threatened to
give him the bastinado. Hearing a noise in the hall, I went
thither, and immediately recollecting the figure I had passed in
the street, accosted him by his own name, to the unspeakable
astonishment of the footman.'

Birkin declared he loved a joke as well as another; but asked if
any of the company could tell where Mr Cropdale lodged, that he
might send him a proposal about restitution, before the boots
should be made away with. 'I would willingly give him a pair of
new shoes (said he), and half a guinea into the bargain' for the
boots, which fitted me like a glove; and I shan't be able to get
the fellows of them 'till the good weather for riding is over.
The stuttering wit declared, that the only secret which Cropdale
ever kept, was the place of his lodgings; but he believed, that,
during the heats of summer, he commonly took his repose upon a
bulk, or indulged himself, in fresco, with one of the kennel-nymphs,
under the portico of St Martin's church. 'Pox on him!
(cried the bookseller) he might as well have taken my whip and
spurs. In that case, he might have been tempted to steal another
horse, and then he would have rid to the devil of course.'

After coffee, I took my leave of Mr S--, with proper
acknowledgments of his civility, and was extremely well pleased
with the entertainment of the day, though not yet satisfied, with
respect to the nature of this connexion, betwixt a man of
character in the literary world, and a parcel of authorlings,
who, in all probability, would never be able to acquire any
degree of reputation by their labours. On this head I
interrogated my conductor, Dick Ivy, who answered me to this
effect -- 'One would imagine S-- had some view to his own interest,
in giving countenance and assistance to those people, whom he
knows to be bad men, as well as bad writers; but, if he has any
such view, he will find himself disappointed; for if he is so
vain as to imagine he can make them, subservient to his schemes
of profit or ambition, they are cunning enough to make him their
property in the mean time. There is not one of the company you
have seen to-day (myself excepted) who does not owe him
particular obligations -- One of them he bailed out of a spunging-house,
and afterwards paid the debt -- another he translated into
his family, and clothed, when he was turned out half naked from
jail in consequence of an act for the relief of insolvent
debtors -- a third, who was reduced to a woollen night cap, and
lived upon sheeps trotters, up three pair of stairs backward in
Butcher-row, he took into present pay and free quarters, and
enabled him to appear as a gentleman, without having the fear of
sheriff's officers before his eyes. Those who are in distress he
supplies with money when he has it, and with his credit when he
is out of cash. When they want business, he either finds
employment for them in his own service, or recommends them to
booksellers to execute some project he has formed for their
subsistence. They are always welcome to his table (which though
plain, is plentiful) and to his good offices as far as they will
go, and when they see Occasion, they make use of his name with
the most petulant familiarity; nay, they do not even scruple to
arrogate to themselves the merit of some of his performances, and
have been known to sell their own lucubrations as the produce of
his brain. The Scotchman you saw at dinner once personated him at
an alehouse in West-Smithfield and, in the character of S--, had
his head broke by a cow-keeper, for having spoke disrespectfully
of the Christian religion; but he took the law of him in his own
person, and the assailant was fain to give him ten pounds to
withdraw his action.'

I observed, that all this appearance of liberality on the side of
Mr S-- was easily accounted for, on the supposition that they
flattered him in private, and engaged his adversaries in public;
and yet I was astonished, when I recollected that I often had
seen this writer virulently abused in papers, poems, and
pamphlets, and not a pen was drawn in his defence 'But you will
be more astonished (said he) when I assure you, those very guests
whom you saw at his table to-day, were the authors of great part
of that abuse; and he himself is well aware of their particular
favours, for they are all eager to detect and betray one
another.' 'But this is doing the devil's work for nothing (cried
I). What should induce them to revile their benefactor without
provocation?' 'Envy (answered Dick) is the general incitement;
but they are galled by an additional scourge of provocation. S--
directs a literary journal, in which their productions are
necessarily brought to trial; and though many of them have been
treated with such lenity and favour as they little deserved, yet
the slightest censure, such as, perhaps, could not be avoided
with any pretensions to candour and impartiality, has rankled in
the hearts of those authors to such a degree, that they have
taken immediate vengeance on the critic in anonymous libels,
letters, and lampoons. Indeed, all the writers of the age, good,
bad, and indifferent, from the moment he assumed this office,
became his enemies, either professed or in petto, except those of
his friends who knew they had nothing to fear from his
strictures; and he must be a wiser man than me who can tell what
advantage or satisfaction he derives from having brought such a
nest of hornets about his ears.'

I owned, that was a point which might deserve consideration; but
still I expressed a desire to know his real motives for
continuing his friendship to a set of rascals equally ungrateful
and insignificant. -- He said, he did not pretend to assign any
reasonable motive; that, if the truth must be told, the man was,
in point of conduct, a most incorrigible fool; that, though he
pretended to have a knack at hitting off characters, he blundered
strangely in the distribution of his favours, which were
generally bestowed on the most undeserving of those who had
recourse to his assistance; that, indeed, this preference was not
so much owing to want of discernment as to want of resolution,
for he had not fortitude enough to resist the importunity even of
the most worthless; and, as he did not know the value of money,
there was very little merit in parting with it so easily; that
his pride was gratified in seeing himself courted by such a
number of literary dependents; that, probably, he delighted in
hearing them expose and traduce one another; and, finally, from
their information, he became acquainted with all the transactions
of Grubstreet, which he had some thoughts of compiling for the
entertainment of the public.

I could not help suspecting, from Dick's discourse, that he had
some particular grudge against S--, upon whose conduct he had put
the worst construction it would bear; and, by dint of cross-examination,
I found he was not at all satisfied with the
character which had been given in the Review of his last
performance, though it had been treated civilly in consequence of
the author's application to the critic. By all accounts, S-- is not
without weakness and caprice; but he is certainly good-humoured
and civilized; nor do I find that there is any thing overbearing,
cruel, or implacable in his disposition.

I have dwelt so long upon authors, that you will perhaps suspect
I intend to enroll myself among the fraternity; but, if I were
actually qualified for the profession, it is at best but a
desperate resource against starving, as it affords no provision
for old age and infirmity. Salmon, at the age of fourscore, is
now in a garret, compiling matter, at a guinea a sheet, for a
modern historian, who, in point of age, might be his grandchild;
and Psalmonazar, after having drudged half a century in the
literary mill, in all the simplicity and abstinence of an
Asiatic, subsists upon the charity of a few booksellers, just
sufficient to keep him from the parish, I think Guy, who was
himself a bookseller, ought to have appropriated one wing or ward
of his hospital to the use of decayed authors; though indeed,
there is neither hospital, college, nor workhouse, within the
bills of mortality, large enough to contain the poor of this
society, composed, as it is, from the refuse of every other
profession.

I know not whether you will find any amusement in this account of
an odd race of mortals, whose constitution had, I own, greatly
interested the curiosity of

Yours,
J. MELFORD
LONDON, June 10.




To Miss LAETITIA WILLIS, at Gloucester.

MY DEAR LETTY,

There is something on my spirits, which I should not venture to
communicate by the post, but having the opportunity of Mrs
Brentwood's return, I seize it eagerly, to disburthen my poor
heart, which is oppressed with fear and vexation. -- O Letty! what
a miserable situation it is, to be without a friend to whom one
can apply for counsel and consolation in distress! I hinted in my
last, that one Mr Barton had been very particular in his
civilities: I can no longer mistake his meaning -- he has formally
professed himself my admirer; and, after a thousand assiduities,
perceiving I made but a cold return to his addresses, he had
recourse to the mediation of lady Griskin, who has acted the part
of a very warm advocate in his behalf: -- but, my dear Willis, her
ladyship over acts her part -- she not only expatiates on the ample
fortune, the great connexions, and the unblemished character of
Mr Barton, but she takes the trouble to catechise me; and, two
days ago, peremptorily told me, that a girl of my age could not
possibly resist so many considerations, if her heart was not pre-engaged.

This insinuation threw me into such a flutter, that she could not
but observe my disorder; and, presuming upon the discovery,
insisted upon my making her the confidante of my passion. But,
although I had not such command of myself as to conceal the
emotion of my heart, I am not such a child as to disclose its
secret to a person who would certainly use them to its prejudice.
I told her, it was no wonder if I was out of countenance at her
introducing a subject of conversation so unsuitable to my years
and inexperience; that I believed Mr Barton was a very worthy
gentleman, and I was much obliged to him for his good opinion;
but the affections were involuntary, and mine, in particular, had
as yet made no concessions in his favour. She shook her head with
an air of distrust that made me tremble; and observed, that if my
affections were free, they would submit to the decision of
prudence, especially when enforced by the authority of those who
had a right to direct my conduct. This remark implied a design to
interest my uncle or my aunt, perhaps my brother, in behalf of Mr
Barton's passion; and I am sadly afraid that my aunt is already
gained over. Yesterday in the forenoon, he had been walking with
us in the Park, and stopping in our return at a toy-shop, he
presented her with a very fine snuff-box, and me with a gold
etuis, which I resolutely refused, till she commanded me to
accept it on pain of her displeasure: nevertheless, being still
unsatisfied with respect to the propriety of receiving this toy,
I signified my doubts to my brother, who said he would consult my
uncle on the subject, and seemed to think Mr Barton had been
rather premature in his presents.

What will be the result of this consultation, Heaven knows; but I
am afraid it will produce an explanation with Mr Barton, who
will, no doubt, avow his passion, and solicit their consent to a
connexion which my soul abhors; for, my dearest Letty, it is not
in my power to love Mr Barton, even if my heart was untouched by
any other tenderness. Not that there is any thing disagreeable
about his person, but there is a total want of that nameless
charm which captivates and controuls the inchanted spirit at
least, he appears to me to have this defect; but if he had all
the engaging qualifications which a man can possess, they would
be excited in vain against that constancy, which, I flatter
myself, is the characteristic of my nature. No, my dear Willis, I
may be involved in fresh troubles, and I believe I shall, from
the importunities of this gentleman and the violence of my
relations; but my heart is incapable of change.

You know I put no faith in dreams; and yet I have been much
disturbed by one that visited me last night. -- I thought I was in
a church, where a certain person, whom you know, was on the point
of being married to my aunt; that the clergyman was Mr Barton,
and that poor forlorn I, stood weeping in a corner, half naked,
and without shoes or stockings. -- Now, I know there is nothing so
childish as to be moved by those vain illusions; but,
nevertheless, in spite of all my reason, this hath made a strong
impression upon my mind, which begins to be very gloomy. Indeed,
I have another more substantial cause of affliction -- I have some
religious scruples, my dear friend, which lie heavy on my
conscience. -- I was persuaded to go to the Tabernacle, where I
heard a discourse that affected me deeply. -- I have prayed
fervently to be enlightened, but as yet I am not sensible of
these inward motions, those operations of grace, which are the
signs of a regenerated spirit; and therefore I begin to be in
terrible apprehensions about the state of my poor soul. Some of
our family have had very uncommon accessions, particularly my
aunt and Mrs Jenkins, who sometimes speak as if they were really
inspired; so that I am not like to want for either exhortation or
example, to purify my thoughts, and recall them from the vanities
of this world, which, indeed, I would willingly resign, if it was
in my power; but to make this sacrifice, I must be enabled by
such assistance from above as hath not yet been indulged to

Your unfortunate friend,
LYDIA MELFORD
June 10.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

The moment I received your letter, I began to execute your
commission -- With the assistance of mine host at the Bull and
Gate, I discovered the place to which your fugitive valet had
retreated, and taxed him with his dishonesty -- The fellow was in
manifest confusion at sight of me, but he denied the charge with
great confidence, till I told him, that if he would give up the
watch, which was a family piece, he might keep the money and the
clothes, and go to the devil his own way, at his leisure; but if
he rejected this proposal, I would deliver him forthwith to the
constable, whom I had provided for that purpose, and he would
carry him before the justice without further delay. After some
hesitation, he desired to speak with me in the next room, where
he produced the watch, with all its appendages, and I have
delivered it to our landlord, to be sent you by the first safe
conveyance.

So much for business.

I shall grow vain, upon your saying you find entertainment in my
letters; barren, as they certainly are, of incident and
importance, because your amusement must arise, not from the
matter, but from the manner, which you know is all my own --
Animated, therefore, by the approbation of a person, whose nice
taste and consummate judgment I can no longer doubt, I will
chearfully proceed with our memoirs -- As it is determined we shall
set out next week for Yorkshire, I went to-day in the forenoon
with my uncle to see a carriage, belonging to a coachmaker in our
neighbourhood -- Turning down a narrow lane, behind Longacre, we
perceived a crowd of people standing at a door; which, it seems,
opened into a kind of a methodist meeting, and were informed,
that a footman was then holding forth to the congregation within.
Curious to see this phoenomenon, we squeezed into the place with
much difficulty; and who should this preacher be, but the
identical Humphry Clinker. He had finished his sermon, and given
out a psalm, the first stave of which he sung with peculiar
graces -- But if we were astonished to see Clinker in the pulpit,
we were altogether confounded at finding all the females of our
family among the audience -- There was lady Griskin, Mrs Tabitha
Bramble, Mrs Winifred Jenkins, my sister Liddy, and Mr Barton,
and all of them joined in the psalmody, with strong marks of
devotion.

I could hardly keep my gravity on this ludicrous occasion; but
old Square-toes was differently affected -- The first thing that
struck him, was the presumption of his lacquey, whom he commanded
to come down, with such an air of authority as Humphry did not
think proper to disregard. He descended immediately, and all the
people were in commotion. Barton looked exceedingly sheepish,
lady Griskin flirted her fan, Mrs Tabby groaned in spirit, Liddy
changed countenance, and Mrs Jenkins sobbed as if her heart was
breaking -- My uncle, with a sneer, asked pardon of the ladies, for
having interrupted their devotion, saying, he had particular
business with the preacher, whom he ordered to call a hackney-coach.
This being immediately brought up to the end of the lane,
he handed Liddy into it, and my aunt and I following him, we
drove home, without taking any further notice of the rest of the
company, who still remained in silent astonishment.

Mr Bramble, perceiving Liddy in great trepidation, assumed a
milder aspect, bidding her be under no concern, for he was not at
all displeased at any thing she had done -- 'I have no objection
(said he) to your being religiously inclined; but I don't think
my servant is a proper ghostly director for a devotee of your sex
and character -- if, in fact (as I rather believe) your aunt is not
the sole conductress of, this machine' -- Mrs Tabitha made no
answer, but threw up the whites of her eyes, as if in the act of
ejaculation -- Poor Liddy, said, she had no right to the title of a
devotee; that she thought there was no harm in hearing a pious
discourse, even if it came from a footman, especially as her aunt
was present; but that if she had erred from ignorance, she hoped
he would excuse it, as she could not bear the thoughts of living
under his displeasure. The old gentleman, pressing her hand with
a tender smile, said she was a good girl, and that he did not
believe her capable of doing any thing that could give him the
least umbrage or disgust.

When we arrived at our lodgings, he commanded Mr Clinker to
attend him up stairs, and spoke to him in these words -- 'Since you
are called upon by the spirit to preach and to teach, it is high
time to lay aside the livery of an earthly master; and for my
part, I am unworthy to have an apostle in my service' -- 'I hope
(said Humphry) I have not failed in my duty to your honour -- I
should be a vile wretch if I did, considering the misery from
which your charity and compassion relieved me -- but having an
inward admonition of the spirit --' 'An admonition of the devil
(cried the squire, in a passion) What admonition, you blockhead?
What right has such a fellow as you to set up for a reformer?'
'Begging your honour's pardon (replied Clinker) may not the new
light of God's grace shine upon the poor and the ignorant in
their humility, as well as upon the wealthy, and the philosopher
in all his pride of human learning?' 'What you imagine to be the
new light of grace (said his master) I take to be a deceitful
vapour, glimmering through a crack in your upper story -- In a
word, Mr Clinker, I will have no light in my family but what pays
the king's taxes, unless it be the light of reason, which you
don't pretend to follow.'

'Ah, sir! (cried Humphry) the light of reason, is no more in
comparison to the light I mean, than a farthing candle to the sun
at noon' -- 'Very true (said uncle), the one will serve to shew you
your way, and the other to dazzle and confound your weak brain.
Heark ye, Clinker, you are either an hypocritical knave, or a
wrong-headed enthusiast; and in either case, unfit for my service.
If you are a quack in sanctity and devotion, you will find it an
easy matter to impose upon silly women, and others of crazed
understanding, who will contribute lavishly for your support. If
you are really seduced by the reveries of a disturbed
imagination, the sooner you lose your senses entirely, the better
for yourself and the community. In that case, some charitable
person might provide you with a dark room and clean straw in
Bedlam, where it would not be in your power to infect others with
your fanaticism; whereas, if you have just reflection enough left
to maintain the character of a chosen vessel in the meetings of
the godly, you and your hearers will be misled by a Will-i'the-wisp,
from one error into another, till you are plunged into
religious frenzy; and then, perhaps, you will hang yourself in
despair' 'Which the Lord of his infinite mercy forbid! (exclaimed
the affrighted Clinker) It is very possible I may be under the
temptation of the devil, who wants to wreck me on the rocks of
spiritual pride -- Your honour says, I am either a knave or a
madman; now, as I'll assure your honour, I am no knave, it
follows that I must be mad; therefore, I beseech your honour,
upon my knees, to take my case into consideration, that means may
be used for my recovery'

The 'squire could not help smiling at the poor fellow's
simplicity, and promised to take care of him, provided he would
mind the business of his place, without running after the new
light of methodism: but Mrs Tabitha took offence at his humility,
which she interpreted into poorness of spirit and worldly
mindedness. She upbraided him with the want of courage to suffer
for conscience sake -- She observed, that if he should lose his
place for bearing testimony to the truth, Providence would not
fail to find him another, perhaps more advantageous; and,
declaring that it could not be very agreeable to live in a family
where an inquisition was established, retired to another room in
great agitation.

My uncle followed her with a significant look, then, turning to
the preacher, 'You hear what my sister says -- If you cannot live
with me upon such terms as I have prescribed, the vineyard of
methodism lies before you, and she seems very well disposed to
reward your labour' -- 'I would not willingly give offence to any
soul upon earth (answered Humphry); her ladyship has been very
good to me, ever since we came to London; and surely she has a
heart turned for religious exercises; and both she and lady
Griskin sing psalms and hymns like two cherubims -- But, at the
same time, I'm bound to love and obey your honour -- It becometh
not such a poor ignorant fellow as me, to hold dispute with
gentlemen of rank and learning -- As for the matter of knowledge, I
am no more than a beast in comparison of your honour; therefore I
submit; and, with God's grace, I will follow you to the world's
end, if you don't think me too far gone to be out of confinement'.

His master promised to keep him for some time longer on trial;
then desired to know in what manner lady Griskin and Mr Barton
came to join their religious society, he told him, that her
ladyship was the person who first carried my aunt and sister to
the Tabernacle, whither he attended them, and had his devotion
kindled by Mr W--'s preaching: that he was confirmed in this
new way, by the preacher's sermons, which he had bought and
studied with great attention: that his discourse and prayers had
brought over Mrs Jenkins and the house-maid to the same way of
thinking; but as for Mr Barton, he had never seen him at service
before this day, when he came in company with lady Griskin.
Humphry, moreover, owned that he had been encouraged to mount the
rostrum, by the example and success of a weaver, who was much
followed as a powerful minister: that on his first trial he found
himself under such strong impulsions, as made him believe he was
certainly moved by the spirit; and that he had assisted in lady
Griskin's, and several private houses, at exercises of devotion.

Mr Bramble was no sooner informed, that her ladyship had acted as
the primum mobile of this confederacy, than he concluded she had
only made use of Clinker as a tool, subservient to the execution
of some design, to the true secret of which he was an utter
stranger -- He observed, that her ladyship's brain was a perfect
mill for projects; and that she and Tabby had certainly engaged
in some secret treaty, the nature of which he could not
comprehend. I told him I thought it was no difficult matter to
perceive the drift of Mrs Tabitha, which was to ensnare the heart
of Barton, and that in all likelihood my lady Griskin acted as
her auxiliary: that this supposition would account for their
endeavours to convert him to methodism; an event which would
occasion a connexion of souls that might be easily improved into
a matrimonial union.

My uncle seemed to be much diverted by the thoughts of this
Scheme's succeeding; but I gave him to understand, that Barton
was pre-engaged: that he had the day before made a present of an
etuis to Liddy, which her aunt had obliged her to receive, with a
view, no doubt, to countenance her own accepting of a snuff-box
at the same time; that my sister having made me acquainted with
this incident, I had desired an explanation of Mr Barton, who
declared his intentions were honourable, and expressed his hope
that I would have no objections to his alliance; that I had
thanked him for the honour he intended our family; but told
him, it would be necessary to consult her uncle and aunt, who
were her guardians; and their approbation being obtained, I
could have no objection to his proposal; though I was persuaded
that no violence would be offered to my sister's inclinations, in
a transaction that so nearly interested the happiness of her
future life: that he had assured me, he should never think of
availing himself of a guardian's authority, unless he could
render his addresses agreeable to the young lady herself; and
that he would immediately demand permission of Mr and Mrs
Bramble, to make Liddy a tender of his hand and fortune.

The squire was not insensible to the advantages of such a match,
and declared he would promote it with all his influence; but when
I took notice that there seemed to be an aversion on the side of
Liddy, he said he would sound her on the subject; and if her
reluctance was such as would not be easily overcome, he would
civilly decline the proposal of Mr Barton; for he thought that,
in the choice of a husband a young woman ought not to sacrifice
the feelings of her heart for any consideration upon earth --
'Liddy is not so desperate (said he) as to worship fortune at
such an expence.'

I take it for granted, this whole affair will end in smoke;
though there seems to be a storm brewing in the quarter of Mrs
Tabby, who sat with all the sullen dignity of silence at dinner,
seemingly pregnant with complaint and expostulation. As she had
certainly marked Barton for her own prey, she cannot possibly
favour his suit to Liddy; and therefore I expect something
extraordinary will attend his declaring himself my sister's
admirer. This declaration will certainly be made in form, as soon
as the lover can pick up resolution enough to stand the brunt of
Mrs Tabby's disappointment; for he is, without doubt, aware of
her designs upon his person -- The particulars of the denouement
you shall know in due season: mean while I am

Always yours,
J. MELFORD
LONDON, June 10.



To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR LEWIS,

The deceitful calm was of short duration. I am plunged again in a
sea of vexation, and the complaints in my stomach and bowels are
returned; so that I suppose I shall be disabled from prosecuting
the excursion I had planned -- What the devil had I to do, to come
a plague hunting with a leash of females in my train? Yesterday
my precious sister (who, by the bye, has been for some time a
professed methodist) came into my apartment, attended by Mr
Barton, and desired an audience with a very stately air -- 'Brother
(said she), this gentleman has something to propose, which I
flatter myself will be the more acceptable, as it will rid you of
a troublesome companion.' Then Mr Barton proceeded to this effect
-- 'I am, indeed, extremely ambitious of being allied to your
family, Mr Bramble, and I hope you will see no cause to interpose
your authority.' 'As for authority (said Tabby, interrupting him
with some warmth), I know of none that he has a right to use on
this occasion -- If I pay him the compliment of making him
acquainted with the step I intend to take, it is all he can
expect in reason -- This is as much as I believe he would do by me,
if he intended to change his own situation in life -- In a word,
brother, I am so sensible of Mr Barton's extra ordinary merit,
that I have been prevailed upon to alter my resolution of living
a single life, and to put my happiness in his hands, by vesting
him with a legal title to my person and fortune, such as they
are. The business at present, is to have the writings drawn; and
I shall be obliged to you, if you will recommend a lawyer to me
for that purpose'

You may guess what an effect this overture had upon me; who, from
the information of my nephew, expected that Barton was to make a
formal declaration of his passion for Liddy; I could not help
gazing in silent astonishment, alternately at Tabby, and her
supposed admirer, who last hung his head in the most aukward
confusion for a few minutes, and then retired on pretence of
being suddenly seized with a vertigo -- Mrs Tabitha affected much
concern, and would have had him make use of a bed in the house;
but he insisted upon going home, that he might have recourse of
some drops, which he kept for such emergencies, and his
innamorata acquiesced -- In the mean time I was exceedingly puzzled
at this adventure (though I suspected the truth) and did not know
in what manner to demean myself towards Mrs Tabitha, when Jery
came in and told me, he had just seen Mr Barton alight from his
chariot at lady Griskin's door -- This incident seemed to threaten
a visit from her ladyship, with which we were honoured
accordingly, in less than half an hour -- 'I find (said she) there
has been a match of cross purposes among you good folks; and I'm
come to set you to rights' -- So saying, she presented me with the
following billet

'DEAR SIR,

I no sooner recollected myself from the extreme confusion I was
thrown into, by that unlucky mistake of your sister, than I
thought it my duty to assure you, that my devoirs to Mrs Bramble
never exceeded the bounds of ordinary civility; and that my heart
is unalterably fixed upon Miss Liddy Melford, as I had the honour
to declare to her brother, when he questioned me upon that
subject -- Lady Griskin has been so good as to charge herself, not
only with the delivery of this note, but also with the task of
undeceiving Mrs Bramble, for whom I have the most profound
respect and veneration, though my affection being otherwise
engaged is no longer in the power of

Sir,
Your very humble servant,
RALPH BARTON.'

Having cast my eyes over this billet, I told her ladyship, that I
would no longer retard the friendly office she had undertaken:
and I and Jery forthwith retired into another room. There we soon
perceived the conversation grow very warm betwixt the two ladies;
and, at length, could distinctly hear certain terms of
altercation, which we could no longer delay interrupting, with
any regard to decorum. When we entered the scene of contention,
we found Liddy had joined the disputants, and stood trembling
betwixt them, as if she had been afraid they would have proceeded
to something more practical than words. Lady Griskin's face was
like the full moon in a storm of wind, glaring, fiery, and
portentous; while Tabby looked grim and ghastly, with an aspect
breathing discord and dismay. -- Our appearance put a stop to their
mutual revilings; but her ladyship turning to me, 'Cousin (said
she) I can't help saying I have met with a very ungrateful return
from this lady, for the pains I have taken to serve her family' --
'My family is much obliged to your ladyship (cried Tabby, with a
kind of hysterical giggle); but we have no right to the good
offices of such an honourable go-between.' 'But, for all that,
good Mrs Tabitha Bramble (resumed the other), I shall be content
with the reflection, That virtue is its own reward; and it shall
not be my fault, if you continue to make yourself ridiculous -- Mr
Bramble, who has no little interest of his own to serve, will, no
doubt, contribute all in his power to promote a match betwixt Mr
Barton and his niece, which will be equally honourable and
advantageous; and, I dare say, Miss Liddy herself will have no
objection to a measure so well calculated to make her happy in
life' -- 'I beg your ladyship's pardon (exclaimed Liddy, with great
vivacity) I have nothing but misery to expect from such a
measure; and I hope my guardians will have too much compassion,
to barter my peace of mind for any consideration of interest or
fortune' -- 'Upon my word, Miss Liddy! (said she) you have profited
by the example of your good aunt -- I comprehend your meaning, and
will explain it when I have a proper opportunity -- In the mean
time, I shall take my leave -- Madam, your most obedient, and
devoted humble servant,' said she, advancing close up to my
sister, and curtsying so low, that I thought she intended to
squat herself down on the floor -- This salutation Tabby returned
with equal solemnity; and the expression of the two faces, while
they continued in this attitude, would be no bad subject for a
pencil like that of the incomparable Hogarth, if any such should
ever appear again, in these times of dullness and degeneracy.

Jery accompanied her ladyship to her house, that he might have an
opportunity to restore the etuis to Barton, and advise him to
give up his suit, which was so disagreeable to his sister,
against whom, however, he returned much irritated -- Lady Griskin
had assured him that Liddy's heart was pre-occupied; and
immediately the idea of Wilson recurring to his imagination, his
family-pride took the alarm. He denounced vengeance against the
adventurer, and was disposed to be very peremptory with his
sister; but I desired he would suppress his resentment, until I
should have talked with her in private.

The poor girl, when I earnestly pressed her on this head, owned
with a flood of tears, that Wilson had actually come to the Hot
Well at Bristol, and even introduced himself into our lodgings as
a Jew pedlar; but that nothing had passed betwixt them, further
than her begging him to withdraw immediately, if he had any
regard for her peace of mind: that he had disappeared
accordingly, after having attempted to prevail upon my sister's
maid, to deliver a letter; which, however, she refused to
receive, though she had consented to carry a message, importing
that he was a gentleman of a good family; and that, in a very
little time, he would avow his passion in that character -- She
confessed, that although he had not kept his word in this
particular, he was not yet altogether indifferent to her
affection; but solemnly promised, she would never carry on any
correspondence with him, or any other admirer, for the future,
without the privity and approbation of her brother and me.

By this declaration, she made her own peace with Jery; but the
hot-headed boy is more than ever incensed against Wilson, whom he
now considers as an impostor, that harbours some infamous design
upon the honour of his family -- As for Barton he was not a little
mortified to find his present returned, and his addresses so
unfavourably received; but he is not a man to be deeply affected
by such disappointments; and I know not whether he is not as well
pleased with being discarded by Liddy, as he would have been with
a permission to prosecute his pretensions, at the risque of being
every day exposed to the revenge or machinations of Tabby, who is
not to be slighted with impunity. -- I had not much time to
moralize on these occurrences; for the house was visited by a
constable and his gang, with a warrant from Justice Buzzard, to
search the box of Humphry Clinker, my footman, -- who was just
apprehended as a highwayman. This incident threw the whole family
into confusion. My sister scolded the constable for presuming to
enter the lodgings of a gentleman on such an errand, without
having first asked, and obtained permission; her maid was
frightened into fits, and Liddy shed tears of compassion for the
unfortunate Clinker, in whose box, however, nothing was found to
confirm the suspicion of robbery.

For my own part, I made no doubt of the fellow's being mistaken
for some other person, and I went directly to the justice, in
order to procure his discharge; but there I found the matter much
more serious than I expected -- Poor Clinker stood trembling at the
bar, surrounded by thief-takers; and at a little distance, a
thick, squat fellow, a postilion, his accuser, who had seized him
on the street, and swore positively to his person, that the said
Clinker had, on the 15th day of March last, on Blackheath, robbed
a gentleman in a post-chaise, which he (the postilion) drove --
This deposition was sufficient to justify his commitment; and he
was sent accordingly to Clerkenwell prison, whither Jery
accompanied him in the coach, in order to recommend him properly
to the keeper, that he may want for no convenience which the
place affords.

The spectators, who assembled to see this highwayman, were
sagacious enough to discern something very villainous in his
aspect; which (begging their pardon) is the very picture of
simplicity; and the justice himself put a very unfavourable
construction upon some of his answers, which, he said, savoured
of the ambiguity and equivocation of an old offender; but, in my
opinion, it would have been more just and humane to impute them
to the confusion into which we may suppose a poor country lad to
be thrown on such an occasion. I am still persuaded he is
innocent; and, in this persuasion, I can do no less than use my
utmost endeavours that he may not be oppressed -- I shall, to-morrow,
send my nephew to wait on the gentleman who was robbed,
and beg; he will have the humanity to go and see the prisoner;
that, in case he should find him quite different from the person
of the highwayman, he may bear testimony in his behalf -- Howsoever
it may fare with Clinker, this cursed affair will be to me
productive of intolerable chagrin -- I have already caught a
dreadful cold, by rushing into the open air from the justice's
parlour, where I had been stewing in the crowd; and though I
should not be laid up with the gout, as I believe I shall, I must
stay at London for some weeks, till this poor devil comes to his
trial at Rochester; so that, in all probability, my northern
expedition is blown up.

If you can find any thing in your philosophical budget, to
console me in the midst of these distresses and apprehensions,
pray let it be communicated to

Your unfortunate friend,
MATT. BRAMBLE
LONDON, June 12.



To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR WAT,

The farce is finished, and another piece of a graver cast brought
upon the stage. -- Our aunt made a desperate attack upon Barton,
who had no other way of saving himself, but by leaving her in
possession of the field, and avowing his pretensions to Liddy, by
whom he has been rejected in his turn. -- Lady Griskin acted as his
advocate and agent on this occasion, with such zeal as embroiled
her with Mrs Tabitha, and a high scene of altercation passed
betwixt these two religionists, which might have come to action,
had not my uncle interposed. They are however reconciled, in
consequence of an event which hath involved us all in trouble and
disquiet. You must know, the poor preacher, Humphry Clinker, is
now exercising his ministry among the felons in Clerkenwell
prison -- A postilion having sworn a robbery against him, no bail
could be taken, and he was committed to jail, notwithstanding all
the remonstrances and interest my uncle could make in his behalf.

All things considered, the poor fellow cannot possibly be guilty,
and yet, I believe, he runs some risque of being hanged. Upon his
examination, he answered with such hesitation and reserve as
persuaded most of the people, who crowded the place, that he was
really a knave, and the justice's remarks confirmed their
opinion. Exclusive of my uncle and myself, there was only one
person who seemed inclined to favour the culprit. -- He was a young
man, well dressed, and, from the manner in which he cross-examined
the evidence, we took it for granted, that he was a
student in one of the inns of court. -- He freely checked the
justice for some uncharitable inferences he made to the prejudice
of the prisoner, and even ventured to dispute with his worship on
certain points of law.

My uncle, provoked at the unconnected and dubious answers of
Clinker, who seemed in danger of falling a sacrifice to his own
simplicity, exclaimed, 'In the name of God, if you are innocent,
say so.' 'No (cried he) God forbid that I should call myself
innocent, while my conscience is burthened with sin.' 'What then,
you did commit this robbery?' resumed his master. 'No, sure (said
he) blessed be the Lord, I'm free of that guilt.'

Here the justice interposed, observing, that the man seemed
inclined to make a discovery by turning king's evidence, and
desired the clerk to take his confession; upon which Humphry
declared, that he looked upon confession to be a popish fraud,
invented by the whore of Babylon. The Templar affirmed, that the
poor fellow was non compos; and exhorted the justice to discharge
him as a lunatic. -- 'You know very well (added he) that the
robbery in question was not committed by the prisoner.'

The thief-takers grinned at one another; and Mr Justice Buzzard
replied with great emotion, 'Mr Martin, I desire you will mind
your own business; I shall convince you one of these days that I
understand mine.' In short, there was no remedy; the mittimus was
made out, and poor Clinker sent to prison in a hackney-coach,
guarded by the constable, and accompanied by your humble servant.
By the way, I was not a little surprised to hear this retainer to
justice bid the prisoner to keep up his spirits, for that he did
not at all doubt but that he would get off for a few weeks
confinement -- He said, his worship knew very well that Clinker was
innocent of the fact, and that the real highwayman who robbed the
chaise, was no other than that very individual Mr Martin, who had
pleaded so strenuously for honest Humphry.

Confounded at this information, I asked, 'Why then is he suffered
to go about at his liberty, and this poor innocent fellow treated
as a malefactor?' 'We have exact intelligence of all Mr Martin's
transactions (said he); but as yet there is not evidence
sufficient for his conviction; and as for this young man, the
justice could do no less than commit him, as the postilion swore
point-blank to his identity.' 'So if this rascally postilion
should persist in the falsity to which he is sworn (said I), this
innocent lad may be brought to the gallows.'

The constable observed, that he would have time enough to prepare
for his trial, and might prove an alibi; or, perhaps, Martin
might be apprehended and convicted for another fact; in which
case, he might be prevailed upon to take this affair upon
himself; or, finally, if these chances should fail, and the
evidence stand good against Clinker, the jury might recommend him
to mercy, in consideration of his youth, especially if this
should appear to be the first fact of which he had been guilty.

Humphry owned he could not pretend to recollect where he had been
on the day when the robbery was committed, much less prove a
circumstance of that kind so far back as six months, though he
knew he had been sick of the fever and ague, which, however, did
not prevent him from going about -- then, turning up his eyes, he
ejaculated, 'The Lord's will be done! if it be my fate to suffer,
I hope I shall not disgrace the faith of which, though unworthy,
I make profession.'

When I expressed my surprize that the accuser should persist in
charging Clinker, without taking the least notice of the real
robber who stood before him, and to whom, indeed, Humphry bore
not the smallest resemblance; the constable (who was himself a
thief-taker) gave me to understand, that Mr Martin was the best
qualified for business of all the gentlemen on the road he had
ever known; that he had always acted on his own bottom, without
partner or correspondent, and never went to work but when he was
cool and sober; that his courage and presence of mind never
failed him; that his address was genteel, and his behaviour void
of all cruelty and insolence; that he never encumbered himself
with watches or trinkets, nor even with bank-notes, but always
dealt for ready money, and that in the current coin of the
kingdom; and that he could disguise himself and his horse in such
a manner, that, after the action, it was impossible to recognize
either the one or the other -- 'This great man (said he) has
reigned paramount in all the roads within fifty miles of London
above fifteen months, and has done more business in that time,
than all the rest of the profession put together; for those who
pass through his hands are so delicately dealt with, that they
have no desire to give him the least disturbance; but for all
that, his race is almost run -- he is now fluttering about justice,
like a moth about a candle -- there are so many lime-twigs laid in
his way, that I'll bet a cool hundred, he swings before
Christmas.'

Shall I own to you, that this portrait, drawn by a ruffian,
heightened by what I myself had observed in his deportment, has
interested me warmly in the fate of poor Martin, whom nature
seems to have intended for a useful and honourable member of that
community upon which he now preys for subsistence? It seems, he
lived some time as a clerk to a timber-merchant, whose daughter
Martin having privately married, was discarded, and his wife
turned out of doors. She did not long survive her marriage; and
Martin, turning fortune-hunter, could not supply his occasions
any other way, than by taking to the road, in which he has
travelled hitherto with uncommon success. -- He pays his respects
regularly to Mr Justice Buzzard, the thief-catcher-general of
this metropolis, and sometimes they smoke a pipe together very
lovingly, when the conversation generally turns upon the nature
of evidence. -- The justice has given him fair warning to take care
of himself, and he has received his caution in good part. --
Hitherto he has baffled all the vigilance, art, and activity of
Buzzard and his emissaries, with such conduct as would have done
honour to the genius of a Caesar or a Turenne; but he has one
weakness, which has proved fatal to all the heroes of his tribe,
namely, an indiscreet devotion to the fair sex, and in all
probability, he will be attacked on this defenceless quarter.

Be that as it may, I saw the body of poor Clinker consigned to
the gaoler of Clerkenwell, to whose indulgence I recommended him
so effectually, that he received him in the most hospitable
manner, though there was a necessity for equipping him with a
suit of irons, in which he made a very rueful appearance. The
poor creature seemed as much affected by my uncle's kindness, as
by his own misfortune. When I assured him, that nothing should be
left undone for procuring his enlargement, and making his
confinement easy in the mean time, he fell down on his knees, and
kissing my hand, which he bathed with his tears, '0 'squire!
(cried he, sobbing) what shall I say? -- I can't -- no, I can't
speak -- my poor heart is bursting with gratitude to you and my
dear -- dear generous -- noble benefactor.'

I protest, the scene became so pathetic, that I was fain to force
myself away, and returned to my uncle, who sent me in the
afternoon with a compliment to one Mr Mead, the person who had
been robbed on Black-heath. As I did not find him at home, I left
a message, in consequence of which he called at our lodgings this
morning, and very humanely agreed to visit the prisoner. By this
time, lady Griskin had come to make her formal compliments of
condolance to Mrs Tabitha, on this domestic calamity; and that
prudent maiden, whose passion was now cooled, thought proper to
receive her ladyship so civilly, that a reconciliation
immediately ensued. These two ladies resolved to comfort the poor
prisoner in their own persons, and Mr Mead and I 'squired them to
Clerkenwell, my uncle being detained at home by some slight
complaints in his stomach and bowels.

The turnkey, who received us at Clerkenwell, looked remarkably
sullen; and when we enquired for Clinker, 'I don't care, if the
devil had him (said he); here has been nothing but canting and
praying since the fellow entered the place. -- Rabbit him! the tap
will be ruined -- we han't sold a cask of beer, nor a dozen of
wine, since he paid his garnish -- the gentlemen get drunk with
nothing but your damned religion. -- For my part, I believe as how
your man deals with the devil. -- Two or three as bold hearts as
ever took the air upon Hounslow have been blubbering all night;
and if the fellow an't speedily removed by Habeas Corpus, or
otherwise, I'll be damn'd if there's a grain of true spirit left
within these walls we shan't have a soul to do credit to the
place, or make his exit like a true born Englishman -- damn my
eyes! there will be nothing but snivelling in the cart -- we shall
all die like so many psalm-singing weavers.'

In short, we found that Humphry was, at that very instant,
haranguing the felons in the chapel; and that the gaoler's wife
and daughter, together with my aunt's woman, Win Jenkins, and
our house-maid, were among the audience, which we immediately
joined. I never saw any thing so strongly picturesque as this
congregation of felons clanking their chains, in the midst of
whom stood orator Clinker, expatiating in a transport of fervor,
on the torments of hell, denounced in scripture against evil-doers,
comprehending murderers, robbers, thieves, and whore
mongers. The variety of attention exhibited in the faces of those
ragamuffins, formed a groupe that would not have disgraced the
pencil of a Raphael. In one, it denoted admiration; in another,
doubt; in a third, disdain; in a fourth, contempt; in a fifth,
terror; in a sixth, derision; and in a seventh, indignation. -- As
for Mrs Winifred Jenkins, she was in tears, overwhelmed with
sorrow; but whether for her own sins, or the misfortune of
Clinker, I cannot pretend to say. The other females seemed to
listen with a mixture of wonder and devotion. The gaoler's wife
declared he was a saint in trouble, saying, she wished from her
heart there was such another good soul, like him, in every gaol
in England.

Mr Mead, having earnestly surveyed the preacher, declared his
appearance was so different from that of the person who robbed
him on Black-heath, that he could freely make oath he was not the
man: but Humphry himself was by this time pretty well rid of all
apprehensions of being hanged; for he had been the night before
solemnly tried and acquitted by his fellow prisoners, some of
whom he had already converted to methodism. He now made proper
acknowledgments for the honour of our visit, and was permitted to
kiss the hands of the ladies, who assured him, he might depend
upon their friendship and protection. Lady Griskin, in her great
zeal, exhorted his fellow-prisoners to profit by the precious
opportunity of having such a saint in bonds among them, and turn
over a new leaf for the benefit of their poor souls; and, that
her admonition might have the greater effect, she reinforced it
with her bounty.

While she and Mrs Tabby returned in the coach with the two
maidservants, I waited on Mr Mead to the house of justice
Buzzard, who, having heard his declaration, said his oath could
be of no use at present, but that he would be a material evidence
for the prisoner at his trial; so that there seems to be no
remedy but patience for poor Clinker; and, indeed, the same
virtue, or medicine, will be necessary for us all, the squire in
particular, who had set his heart upon his excursion to the
northward.

While we were visiting honest Humphry in Clerkenwell prison, my
uncle received a much more extraordinary visit at his own
lodgings. Mr Martin, of whom I have made such honourable mention,
desired permission to pay him his respects, and was admitted
accordingly. He told him, that having observed him, at Mr
Buzzard's, a good deal disturbed by what had happened to his
servant, he had come to assure him he had nothing to apprehend
for Clinker's life; for, if it was possible that any jury could
find him guilty upon such evidence, he, Martin himself, would
produce in court a person, whose deposition would bring him off
clear as the sun at noon. -- Sure, the fellow would not be so
romantic as to take the robbery upon himself! -- He said, the
postilion was an infamous fellow, who had been a dabbler in the
same profession, and saved his life at the Old Bailey by
impeaching his companions; that being now reduced to great
poverty, he had made this desperate push, to swear away the life
of an innocent man, in hopes of having the reward upon his
conviction; but that he would find himself miserably
disappointed, for the justice and his myrmidons were determined
to admit of no interloper in this branch of business; and that he
did not at all doubt but that they would find matter enough to
shop the evidence himself before the next gaol-delivery. He
affirmed, that all these circumstances were well known to the
justice; and that his severity to Clinker was no other than a
hint to his master to make him a present in private, as an
acknowledgment of his candour and humanity.

This hint, however, was so unpalatable to Mr Bramble, that he
declared, with great warmth, he would rather confine himself for
life to London, which he detested, than be at liberty to leave it
tomorrow, in consequence of encouraging corruption in a
magistrate. Hearing, however, how favourable Mr Mead's report had
been for the prisoner, he is resolved to take the advice of
counsel in what manner to proceed for his immediate enlargement.
I make no doubt, but that in a day or two this troublesome
business may be discussed; and in this hope we are preparing for
our journey. If our endeavours do not miscarry, we shall have
taken the field before you hear again from

Yours,
J. MELFORD
LONDON, June 11



To Dr LEWIS.

Thank Heaven! dear Lewis, the clouds are dispersed, and I have
now the clearest prospect of my summer campaign, which, I hope, I
shall be able to begin to-morrow. I took the advice of counsel
with respect to the case of Clinker, in whose favour a lucky
incident has intervened. The fellow who accused him, has had his
own battery turned upon himself. -- Two days ago he was apprehended
for a robbery on the highway, and committed, on the evidence of
an accomplice. Clinker, having moved for a writ of habeas corpus,
was brought before the lord chief justice, who, in consequence of
an affidavit of the gentleman who had been robbed, importing that
the said Clinker was not the person who stopped him on the
highway, as well as in consideration of the postilion's character
and present circumstances, was pleased to order, that my servant
should be admitted to bail, and he has been discharged
accordingly, to the unspeakable satisfaction of our whole family,
to which he has recommended himself in an extraordinary manner,
not only by his obliging deportment, but by his talents of
preaching, praying, and singing psalms, which he has exercised
with such effect, that even Tabby respects him as a chosen
vessel. If there was any thing like affectation or hypocrisy in
this excess of religion, I would not keep him in my service, but,
so far as I can observe, the fellow's character is downright
simplicity, warmed with a kind of enthusiasm, which renders him
very susceptible of gratitude and attachment to his benefactors.

As he is an excellent horseman, and understands farriery, I have
bought a stout gelding for his use, that he may attend us on the
road, and have an eye to our cattle, in case the coachman should
not mind his business. My nephew, who is to ride his own saddle-horse,
has taken, upon trial, a servant just come from abroad
with his former master, Sir William Strollop, who vouches for his
honesty. The fellow, whose name is Dutton, seems to be a petit
maitre. -- He has got a smattering of French, bows, and grins, and
shrugs, and takes snuff a la mode de France, but values himself
chiefly upon his skill and dexterity in hair-dressing. -- If I am
not much deceived by appearance, he is, in all respects, the very
contrast of Humphry Clinker.

My sister has made up matters with lady Griskin; though, I must
own, I should not have been sorry to see that connexion entirely
destroyed: but Tabby is not of a disposition to forgive Barton,
who, I understand, is gone to his seat in Berkshire for the
summer season. I cannot help suspecting, that in the treaty of
peace, which has been lately ratified betwixt those two females,
it is stipulated, that her ladyship shall use her best endeavours
to provide an agreeable help-mate for our sister Tabitha, who
seems to be quite desperate in her matrimonial designs. Perhaps,
the match-maker is to have a valuable consideration in the way of
brokerage, which she will most certainly deserve, if she can find
any man in his senses, who will yoke with Mrs Bramble from
motives of affection or interest.

I find my spirits and my health affect each other reciprocally
that is to say, every thing that discomposes my mind, produces a
correspondent disorder in my body; and my bodily complaints are
remarkably mitigated by those considerations that dissipate the
clouds of mental chagrin. -- The imprisonment of Clinker brought on
those symptoms which I mentioned in my last, and now they are
vanished at his discharge. -- It must be owned, indeed, I took some
of the tincture of ginseng, prepared according to your
prescription, and found it exceedingly grateful to the stomach;
but the pain and sickness continued to return, after short
intervals, till the anxiety of my mind was entirely removed, and
then I found myself perfectly at case. We have had fair weather
these ten days, to the astonishment of the Londoners, who think
it portentous. If you enjoy the same indulgence in Wales, I hope
Barns has got my hay made, and safe cocked by this time. As we
shall be in motion for some weeks, I cannot expect to hear from
you as usual; but I shall continue to write from every place at
which we make any halt, that you may know our track, in case it
should be necessary to communicate any thing to

Your assured friend,
MATT. BRAMBLE
LONDON, June 14.



To Mrs MARY JONES, at Brambleton-hall, &c.

DEAR MARY,

Having the occasion of my cousin Jenkins of Aberga'ny, I send
you, as a token, a turkey-shell comb, a kiple of yards of green
ribbon, and a sarment upon the nothingness of good works, which
was preached in the Tabernacle; and you will also receive a horn-buck
for Saul, whereby she may learn her letters; for Fin much
consarned about the state of her poor sole -- and what are all the
pursuits of this life to the consarns of that immortal part? --
What is life but a veil of affliction? O Mary! the whole family
have been in such a constipation! -- Mr Clinker has been in
trouble, but the gates of hell have not been able to prevail
again him. His virtue is like poor gould, seven times tried in
the fire. He was tuck up for a rubbery, and had before gustass
Busshard, who made his mittamouse; and the pore youth was sent to
prison upon the false oaf of a willian, that wanted to sware his
life away for the looker of cain.

The 'squire did all in his power, but could not prevent his being
put in chains, and confined among common manufactors, where he
stood like an innocent sheep in the midst of wolves and tygers. --
Lord knows what mought have happened to this pyehouse young man,
if master had not applied to Apias Korkus, who lives with the
ould bailiff, and is, they say, five hundred years old (God bless
us!), and a congeror: but, if he be, sure I am he don't deal with
the devil, otherwise he couldn't have fought out Mr Clinker, as
he did, in spite of stone walls, iron bolts, and double locks,
that flew open at his command; for ould Scratch has not a greater
enemy upon hearth than Mr Clinker, who is, indeed, a very
powerful labourer in the Lord's vineyard. I do no more than yuse
the words of my good lady, who has got the infectual calling;
and, I trust, that even myself, though unworthy, shall find
grease to be excepted. -- Miss Liddy has been touch'd to the quick,
but is a little timorsome: howsomever, I make no doubt, but she,
and all of us, will be brought, by the endeavours of Mr Clinker,
to produce blessed fruit of generation and repentance. -- As for
master and the young 'squire, they have as yet had narro glimpse
of the new light. -- I doubt as how their harts are hardened by
worldly wisdom, which, as the pyebill saith, is foolishness in
the sight of God.

O Mary Jones, pray without seizing for grease to prepare you for
the operations of this wonderful instrument, which, I hope, will
be exorcised this winter upon you and others at Brambleton-hall. --
Tomorrow, we are to set out in a cox and four for Yorkshire;
and, I believe, we shall travel that way far, and far, and
farther than I can tell; but I shan't go so far as to forget my
friends; and Mary Jones will always be remembered as one of them
by her


Humble sarvant,
WIN. JENKINS
LONDON, June 14.



To Mrs GWYLLIM, house-keeper at Brambleton-hall.
MRS GWYLLIM,

I can't help thinking it very strange, that I never had an answer
to the letter I wrote you some weeks ago from Bath, concerning
the sour bear, the gander, and the maids eating butter, which I
won't allow to be wasted. -- We are now going upon a long journey
to the north, whereby I desire you will redouble your care and
circumflexion, that the family may be well managed in our
absence; for, you know, you must render account, not only to your
earthly master, but also to him that is above; and if you are
found a good and faithful sarvant, great will be your reward in
haven. I hope there will be twenty stun of cheese ready for
market -- by the time I get huom, and as much owl spun, as will
make half a dozen pair of blankets; and that the savings of the
butter-milk will fetch me a good penny before Martinmass, as the
two pigs are to be fed for baking with bitchmast and acrons.

I wrote to doctor Lews for the same porpuss, but he never had the
good manners to take the least notice of my letter; for which
reason, I shall never favour him with another, though he beshits
me on his bended knees. You will do well to keep a watchful eye
over the hind Villiams, who is one of his amissories, and, I
believe, no better than he should be at bottom. God forbid that I
should lack christian charity; but charity begins at huom, and
sure nothing can be a more charitable work than to rid the family
of such vermine. I do suppose, that the bindled cow has been had
to the parson's bull, that old Moll has had another litter of
pigs, and that Dick is become a mighty mouser. Pray order every
thing for the best, and be frugal, and keep the maids to their
labour -- If I had a private opportunity, I would send them some
hymns to sing instead of profane ballads; but, as I can't, they
and you must be contented with the prayers of


Your assured friend,
T. BRAMBLE
LONDON, June 14.



To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

The very day after I wrote my last, Clinker was set at liberty. As
Martin had foretold, the accuser was himself committed for a
robbery, upon unquestionable evidence. He had been for some time
in the snares of the thief-taking society; who, resenting his
presumption in attempting to incroach upon their monopoly of
impeachment, had him taken up and committed to Newgate, on the
deposition of an accomplice, who has been admitted as evidence
for the king. The postilion being upon record as an old offender,
the chief justice made no scruple of admitting Clinker to bail,
when he perused the affidavit of Mr Mead, importing that the said
Clinker was not the person that robbed him on Blackheath; and
honest Humphry was discharged. When he came home, he expressed
great eagerness to pay his respects to his master, and here his
elocution failed him, but his silence was pathetic; he fell down
at his feet and embraced his knees, shedding a flood of tears,
which my uncle did not see without emotion. He took snuff in some
confusion; and, putting his hand in his pocket, gave him his
blessing in something more substantial than words -- 'Clinker (said
he), I am so well convinced, both of your honesty and courage,
that I am resolved to make you my life-guardman on the highway.'

He was accordingly provided with a case of pistols, and a carbine
to be flung a-cross his shoulders; and every other preparation
being made, we set out last Thursday, at seven in the morning; my
uncle, with the three women in the coach; Humphry, well mounted
on a black gelding bought for his use; myself a-horseback,
attended by my new valet, Mr Dutton, an exceeding coxcomb, fresh
from his travels, whom I have taken upon trial -- The fellow wears
a solitaire, uses paint, and takes rappee with all the grimace of
a French marquis. At present, however, he is in a ridingdress,
jack-boots, leather breeches, a scarlet waistcoat, with gold
binding, a laced hat, a hanger, a French posting-whip in his
hand, and his hair en queue.

Before we had gone nine miles, my horse lost one of his shoes; so
that I was obliged to stop at Barnet to have another, while the
coach proceeded at an easy pace over the common. About a mile
short of Hatfield, the postilions, stopping the carriage, gave
notice to Clinker that there were two suspicious fellows a-horseback,
at the end of a lane, who semed waiting to attack the
coach. Humphry forthwith apprised my uncle, declaring he would
stand by him to the last drop of his blood; and unflinging his
carbine, prepared for action. The 'squire had pistols in the
pockets of the coach, and resolved to make use of them directly;
but he was effectually prevented by his female companions, who
flung themselves about his neck, and screamed in concert -- At that
instant, who should come up at a hand-gallop, but Martin, the
highway-man, who, advancing to the coach, begged the ladies would
compose themselves for a moment then, desiring Clinker to follow
him to the charge, he pulled a pistol out of his bosom, and they
rode up together to give battle to the rogues, who, having fired
at a great distance, fled across the common. They were in pursuit
of the fugitives when I came up, not a little alarmed at the
shrieks in the coach, where I found my uncle in a violent rage,
without his periwig, struggling to disentangle himself from Tabby
and the other two, and swearing with great vociferation. Before I
had time to interpose, Martin and Clinker returned from the
pursuit, and the former payed his compliments with great
politeness, giving us to understand, that the fellows had
scampered off, and that he believed they were a couple of raw
'prentices from London. He commended Clinker for his courage, and
said, if we would give him leave, he would have the honour to
accompany us as far as Stevenage, where he had some business.

The 'squire, having recollected and adjusted himself, was the
first to laugh at his own situation: but it was not without
difficulty, that Tabby's arms could be untwisted from his neck;
Liddy's teeth chattered, and Jenkins was threatened with a fit as
usual. I had communicated to my uncle the character of Martin, as
it was described by the constable, and he was much struck with
its singularity -- He could not suppose the fellow had any design
on our company, which was so numerous and well armed; he
therefore thanked him, for the service he had just done them,
said he would be glad of his company, and asked him to dine with
us at Hatfield. This invitation might not have been agreeable to
the ladies, had they known the real profession of our guest, but
this was a secret to all, except my uncle and myself. Mrs Tabitha,
however, would by no means consent to proceed with a case of
loaded pistols in the coach, and they were forthwith discharged
in complaisance to her and the rest of the women.

Being gratified in this particular, she became remarkably
goodhumoured, and at dinner behaved in the most affable manner to
Mr Martin, with whose polite address and agreeable conversation
she seemed to be much taken. After dinner, the landlord accosting
me in the yard, asked with a significant look, if the gentleman
that rode the sorrel belonged to our company? -- I understand his
meaning, but answered no; that he had come up with us on the
common, and helped us to drive away two fellows, that looked like
highwaymen -- He nodded three times distinctly, as much as to say,
he knows his cue. Then he inquired, if one of those men was
mounted on a bay mare, and the other on a chestnut gelding with a
white streak down his forehead? and being answered in the
affirmative, he assured me they had robbed three post-chaises
this very morning -- I inquired, in my turn, if Mr Martin was of
his acquaintance; and, nodding thrice again, he answered, that he
had seen the gentleman.

Before we left Hatfield, my uncle, fixing his eyes on Martin with
such expression as is more easily conceived than described,
asked, if he often travelled that road? and he replied with a
look which denoted his understanding the question, that he very
seldom did business in that part of the country. In a word, this
adventurer favoured us with his company to the neighbourhood of
Stevenage, where he took his leave of the coach and me, in very
polite terms, and turned off upon a crossroad, that led to a
village on the left -- At supper, Mrs Tabby was very full in the
praise of Mr Martin's good-sense and good-breeding, and seemed to
regret that she had not a further opportunity to make some
experiment upon his affection. In the morning, my uncle was not a
little surprised to receive, from the waiter a billet couched in
these words --


'SIR,

I could easily perceive from your looks, when I had the honour to
converse with you at Hatfield, that my character is not unknown
to you; and, I dare say you won't think it strange, that I should
be glad to change my present way of life, for any other honest
occupation, let it be ever so humble, that will afford me bread
in moderation, and sleep in safety -- Perhaps you may think I
flatter, when I say, that from the moment I was witness to your
generous concern in the cause of your servant, I conceived a
particular esteem and veneration for your person; and yet what I
say is true. I should think myself happy, if I could be admitted
into your protection and service, as house-steward, clerk,
butler, or bailiff, for either of which places I think myself
tolerably well qualified; and, sure I am, I should not be found
deficient in gratitude and fidelity -- At the same time, I am very
sensible how much you must deviate from the common maxims of
discretion, even in putting my professions to the trial; but I
don't look upon you as a person that thinks in the ordinary
stile; and the delicacy of my situation, will, I know, justify
this address to a heart warmed with beneficence and compassion --
Understanding you are going pretty far north, I shall take an
opportunity to throw myself in your way again, before you reach
the borders of Scotland; and, I hope, by that time, you will have
taken into consideration, the truly distressful case of,

honoured sir,
your very humble, and devoted servant,
EDWARD MARTIN'

The 'squire, having perused this letter, put it into my hand,
without saying a syllable; and when I had read it we looked at
each other in silence. From a certain sparkling in his eyes, I
discovered there was more in his heart, than he cared to express
with his tongue, in favour of poor Martin; and this was precisely
my own feeling, which he did not fail to discern, by the same
means of communication -- 'What shall we do (said he) to save this
poor sinner from the gallows, and make him a useful member of the
commonwealth; and yet the proverb says, Save a thief from the
gallows, and he'll cut your throat.' I told him I really believed
Martin was capable of giving the proverb the lie; and that I
should heartily concur in any step he might take in favour of his
solicitation. We mutually resolved to deliberate upon the
subject, and, in the mean time, proceeded on our journey. The
roads, having been broken up by the heavy rains in the spring,
were so rough, that although we travelled very slowly, the
jolting occasioned such pain, to my uncle, that he was become
exceedingly peevish when we arrived at this place, which lies
about eight miles from the postroad, between Wetherby and
Boroughbridge.

Harrigate-water, so celebrated for its efficacy in the scurvy and
other distempers, is supplied from a copious spring, in the
hollow of a wild common, round which, a good many houses have
been built for the convenience of the drinkers, though few of
them are inhabited. Most of the company lodge at some distance,
in five separate inns, situated in different parts of the
commons, from whence they go every morning to the well, in their
own carriages. The lodgers of each inn form a distinct society,
that eat together; and there is a commodious public room, where
they breakfast in disabille, at separate tables, from eight
o'clock till eleven, as they chance or chuse to come in -- Here
also they drink tea in the afternoon, and play at cards or dance
in the evening. One custom, however, prevails, which I looked
upon as a solecism in politeness. The ladies treat with tea in
their turns; and even girls of sixteen are not exempted from this
shameful imposition -- There is a public ball by subscription every
night at one of the houses, to which all the company from the
others are admitted by tickets; and, indeed, Harrigate treads
upon the heels of Bath, in the articles of gaiety and
dissipation -- with this difference, however, that here we are more
sociable and familiar. One of the inns is already full up to the
very garrets, having no less than fifty lodgers, and as many
servants. Our family does not exceed thirty-six; and I should be
sorry to see the number augmented, as our accommodations won't
admit of much increase.

At present, the company is more agreeable than one could expect
from an accidental assemblage of persons, who are utter strangers
to one another -- There seems to be a general disposition among us
to maintain good-fellowship, and promote the purposes of
humanity, in favour of those who come hither on the score of
health. I see several faces which we left at Bath, although the
majority are of the Northern counties, and many come from
Scotland for the benefit of these waters -- In such a variety,
there must be some originals, among whom Mrs Tabitha Bramble is
not the most inconsiderable -- No place where there is such an
intercourse between the sexes, can be disagreeable to a lady of
her views and temperament -- She has had some warm disputes at
table, with a lame parson from Northumberland, on the new birth,
and the insignificance of moral virtue; and her arguments have
been reinforced by an old Scotch lawyer, in a rye periwig, who,
though he has lost his teeth, and the use of his limbs, can still
wag his tongue with great volubility. He has paid her such
fulsome compliments, upon her piety and learning, as seem to have
won her heart; and she, in her turn, treats him with such
attention as indicates a design upon his person; but, by all
accounts, he is too much of a fox to be inveigled into any snare
that she can lay for his affection.

We do not propose to stay long at Harrigate, though, at present,
it is our headquarters, from whence we shall make some
excursions, to visit two or three of our rich relations, who are
settled in this country. -- Pray, remember me to all our friends of
Jesus, and allow me to be still

Yours affectionately,
J. MELFORD
HARRIGATE, June 23.



To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DOCTOR,

Considering the tax we pay for turnpikes, the roads of this
county constitute a most intolerable grievance. Between Newark
and Weatherby, I have suffered more from jolting and swinging
than ever I felt in the whole course of my life, although the
carriage is remarkably commodious and well hung, and the
postilions were very careful in driving. I am now safely housed
at the New Inn, at Harrigate, whither I came to satisfy my
curiosity, rather than with any view of advantage to my health;
and, truly, after having considered all the parts and particulars
of the place, I cannot account for the concourse of people one
finds here, upon any other principle but that of caprice, which
seems to be the character of our nation.

Harrigate is a wild common, bare and bleak, without tree or
shrub, or the least signs of cultivation; and the people who
come to drink the water, are crowded together in paltry inns,
where the few tolerable rooms are monopolized by the friends and
favourites of the house, and all the rest of the lodgers are
obliged to put up with dirty holes, where there is neither space,
air, nor convenience. My apartment is about ten feet square; and
when the folding bed is down, there is just room sufficient to
pass between it and the fire. One might expect, indeed, that
there would be no occasion for a fire at Midsummer; but here the
climate is so backward, that an ash tree, which our landlord
has planted before my window, is just beginning to put forth its
leaves; and I am fain to have my bed warmed every night.

As for the water, which is said to have effected so many
surprising cures, I have drank it once, and the first draught has
cured me of all desire to repeat the medicine. -- Some people say
it smells of rotten eggs, and others compare it to the scourings
of a foul gun. -- It is generally supposed to be strongly
impregnated with sulphur; and Dr Shaw, in his book upon mineral
water, says, he has seen flakes of sulphur floating in the well --
Pace tanti viri; I, for my part, have never observed any thing
like sulphur, either in or about the well, neither do I find that
any brimstone has ever been extracted from the water. As for the
smell, if I may be allowed to judge from my own organs, it is
exactly that of bilge-water; and the saline taste of it seems to
declare that it is nothing else than salt water putrified in the
bowels of the earth. I was obliged to hold my nose with one hand,
while I advanced the glass to my mouth with the other; and after
I had made shift to swallow it, my stomach could hardly retain
what it had received. -- The only effects it produced were
sickness, griping, and insurmountable disgust. -- I can hardly
mention it without puking. -- The world is strangely misled by the
affectation of singularity. I cannot help suspecting, that this
water owes its reputation in a great measure to its being so
strikingly offensive. -- On the same kind of analogy, a German
doctor has introduced hemlock and other poisons, as specifics,
into the materia medica. -- I am persuaded, that all the cures
ascribed to the Harrigate water, would have been as
efficaciously, and infinitely more agreeably performed, by the
internal and external use of seawater. Sure I am, this last is
much less nauseous to the taste and smell, and much more gentle
in its operation as a purge, as well as more extensive in its
medical qualities.

Two days ago we went across the country to visit 'squire Burdock,
who married a first cousin of my father, an heiress, who brought
him an estate of a thousand a-year. This gentleman is a declared
opponent of the ministry in parliament; and having an opulent
fortune, piques himself upon living in the country, and
maintaining old English hospitality -- By the bye, this is a phrase
very much used by the English themselves both in words and
writing; but I never heard of it out of the island, except by way
of irony and sarcasm. What the hospitality of our forefathers has
been I should be glad to see recorded, rather in the memoirs of
strangers who have visited our country, and were the proper
objects and judges of such hospitality, than in the discourse and
lucubrations of the modern English, who seem to describe it from
theory and conjecture. Certain it is, we are generally looked
upon by foreigners, as a people totally destitute of this virtue;
and I never was in any country abroad, where I did not meet with
persons of distinction, who complained of having been
inhospitably used in Great Britain. A gentleman of France, Italy,
or Germany, who has entertained and lodged an Englishman at his
house, when he afterwards meets with his guest at London, is
asked to dinner at the Saracen's-head, the Turk's-head, the
Boar's-head, or the Bear, eats raw beef and butter, drinks
execrable port, and is allowed to pay his share of the reckoning.

But to return from this digression, which my feeling for the
honour of my country obliged me to make -- our Yorkshire cousin has
been a mighty fox-hunter before the Lord; but now he is too fat
and unwieldy to leap ditches and five-bar gates; nevertheless, he
still keeps a pack of hounds, which are well exercised; and his
huntsman every night entertains him with the adventures of the
day's chace, which he recites in a tone and terms that are
extremely curious and significant. In the mean time, his broad
brawn is scratched by one of his grooms. -- This fellow, it
seems, having no inclination to curry any beast out of the
stable, was at great pains to scollop his nails in such a manner
that the blood followed at every stroke. -- He was in hopes that he
would be dismissed from this disagreeable office, but the event
turned out contrary to his expectation. -- His master declared he
was the best scratcher in the family; and now he will not suffer
any other servant to draw a nail upon his carcase.

The 'squire's lady is very proud, without being stiff or
inaccessible. She receives even her inferiors in point of fortune
with a kind of arrogant civility; but then she thinks she has a
right to treat them with the most ungracious freedoms of speech,
and never fails to let them know she is sensible of her own
superior affluence. In a word, she speaks well of no living soul,
and has not one single friend in the world. Her husband hates her
mortally; but, although the brute is sometimes so very powerful
in him that he will have his own way, he generally truckles to
her dominion, and dreads, like a school-boy, the lash of her
tongue. On the other hand, she is afraid of provoking him too
far, lest he should make some desperate effort to shake off her
yoke. -- She, therefore, acquiesces in the proofs he daily gives of
his attachment to the liberty of an English freeholder, by saying
and doing, at his own table, whatever gratifies the brutality of
his disposition, or contributes to the case of his person. The
house, though large, is neither elegant nor comfortable. -- It
looks like a great inn, crowded with travellers, who dine at the
landlord's ordinary, where there is a great profusion of victuals
and drink, but mine host seems to be misplaced; and I would
rather dine upon filberts with a hermit, than feed upon venison
with a hog. The footmen might be aptly compared to the waiters of
a tavern, if they were more serviceable and less rapacious; but
they are generally insolent and inattentive, and so greedy, that,
I think, I can dine better, and for less expence, at the Star and
Garter in Pall mall, than at our cousin's castle in Yorkshire.
The 'squire is not only accommodated with a wife, but he is also
blessed with an only son, about two and twenty, just returned
from Italy, a complete fidler and dillettante; and he slips no
opportunity of manifesting the most perfect contempt for his own
father.

When we arrived, there was a family of foreigners at the house,
on a visit to this virtuoso, with whom they had been acquainted
at the Spa; it was the count de Melville, with his lady, on their
way to Scotland. Mr Burdock had met with an accident, in
consequence of which both the count and I would have retired but
the young gentleman and his mother insisted upon our staying
dinner; and their serenity seemed to be so little ruffled by what
had happened, that we complied with their invitation. The 'squire
had been brought home over night in his post-chaise, so terribly
belaboured about the pate, that he seemed to be in a state of
stupefaction, and had ever since remained speechless. A country
apothecary, called Grieve, who lived in a neighbouring village,
having been called to his assistance, had let him blood, and
applied a poultice to his head, declaring, that he had no fever,
nor any other bad symptom but the loss of speech, if he really
had lost that faculty. But the young 'squire said this
practitioner was an ignorantaccio, that there was a fracture in
the cranium, and that there was a necessity for having him
trepanned without loss of time. His mother, espousing this
opinion, had sent an express to York for a surgeon to perform the
operation, and he was already come with his 'prentice and
instruments. Having examined the patient's head, he began to
prepare his dressings; though Grieve still retained his first
opinion that there was no fracture, and was the more confirmed in
it as the 'squire had passed the night in profound sleep,
uninterrupted by any catching or convulsion. The York surgeon
said he could not tell whether there was a fracture, until he
should take off the scalp; but, at any rate, the operation might
be of service in giving vent to any blood that might be
extravasated, either above or below the dura mater. The lady and
her son were clear for trying the experiment; and Grieve was
dismissed with some marks of contempt, which, perhaps, he owed to
the plainness of his appearance. He seemed to be about the middle
age, wore his own black hair without any sort of dressing; by his
garb, one would have taken him for a quaker, but he had none of
the stiffness of that sect, on the contrary he was very
submissive, respectful, and remarkably taciturn.

Leaving the ladies in an apartment by themselves, we adjourned to
the patient's chamber, where the dressings and instruments were
displayed in order upon a pewter dish. The operator, laying aside
his coat and periwig, equipped himself with a night-cap, apron,
and sleeves, while his 'prentice and footman, seizing the
'squire's head, began to place it in a proper posture. -- But mark
what followed. -- The patient, bolting upright in the bed, collared
each of these assistants with the grasp of Hercules, exclaiming,
in a bellowing tone, 'I ha'n't lived so long in Yorkshire to be
trepanned by such vermin as you;' and leaping on the floor, put
on his breeches quietly, to the astonishment of us all. The
Surgeon still insisted upon the operation, alleging it was now
plain that the brain was injured, and desiring the servants put
him into bed again; but nobody would venture to execute his
orders, or even to interpose: when the 'squire turned him and his
assistants out of doors, and threw his apparatus out at the
window. Having thus asserted his prerogative, and put on his
cloaths with the help of a valet, the count, with my nephew and
me, were introduced by his son, and received with his usual stile
of rustic civility; then turning to signor Macaroni, with a
sarcastic grin, 'I tell thee what, Dick (said he), a man's scull
is not to be bored every time his head is broken; and I'll
convince thee and thy mother, that I know as many tricks as e'er
an old fox in the West Riding.'

We afterwards understood he had quarrelled at a public house with
an exciseman, whom he challenged to a bout at single stick, in
which he had been worsted; and that the shame of this defeat had
tied up his tongue. As for madam, she had shewn no concern for
his disaster, and now heard of his recovery without emotion -- She
had taken some little notice of my sister and niece, though
rather with a view to indulge her own petulance, than out of any
sentiment of regard to our family. -- She said Liddy was a fright,
and ordered her woman to adjust her head before dinner; but she
would not meddle with Tabby, whose spirit, she soon perceived,
was not to be irritated with impunity. At table, she acknowledged
me so far as to say she had heard of my father; though she
hinted, that he had disobliged her family by making a poor match
in Wales. She was disagreeably familiar in her enquiries about
our circumstances; and asked, if I intended to bring up my nephew
to the law. I told her, that, as he had an independent fortune,
he should follow no profession but that of a country gentleman;
and that I was not without hopes of procuring for him a seat in
parliament -- 'Pray cousin (said she), what may his fortune be?'
When I answered, that, with what I should be able to give him, he
would have better than two thousand a year, she replied, with a
disdainful toss of her head, that it would be impossible for him
to preserve his independence on such a paultry provision.

Not a little nettled at this arrogant remark, I told her, I had
the honour to sit in parliament with her father, when he had
little more than half that income; and I believed there was not a
more independent and incorruptible member in the house. 'Ay; but
times are changed (cried the 'squire) -- Country gentlemen now-a-days
live after another fashion. My table alone stands me in a
cool thousand a quarter, though I raise my own stock, import my
own liquors, and have every thing at the first hand. -- True it
is, I keep open house, and receive all corners, for the honour of
Old England.' 'If that be the case (said I), 'tis a wonder you
can maintain it at so small an expence; but every private
gentleman is not expected to keep a caravanserai for the
accommodation of travellers: indeed, if every individual lived in
the same stile, you would not have such a number of guests at
your table, of consequence your hospitality would not shine so
bright for the glory of the West Riding.' The young 'squire,
tickled by this ironical observation, exclaimed, 'O che burla!' --
his mother eyed me in silence with a supercilious air; and the
father of the feast, taking a bumper of October, 'My service to
you, cousin Bramble (said he), I have always heard there was
something keen and biting in the air of the Welch mountains.'

I was much pleased with the count de Melville, who is sensible,
easy, and polite; and the countess is the most amiable woman I
ever beheld. In the afternoon they took leave of their
entertainers, and the young gentleman, mounting his horse,
undertook to conduct their coach through the park, while one of
their servants rode round to give notice to the rest, whom they
had left at a public house on the road. The moment their backs
were turned, the censorious daemon took possession of our
Yorkshire landlady and our sister Tabitha -- The former observed,
that the countess was a good sort of a body, but totally ignorant
of good breeding, consequently aukward in her address. The squire
said, he did not pretend to the breeding of any thing but colts;
but that the jade would be very handsome, if she was a little
more in flesh. 'Handsome! (cried Tabby) she has indeed a pair of
black eyes without any meaning; but then there is not a good
feature in her face.' 'I know not what you call good features in
Wales (replied our landlord); but they'll pass in Yorkshire.'
Then turning to Liddy, he added, 'What say you, my pretty
Redstreak? -- what is your opinion of the countess?' 'I think
(cried Liddy, with great emotion), she's an angel.' Tabby chid
her for talking with such freedom in company; and the lady of the
house said, in a contemptuous tone, she supposed miss had been
brought up at some country boarding-school.

Our conversation was suddenly interrupted by the young gentleman,
who galloped into the yard all aghast, exclaiming, that the coach
was attacked by a great number of highwaymen. My nephew and I
rushed out, found his own and his servant's horse ready saddled
in the stable, with pistols in the caps -- We mounted instantly,
ordering Clinker and Dutton to follow with all possible
expedition; but notwithstanding all the speed we could make, the
action was over before we arrived, and the count with his lady,
safe lodged at the house of Grieve, who had signalized himself
in a very remarkable manner on this occasion. At the turning of
a lane, that led to the village where the count's servants
remained, a couple of robbers a-horseback suddenly appeared, with
their pistols advanced: one kept the coachman in awe, and the
other demanded the count's money, while the young 'squire went
off at full speed, without ever casting a look behind. The count
desiring the thief to withdraw his pistol, as the lady was in
great terror, delivered his purse without making the least
resistance; but not satisfied with this booty, which was pretty
considerable, the rascal insisted upon rifling her of her car-rings
and necklace, and the countess screamed with affright. Her
husband, exasperated at the violence with which she was
threatened, wrested the pistol out of the fellow's hand, and
turning it upon him, snapped it in his face; but the robber
knowing there was no charge in it, drew another from his bosom,
and in all probability would have killed him on the spot, had not
his life been saved by a wonderful interposition. Grieve, the
apothecary, chancing to pass that very instant, ran up to the
coach, and with a crab-stick, which was all the weapon he had,
brought the fellow to the ground with the first blow; then
seizing his pistol, presented it at his colleague, who fired his
piece at random, and fled without further opposition. The other
was secured by the assistance of the count and the coachman; and
his legs being tied under the belly of his own horse, Grieve
conducted him to the village, whither also the carriage
proceeded. It was with great difficulty the countess could be
kept from swooning; but at last she was happily conveyed to the
house of the apothecary, who went into the shop to prepare some
drops for her, while his wife and daughter administered to her in
another apartment.

I found the count standing in the kitchen with the parson of the
parish, and expressing much impatience to see his protector, whom
as yet he had scarce found time to thank for the essential
service he had done him and the countess. -- The daughter passing
at the same time with a glass of water, monsieur de Melville
could not help taking notice of her figure, which was strikingly
engaging. -- 'Ay (said the parson), she is the prettiest girl, and
the best girl in all my parish: and if I could give my son an
estate of ten thousand a year, he should have my consent to lay
it at her feet. If Mr Grieve had been as solicitious about
getting money, as he has been in performing all the duties of a
primitive Christian, he would not have hung so long upon his
hands.' 'What is her name?' said I. 'Sixteen years ago (answered
the vicar) I christened her by the names of Seraphina Melvilia.'
'Ha! what! how! (cried the count eagerly) sure, you said
Seraphina Melvilia.' 'I did (said he); Mr Grieve told me those
were the names of two noble persons abroad, to whom he had been
obliged for more than life.'

The count, without speaking another syllable, rushed into the
parlour, crying, 'This is your god-daughter, my dear.' Mrs
Grieve, then seizing the countess by the hand, exclaimed with
great agitation, 'O madam! O sir! -- I am -- I am your poor Elinor. --
This is my Seraphina Melvilia O child! these are the count and
countess of Melville, the generous the glorious benefactors of
thy once unhappy parents.'

The countess rising from her scat threw her arms about the neck
of the amiable Seraphina, and clasped her to her breast with
great tenderness, while she herself was embraced by the weeping
mother. This moving scene was completed by the entrance of Grieve
himself, who falling on his knees before the count, 'Behold (said
he) a penitent, who at length can look upon his patron without
shrinking.' 'Ah, Ferdinand! (cried he, raising and folding him in
his arms) the playfellow of my infancy -- the companion of my
youth! -- Is it to you then I am indebted for my life?' 'Heaven has
heard my prayer (said the other), and given me an opportunity to
prove myself not altogether unworthy of your clemency and
protection.' He then kissed the hand of the countess, while
monsieur de Melville saluted his wife and lovely daughter, and
all of us were greatly affected by this pathetic recognition.

In a word, Grieve was no other than Ferdinand count Fathom, whose
adventures were printed many years ago. Being a sincere convert
to virtue, he had changed his name, that he might elude the
enquiries of the count, whose generous allowance he determined to
forego, that he might have no dependence but upon his own
industry and moderation. He had accordingly settled in this
village as a practitioner in surgery and physic, and for some
years wrestled with all the miseries of indigence, which,
however, he and his wife had borne with the most exemplary
resignation. At length, by dint of unwearied attention to the
duties of his profession, which he exercised with equal humanity
and success, he had acquired tolerable share of business among
the farmers and common people, which enabled him to live in a
decent manner. He had been scarce ever seen to smile; was
unaffectedly pious; and all the time he could spare from the
avocations of his employment, he spent in educating his daughter,
and in studying for his own improvement. In short, the adventurer
Fathom was, under the name of Grieve, universally respected among
the commonalty of this district, as a prodigy of learning and
virtue. These particulars I learned from the vicar, when we
quitted the room, that they might be under no restraint in their
mutual effusions. I make no doubt that Grieve will be pressed to
leave off business, and re-unite himself to the count's family;
and as the countess seemed extremely fond of his daughter, she
will, in all probability, insist upon Seraphina's accompanying
her to Scotland.

Having paid our compliments to these noble persons, we returned
to the 'squire's, where we expected an invitation to pass the
night, which was wet and raw; but it seems, 'squire Burdock's
hospitality reached not so far for the honour of Yorkshire; we
therefore departed in the evening, and lay at an inn, where I
caught cold.

In hope of riding it down before it could take fast hold on my
constitution, I resolved to visit another relation, one Mr
Pimpernel, who lived about a dozen miles from the place where we
lodged. Pimpernel being the youngest of four sons, was bred an
attorney at Furnival's inn; but all his elder brothers dying, he
got himself called to the bar for the honour of his family, and
soon after this preferment, succeeded to his father's estate
which was very considerable. He carried home with him all the
knavish chicanery of the lowest pettifogger, together with a wife
whom he had purchased of a drayman for twenty pounds; and he soon
found means to obtain a dedimus as an acting justice of peace. He
is not only a sordid miser in his disposition, but his avarice is
mingled with a spirit of despotism, which is truly diabolical. --
He is a brutal husband, an unnatural parent, a harsh master, an
oppressive landlord, a litigious neighbour, and a partial
magistrate. Friends he has none; and in point of hospitality and
good breeding, our cousin Burdock is a prince in comparison of
this ungracious miscreant, whose house is the lively
representation of a gaol. Our
reception was suitable to the character I have sketched. Had it
depended upon the wife, we should have been kindly treated. -- She
is really a good sort of a woman, in spite of her low original,
and well respected in the country; but she has not interest
enough in her own house to command a draught of table beer, far
less to bestow any kind of education on her children, who run
about, like tagged colts, in a state of nature. -- Pox on him! he
is such a dirty fellow, that I have not patience to prosecute the
subject.

By that time we reached Harrigate, I began to be visited by
certain rheumatic symptoms. The Scotch lawyer, Mr Micklewhimmen,
recommended a hot bath of these waters so earnestly, that I was
over-persuaded to try the experiment. -- He had used it often with
success and always stayed an hour in the bath, which was a tub
filled with Harrigate water, heated for the purpose. If I could
hardly bear the smell of a single tumbler when cold, you may
guess how my nose was regaled by the streams arising from a hot
bath of the same fluid. At night, I was conducted into a dark
hole on the ground floor, where the tub smoaked and stunk like
the pot of Acheron, in one corner, and in another stood a dirty
bed provided with thick blankets, in which I was to sweat after
coming out of the bath. My heart seemed to die within me when I
entered this dismal bagnio, and found my brain assaulted by such
insufferable effluvia. I cursed Micklewhimmen for not considering
that my organs were formed on this side of the Tweed; but being
ashamed to recoil upon the threshold, I submitted to the process.

After having endured all but real suffocation for above a quarter
of an hour in the tub, I was moved to the bed and wrapped in
blankets. -- There I lay a full hour panting with intolerable heat;
but not the least moisture appearing on my skin, I was carried to
my own chamber, and passed the night without closing an eye, in
such a flutter of spirits as rendered me the most miserable
wretch in being. I should certainly have run distracted, if the
rarefaction of my blood, occasioned by that Stygian bath, had not
burst the vessels, and produced a violent haemorrhage, which,
though dreadful and alarming, removed the horrible disquiet -- I
lost two pounds of blood, and more, on this occasion; and find
myself still weak and languid; but, I believe, a little exercise
will forward my recovery, and therefore I am resolved to set out
to-morrow for York, in my way to Scarborough, where I propose to
brace up my fibres by sea-bathing, which, I know, is one of your
favourite specificks. There is, however, one disease, for which
you have found as yet no specific, and that is old age, of which
this tedious unconnected epistle is an infallible symptom: what,
therefore, cannot be cured, must be endured, by you, as well as
by

Yours,
MATT. BRAMBLE
HARRIGATE, June 26.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR KNIGHT,

The manner of living at Harrigate was so agreeable to my
disposition, that I left the place with some regret -- Our aunt
Tabby would have probably made some objection to our departing so
soon, had not an accident embroiled her with Mr Micklewhimmen,
the Scotch advocate, on whose heart she had been practising, from
the second day after our arrival -- That original, though seemingly
precluded from the use of his limbs, had turned his genius to
good account -- In short, by dint of groaning, and whining, he had
excited the compassion of the company so effectually, that an old
lady, who occupied the very best apartment in the house, gave it
up for his case and convenience. When his man led him into the
Long Room, all the females were immediately in commotion -- One set
an elbow-chair; another shook up the cushion; a third brought a
stool; and a fourth a pillow, for the accommodation of his feet --
Two ladies (of whom Tabby was always one) supported him into the
dining-room, and placed him properly at the table; and his taste
was indulged with a succession of delicacies, culled by their
fair hands. All this attention he repaid with a profusion of
compliments and benedictions, which were not the less agreeable
for being delivered in the Scottish dialect. As for Mrs Tabitha,
his respects were particularly addressed to her, and he did not
fail to mingle them with religious reflections, touching free
grace, knowing her bias to methodism, which he also professed
upon a calvinistical model.

For my part, I could not help thinking this lawyer was not such
an invalid as he pretended to be. I observed he ate very heartily
three times a day; and though his bottle was marked stomachic
tincture, he had recourse to it so often, and seemed to swallow
it with such peculiar relish, that I suspected it was not
compounded in the apothecary's shop, or the chemist's laboratory.
One day, while he was earnest in discourse with Mrs Tabitha, and
his servant had gone out on some occasion or other, I dexterously
exchanged the labels, and situation of his bottle and mine; and
having tasted his tincture, found it was excellent claret. I
forthwith handed it about me to some of my neighbours, and it was
quite emptied before Mr Micklewhimmen had occasion to repeat his
draught. At length, turning about, he took hold of my bottle,
instead of his own, and, filling a large glass, drank to the
health of Mrs Tabitha. It had scarce touched his lips, when he
perceived the change which had been put upon him, and was at
first a little out of countenance. He seemed to retire within
himself, in order to deliberate, and in half a minute his
resolution was taken; addressing himself to our quarter, 'I give
the gentleman credit for his wit (said he); it was a gude
practical joke; but sometimes hi joci in seria ducunt mala -- I
hope for his own sake he has na drank all the liccor; for it was
a vara poorful infusion of jallap in Bourdeaux wine; at its
possable he may ha ta'en sic a dose as will produce a terrible
catastrophe in his ain booels --'

By far the greater part of the contents had fallen to the share
of a young clothier from Leeds, who had come to make a figure at
Harrigate, and was, in effect a great coxcomb in his way. It was
with a view to laugh at his fellow-guests, as well as to mortify
the lawyer, that he had emptied the bottle, when it came to his
turn, and he had laughed accordingly: but now his mirth gave way
to his apprehension -- He began to spit, to make wry faces, and
writhe himself into various contorsions -- 'Damn the stuff! (cried
he) I thought it had a villainous twang -- pah! He that would cozen
a Scot, mun get oope betimes, and take Old Scratch for his
counsellor --' 'In troth mester what d'ye ca'um (replied the
lawyer), your wit has run you into a filthy puddle -- I'm truly
consarned for your waeful case -- The best advice I can give you,
in sic a delemma, is to send an express to Rippon for doctor
Waugh, without delay, and, in the mean time, swallow all the oil
and butter you can find in the hoose, to defend your poor stomach
and intastines from the villication of the particles of the
jallap, which is vara violent, even when taken in moderation.'

The poor clothier's torments had already begun: he retired,
roaring with pain, to his own chamber; the oil was swallowed, and
the doctor sent for; but before he arrived, the miserable patient
had made such discharges upwards and downwards, that nothing
remained to give him further offence; and this double evacuation,
was produced by imagination alone; for what he had drank was
genuine wine of Bourdeaux, which the lawyer had brought from
Scotland for his own private use. The clothier, finding the joke
turn out so expensive and disagreeable, quitted the house next
morning, leaving the triumph to Micklewhimmen, who enjoyed it
internally without any outward signs of exultation -- on the
contrary, he affected to pity the young man for what he had
suffered; and acquired fresh credit from this shew of moderation.

It was about the middle of the night, which succeeded this
adventure, that the vent of the kitchen chimney being foul, the
soot took fire, and the alarm was given in a dreadful manner.
Every body leaped naked out of bed, and in a minute the whole
house was filled with cries and confusion -- There was two stairs
in the house, and to these we naturally ran; but they were both
so blocked up, by the people pressing one upon another, that it
seemed impossible to pass, without throwing down and trampling
upon the women. In the midst of this anarchy, Mr Micklewhimmen,
with a leathern portmanteau on his back, came running as nimble
as a buck along the passage; and Tabby in her underpetticoat,
endeavouring to hook him under the arm, that she might escape
through his protection, he very fairly pushed her down, crying,
'Na, na, gude faith, charity begins at hame!' Without paying the
least respect to the shrieks and intreaties of his female
friends, he charged through the midst of the crowd, overturning
every thing that opposed him; and actually fought his way to the
bottom of the Stair-case -- By this time Clinker had found a ladder
by which he entered the window of my uncle's chamber, where our
family was assembled, and proposed that we should make our exit
successively by that conveyance. The 'squire exhorted his sister
to begin the descent; but, before she could resolve, her woman,
Mrs Winifred Jenkins, in a transport of terror, threw herself out at
the window upon the ladder, while Humphry dropped upon the
ground, that he might receive her in her descent -- This maiden was
just as she had started out of bed, the moon shone very bright,
and a fresh breeze of wind blowing, none of Mrs Winifred's
beauties could possibly escape the view of the fortunate Clinker,
whose heart was not able to withstand the united force of so many
charms; at least I am much mistaken, if he has not been her
humble slave from that moment -- He received her in his arms, and,
giving her his coat to protect her from the weather, ascended
again with admirable dexterity.

At that instant, the landlord of the house called out with an
audible voice, that the fire was extinguished, and the ladies had
nothing further to fear: this was a welcome note to the audience,
and produced an immediate effect; the shrieking ceased, and a
confused sound of expostulation ensued. I conducted Mrs Tabitha
and my sister to their own chamber, where Liddy fainted away; but
was soon brought to herself. Then I went to offer my services to
the other ladies, who might want assistance -- They were all
scudding through the passage to their several apartments; and as
the thoroughfair was lighted by two lamps, I had a pretty good
observation of them in their transit; but as most of them were
naked to the smock, and all their heads shrowded in huge
nightcaps, I could not distinguish one face from another, though
I recognized some of their voices -- These were generally
plaintive; some wept, some scolded, and some prayed -- I lifted up
one poor old gentlewoman, who had been overturned and sore
bruised by a multitude of feet; and this was also the case with
the lame person from Northumberland, whom Micklewhimmen had in
his passage overthrown, though not with impunity, for the
cripple, in falling, gave him such a good pelt on the head with
his crutch, that the blood followed.

As for this lawyer, he waited below till the hurly burly was
over, and then stole softly to his own chamber, from whence he
did not venture to make a second sally till eleven in the
forenoon, when he was led into the Public Room, by his own
servant and another assistant, groaning most woefully, with a
bloody napkin round his head. But things were greatly altered --
The selfish brutality of his behaviour on the stairs had steeled
their hearts against all his arts and address -- Not a soul offered
to accommodate him with a chair, cushion, or footstool; so that
he was obliged to sit down on a hard bench -- In that position, he
looked around with a rueful aspect, and, bowing very low, said in
a whining tone, 'Your most humble servant, ladies -- Fire is a
dreadful calamity' -- 'Fire purifies gold, and it ties friendship,'
cried Mrs Tabitha, bridling. 'Yea, madam (replied Micklewhimmen);
and it trieth discretion also' -- 'If discretion consists in
forsaking a friend in adversity, you are eminently possessed of
that virtue' (resumed our aunt). -- 'Na, madam (rejoined the
advocate), well I wot, I cannot claim any merit from the mode of
my retreat -- Ye'll please to observe, ladies, there are twa
independent principles that actuate our nature -- One is instinct,
which we have in common with the brute creation, and the other is
reason -- Noo, in certain great emergencies, when the faculty of
reason is suspended, instinct taks the lead, and when this
predominates, having no affinity with reason, it pays no sort of
regard to its connections; it only operates for the preservation
of the individual, and that by the most expeditious and effectual
means; therefore, begging your pardon, ladies, I'm no accountable
in foro conscientioe for what I did, while under the influence of
this irresistible pooer.'

Here my uncle interposing, 'I should be glad to know (said he),
whether it was instinct that prompted you to retreat with bag and
baggage; for, I think, you had a portmanteau on your shoulder'
The lawyer answered, without hesitation, 'Gif I might tell my
mind freely, withoot incuring the suspicion of presumption, I
should think it was something superior to either reason or
instinct which suggested that measure, and this on a twafold
accoont: in the first place, the portmanteau contained the
writings of a worthy nobleman's estate; and their being burnt
would have occasioned a loss that could not be repaired;
secondly, my good angel seems to have laid the portmanteau on my
shoulders, by way of defence, to sustain the violence of a most
inhuman blow, from the crutch of a reverend clergyman, which,
even in spite of that medium, hath wounded me sorely, even unto
the pericranium.' 'By your own doctrine (cried the parson, who
chanced to be present), I am not accountable for the blow, which
was the effect of instinct.' 'I crave your pardon, reverend sir
(said the other), instinct never acts but for the preservation of
the individual; but your preservation was out of the case -- you
had already received the damage, and therefore the blow must be
imputed to revenge, which is a sinful passion, that ill becomes
any Christian, especially a protestant divine; and let me tell
you, most reverend doctor, gin I had a mind to plea, the law
would hauld my libel relevant.' 'Why, the damage is pretty equal
on both sides (cried the parson); your head is broke, and my
crutch is snapt in the middle. Now, if you will repair the one, I
will be at the expence of curing the other.'

This sally raised the laugh against Micklewhimmen, who began to
look grave; when my uncle, in order to change the discourse,
observed, that instinct had been very kind to him in another
respect; for it had restored to him the use of his limbs, which,
in his exit, he had moved with surprising agility. -- He replied,
that it was the nature of fear to brace up the nerves; and
mentioned some surprising feats of strength and activity
performed by persons under the impulse of terror; but he
complained that in his own particular, the effects had ceased
when the cause was taken away -- The 'squire said, he would lay a
tea-drinking on his head, that he should dance a Scotch measure,
without making a false step; and the advocate grinning, called
for the piper -- A fidler being at hand, this original started up,
with his bloody napkin over his black tye-periwig, and acquitted
himself in such a manner as excited the mirth of the whole
company; but he could not regain the good graces of Mrs Tabby,
who did not understand the principle of instinct; and the lawyer
did not think it worth his while to proceed to further
demonstration.

From Harrigate, we came hither, by the way of York, and here we
shall tarry some days, as my uncle and Tabitha are both resolved
to make use of the waters. Scarborough, though a paltry town, is
romantic from its situation along a cliff that over-hangs the
sea. The harbour is formed by a small elbow of land that runs out
as a natural mole, directly opposite to the town; and on that
side is the castle, which stands very high, of considerable
extent, and, before the invention of gun-powder, was counted
impregnable. At the other end of Scarborough are two public rooms
for the use of the company, who resort to this place in the
summer to drink the waters and bathe in the sea; and the
diversions are pretty much on the same footing here as at Bath.
The Spa is a little way beyond the town, on this side, under a
cliff, within a few paces of the sea, and thither the drinkers go
every morning in dishabille; but the descent is by a great number
of steps, which invalids find very inconvenient. Betwixt the well
and the harbour, the bathing machines are ranged along the beach,
with all their proper utensils and attendants. You have never seen
one of these machines -- Image to yourself a small, snug, wooden
chamber, fixed upon a wheel-carriage, having a door at each end,
and on each side a little window above, a bench below -- The
bather, ascending into this apartment by wooden steps, shuts
himself in, and begins to undress, while the attendant yokes a
horse to the end next the sea, and draws the carriage forwards,
till the surface of the water is on a level with the floor of the
dressing-room, then he moves and fixes the horse to the other
end -- The person within being stripped, opens the door to the sea-ward,
where he finds the guide ready, and plunges headlong into
the water -- After having bathed, he re-ascends into the apartment,
by the steps which had been shifted for that purpose, and puts on
his clothes at his leisure, while the carriage is drawn back
again upon the dry land; so that he has nothing further to do,
but to open the door, and come down as he went up -- Should he be
so weak or ill as to require a servant to put off and on his
clothes, there is room enough in the apartment for half a dozen
people. The guides who attend the ladies in the water, are of
their own sex, and they and the female bathers have a dress of
flannel for the sea; nay, they are provided with other
conveniences for the support of decorum. A certain number of the
machines are fitted with tilts, that project from the sea-ward
ends of them, so as to screen the bathers from the view of all
persons whatsoever -- The beach is admirably adapted for this
practice, the descent being gently gradual, and the sand soft as
velvet; but then the machines can be used only at a certain time
of the tide, which varies every day; so that sometimes the
bathers are obliged to rise very early in the morning -- For my
part, I love swimming as an exercise, and can enjoy it at all
times of the tide, without the formality of an apparatus -- You and
I have often plunged together into the Isis; but the sea is a
much more noble bath, for health as well as pleasure. You cannot
conceive what a flow of spirits it gives, and how it braces every
sinew of the human frame. Were I to enumerate half the diseases
which are every day cured by sea-bathing, you might justly say
you had received a treatise, instead of a letter, from

Your affectionate friend
and servant,
J. MELFORD
SCARBOROUGH, July 1.




To Dr LEWIS.

I have not found all the benefit I expected at Scarborough, where
I have been these eight days -- From Harrigate we came hither by
the way of York, where we stayed only one day to visit the
Castle, the Minster and the Assembly-room. The first, which was
heretofore a fortress, is now converted to a prison, and is the
best, in all respects, I ever saw, at home or abroad -- It stands
in a high situation, extremely well ventilated; and has a
spacious area within the walls, for the health and convenience of
all the prisoners except those whom it is necessary to secure in
close confinement. Even these last have all the comforts that the
nature of their situation can admit. Here the assizes are held,
in a range of buildings erected for that purpose.

As for the Minster, I know not how to distinguish it, except by
its great size and the height of its spire, from those other
ancient churches in different parts of the kingdom, which used to
be called monuments of Gothic architecture; but it is now agreed,
that this stile is Saracen rather than Gothic; and, I suppose, it
was first imported into England from Spain, great part of which
was under the dominion of the Moors. Those British architects who
adopted this stile, don't seem to have considered the propriety
of their adoption. The climate of the country, possessed by the
Moors or Saracens, both in Africa and Spain, was so exceedingly
hot and dry, that those who built places of worship for the
multitude, employed their talents in contriving edifices that
should be cool; and, for this purpose, nothing could be better
adopted than those buildings, vast, narrow, dark, and lofty,
impervious to the sun-beams, and having little communication with
the scorched external atmosphere; but ever affording a refreshing
coolness, like subterranean cellars in the heats of summer, or
natural caverns in the bowels of huge mountains. But nothing
could be more preposterous, than to imitate such a mode of
architecture in a country like England, where the climate is
cold, and the air eternally loaded with vapours; and where, of
consequence, the builder's intention should be to keep the people
dry and warm -- For my part, I never entered the Abbey church at
Bath but once, and the moment I stept over the threshold, I found
myself chilled to the very marrow of my bones. When we consider,
that in our churches, in general, we breathe a gross stagnated
air, surcharged with damps from vaults, tombs, and charnel-houses,
may we not term them so many magazines of rheums, created
for the benefit of the medical faculty? and safely aver, that
more bodies are lost, than souls saved, by going to church, in
the winter especially, which may be said to engross eight months
in the year. I should be glad to know, what offence it would give
to tender consciences, if the house of God was made more
comfortable, or less dangerous to the health of valetudinarians;
and whether it would not be an encouragement to piety, as well as
the salvation of many lives, if the place of worship was well
floored, wainscotted, warmed, and ventilated, and its area kept
sacred from the pollution of the dead. The practice of burying in
churches was the effect of ignorant superstition, influenced by
knavish priests, who pretended that the devil could have no power
over the defunct if he was interred in holy ground; and this
indeed, is the only reason that can be given for consecrating all
cemeteries, even at this day.

The external appearance of an old cathedral cannot be but
displeasing to the eye of every man, who has any idea of
propriety or proportion, even though he may be ignorant of
architecture as a science; and the long slender spire puts one in
mind of a criminal impaled with a sharp stake rising up through
his shoulder -- These towers, or steeples, were likewise borrowed
from the Mahometans; who, having no bells, used such minarets for
the purpose of calling the people to prayers -- They may be of
further use, however, for making observations and signals; but I
would vote for their being distinct from the body of the church,
because they serve only to make the pile more barbarous, or
Saracenical.

There is nothing of this Arabic architecture in the Assembly
Room, which seems to me to have been built upon a design of
Palladio, and might be converted into an elegant place of
worship; but it is indifferently contrived for that sort of
idolatry which is performed in it at present: the grandeur of the
fane gives a diminutive effect to the little painted divinities
that are adorned in it, and the company, on a ball-night, must
look like an assembly of fantastic fairies, revelling by
moonlight among the columns of a Grecian temple.

Scarborough seems to be falling off, in point of reputation. All
these places (Bath excepted) have their vogue, and then the
fashion changes. I am persuaded, there are fifty spaws in England
as efficacious and salutary as that of Scarborough, though they
have not yet risen to fame; and, perhaps, never will, unless some
medical encomiast should find an interest in displaying their
virtues to the public view -- Be that as it may, recourse will
always be had to this place for the convenience of sea bathing,
while this practice prevails; but it were to be wished, they
would make the beach more accessible to invalids.

I have here met with my old acquaintance, H[ewet]t, whom you have
often heard me mention as one of the most original characters
upon earth -- I first knew him at Venice, and afterwards saw him in
different parts of Italy, where he was well known by the nick-name
of Cavallo Bianco, from his appearing always mounted on a
pale horse, like Death in the Revelations. You must remember the
account I once gave you of a curious dispute he had at
Constantinople, with a couple of Turks, in defence of the
Christian religion; a dispute from which he acquired the epithet
of Demonstrator -- The truth is, H-- owns no religion but that of
nature; but, on this occasion, he was stimulated to shew his
parts, for the honour of his country -- Some years ago, being in
the Campidoglio at Rome, he made up to the bust of Jupiter, and,
bowing very low, exclaimed in the Italian language, 'I hope, sir,
if ever you get your head above water again, you will remember
that I paid my respects to you in your adversity.' This sally was
reported to the cardinal Camerlengo, and by him laid before pope
Benedict XIV, who could not help laughing at the extravagance of
the address, and said to the cardinal, 'Those English heretics
think they have a right to go to the devil in their own way.'

Indeed H-- was the only Englishman I ever knew, who had
resolution enough to live in his own way, in the midst of
foreigners; for, neither in dress, diet, customs, or
conversation, did he deviate one tittle from the manner in which
he had been brought up. About twelve years ago, he began a Giro
or circuit, which he thus performed -- At Naples, where he fixed
his headquarters, he embarked for Marseilles, from whence he
travelled with a Voiturin to Antibes -- There he took his passage
to Genoa and Lerici; from which last place he proceeded, by the
way of Cambratina, to Pisa and Florence -- After having halted some
time in this metropolis, he set out with a Vetturino for Rome,
where he reposed himself a few weeks, and then continued his
route for Naples, in order to wait for the next opportunity of
embarkation -- After having twelve times described this circle, he
lately flew off at a tangent to visit some trees at his country-house
in England, which he had planted above twenty years ago,
after the plan of the double colonnade in the piazza of St
Peter's at Rome -- He came hither to Scarborough, to pay his
respects to his noble friend and former pupil, the M-- of G--,
and, forgetting that he is now turned of seventy, sacrificed so
liberally to Bacchus, that next day he was seized with a fit of
the apoplexy, which has a little impaired his memory; but he
retains all the oddity of his character in perfection, and is
going back to Italy by the way of Geneva, that he may have a
conference with his friend Voltaire, about giving the last blow
to the Christian superstition -- He intends to take shipping here
for Holland or Hamburgh; for it is a matter of great indifference
to him at what part of the continent he first lands.

When he was going abroad the last time, he took his passage in a
ship bound for Leghorn, and his baggage was actually embarked. In
going down the river by water, he was by mistake put on board of
another vessel under sail; and, upon inquiry understood she was
bound to Petersburgh -- 'Petersburgh, -- Petersburgh (said he) I
don't care if I go along with you.' He forthwith struck a bargain
with the captain; bought a couple of shirts of the mate, and was
safe conveyed to the court of Muscovy, from whence he travelled
by land to receive his baggage at Leghorn -- He is now more likely
than ever to execute a whim of the same nature; and I will hold
any wager, that as he cannot be supposed to live much longer,
according to the course of nature, his exit will be as odd as his
life has been extravagant.

[This gentleman crossed the sea to France, visited and conferred
with Mr de Voltaire at Fernay, resumed his old circuit at Genoa,
and died in 1767, at the house of Vanini in Florence. Being taken
with a suppression of urine, he resolved, in imitation of
Pomponius Atticus, to take himself off by abstinence; and this
resolution he executed like an ancient Roman. He saw company to
the last, cracked his jokes, conversed freely, and entertained
his guests with music. On the third day of his fast, he found
himself entirely freed of his complaint; but refused taking
sustenance. He said the most disagreeable part of the voyage was
past, and he should be a cursed fool indeed, to put about ship,
when he was just entering the harbour. In these sentiments he
persisted, without any marks of affectation, and thus finished
his course with such case and serenity, as would have done honour
to the firmest Stoic of antiquity.]

But, to return from one humourist to another, you must know I
have received benefit, both from the chalybeate and the sea, and
would have used them longer, had not a most ridiculous adventure,
by making me the town-talk, obliged me to leave the place; for I
can't bear the thoughts of affording a spectacle to the multitude
Yesterday morning, at six o'clock, I went down to the bathing-place,
attended by my servant Clinker, who waited on the beach as
usual -- The wind blowing from the north, and the weather being
hazy, the water proved so chill, that when I rose from my first
plunge, I could not help sobbing and bawling out, from the
effects of the cold. Clinker, who heard me cry, and saw me
indistinctly a good way without the guide, buffetting the waves,
took it for granted I was drowning, and rushing into the sea,
clothes and all, overturned the guide in his hurry to save his
master. I had swam out a few strokes, when hearing a noise, I
turned about and saw Clinker, already up to his neck, advancing
towards me, with all the wildness of terror in his aspect -- Afraid
he would get out of his depth, I made haste to meet him, when,
all of a sudden, he seized me by one ear, dragged me bellowing
with pain upon the dry beach, to the astonishment of all the
people, men, and women, and children there assembled.

I was so exasperated by the pain of my ear, and the disgrace of
being exposed in such an attitude, that, in the first transport I
struck him down; then, running back into the sea, took shelter in
the machine where my clothes had been deposited. I soon
recollected myself so far as to do justice to the poor fellow,
who, in great simplicity of heart, had acted from motives of
fidelity and affection -- Opening the door of the machine, which
was immediately drawn on shore, I saw him standing by the wheel,
dropping like a water-work, and trembling from head to foot;
partly from cold, and partly from the dread of having offended
his master -- I made my acknowledgments for the blow he had
received, assured him I was not angry, and insisted upon his
going home immediately, to shift his clothes; a command which he
could hardly find in his heart to execute, so well disposed was
he to furnish the mob with further entertainment at my expence.
Clinker's intention was laudable without all doubt, but,
nevertheless, I am a sufferer by his simplicity -- I have had a
burning heat, and a strange buzzing noise in that ear, ever since
it was so roughly treated; and I cannot walk the street without
being pointed at; as the monster that was hauled naked a-shore
upon the beach -- Well, I affirm that folly is often more provoking
than knavery, aye and more mischievous too; and whether a man had
not better choose a sensible rogue, than an honest simpleton for
his servant, is no matter of doubt with

Yours,
MATT. BRAMBLE
SCARBOROUGH, July 4.



To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR WAT,

We made a precipitate retreat from Scarborough, owing to the
excessive delicacy of our 'squire, who cannot bear the thoughts
of being proetereuntium digito monstratus.

One morning, while he was bathing in the sea, his man Clinker
took it in his head that his master was in danger of drowning;
and, in this conceit, plunging into the water, he lugged him out
naked on the beach, and almost pulled off his ear in the
operation. You may guess how this atchievement was relished by Mr
Bramble, who is impatient, irascible, and has the most
extravagant ideas of decency and decorum in the oeconomy of his
own person -- In the first ebullition of his choler, he knocked
Clinker down with his fist; but he afterwards made him amends for
his outrage, and, in order to avoid further notice of the people,
among whom this incident had made him remarkable, he resolved to
leave Scarborough next day.

We set out accordingly over the moors, by the way of Whitby, and
began our journey betimes, in hopes of reaching Stockton that
night; but in this hope we were disappointed -- In the afternoon,
crossing a deep gutter, made by a torrent, the coach was so hard
strained, that one of the irons, which connect the frame, snapt,
and the leather sling on the same side, cracked in the middle. The
shock was so great, that my sister Liddy struck her head against
Mrs Tabitha's nose with such violence that the blood flowed; and
Win. Jenkins was darted through a small window in that part of
the carriage next the horses, where she stuck like a bawd in the
pillory, till she was released by the hand of Mr Bramble. We were
eight miles distant from any place where we could be supplied
with chaises, and it was impossible to proceed with the coach,
until the damage should be repaired -- in this dilemma, we
discovered a blacksmith's forge on the edge of a small common,
about half a mile from the scene of our disaster, and thither the
postilions made shift to draw the carriage, slowly, while the
company walked a-foot; but we found the black-smith had been dead
some days; and his wife, who had been lately delivered, was
deprived of her senses, under the care of a nurse, hired by the
parish. We were exceedingly mortified at this disappointment,
which, however, was surmounted by the help of Humphry Clinker,
who is a surprising compound of genius and simplicity. Finding
the tools of the defunct, together with some coals in the smithy,
he unscrewed the damaged iron in a twinkling, and, kindling a
fire, united the broken pieces with equal dexterity and dispatch --
While he was at work upon this operation, the poor woman in the
straw, struck with the well-known sound of the hammer and anvil,
started up, and, notwithstanding all the nurse's efforts, came
running into the smithy, where, throwing her arms about Clinker's
neck, 'Ah, Jacob (cried she) how could you leave me in such a
condition?'

This incident was too pathetic to occasion mirth -- it brought
tears into the eyes of all present. The poor widow was put to bed
again; and we did not leave the village without doing something
for her benefit -- Even Tabitha's charity was awakened on this
occasion. As for the tender-hearted Humphry Clinker, he hammered
the iron and wept at the same time -- But his ingenuity was not
confined to his own province of farrier and black-smith -- It was
necessary to join the leather sling, which had been broke; and
this service he likewise performed, by means of a broken awl,
which he new-pointed and ground, a little hemp, which he spun
into lingels, and a few tacks which he made for the purpose. Upon
the whole, we were in a condition to proceed in little more than
an hour; but even this delay obliged us to pass the night at
Gisborough -- Next day we crossed the Tees at Stockton, which is a
neat agreeable town; and there we resolved to dine, with purpose
to lie at Durham.

Whom should we meet in the yard, when we alighted, but Martin the
adventurer? Having handed out the ladies, and conducted them into
an apartment, where he payed his compliments to Mrs Tabby, with
his usual address, he begged leave to speak to my uncle in
another room; and there, in some confusion, he made an apology
for having taken the liberty to trouble him with a letter at
Stevenage. He expressed his hope, that Mr Bramble had bestowed
some consideration on his unhappy case, and repeated his desire
of being taken into his service.

My uncle, calling me into the room, told him, that we were both
very well inclined to rescue him from a way of life that was
equally dangerous and dishonourable; and that he should have no
scruples in trusting to his gratitude and fidelity, if he had any
employment for him, which he thought would suit his
qualifications and his circumstances; but that all the
departments he had mentioned in his letter, were filled up by
persons of whose conduct he had no reason to complain; of
consequence he could not, without injustice, deprive any one of
them of his bread. Nevertheless, he declared himself ready to
assist him in any feasible project, either with his purse or
credit.

Martin seemed deeply touched at this declaration -- The tear
started in his eye, while he said, in a faultering accent --
'Worthy sir -- your generosity oppresses me -- I never dreamed of
troubling you for any pecuniary assistance -- indeed I have no
occasion -- I have been so lucky at billiards and betting in
different places, at Buxton, Harrigate, Scarborough, and
Newcastle races, that my stock in ready-money amounts to three
hundred pounds, which I would willingly employ, in prosecuting
some honest scheme of life; but my friend, justice Buzzard, has
set so many springs for my life, that I am under the necessity of
either retiring immediately to a remote part of the country,
where I can enjoy the protection of some generous patron, or of
quitting the kingdom altogether. It is upon this alternative that
I now beg leave to ask your advice. I have had information of all
your route, since I had the honour to see you at Stevenage; and,
supposing you would come this way from Scarborough, I came hither
last night from Darlington, to pay you my respects.'

'It would be no difficult matter to provide you with an asylum in
the country (replied my uncle); but a life of indolence and
obscurity would not suit with your active and enterprizing
disposition -- I would therefore advise you to try your fortune in
the East Indies -- I will give you a letter to a friend in London,
who will recommend you to the direction, for a commission in the
company's service; and if that cannot be obtained, you will at
least be received as a volunteer -- in which case, you may pay for
your passage, and I shall undertake to procure you such
credentials, that you will not be long without a commission.'

Martin embraced the proposal with great eagerness; it was
therefore resolved, that he should sell his horse, and take a
passage by sea for London, to execute the project without delay --
In the mean time he accompanied us to Durham, were we took up our
quarters for the night. Here, being furnished with letters from my
uncle, he took his leave of us, with strong symptoms of gratitude
and attachment, and set out for Sunderland, in order to embark in
the first collier, bound for the river Thames. He had not been
gone half an hour, when we were joined by another character,
which promised something extraordinary -- A tall, meagre figure,
answering, with his horse, the description of Don Quixote mounted
on Rozinante, appeared in the twilight at the inn door, while my
aunt and Liddy stood at a window in the dining-room -- He wore a
coat, the cloth of which had once been scarlet, trimmed with
Brandenburgs, now totally deprived of their metal, and he had
holstercaps and housing of the same stuff and same antiquity.
Perceiving ladies at the window above, he endeavoured to dismount
with the most graceful air he could assume; but the ostler
neglecting to hold the stirrup when he wheeled off his right
foot, and stood with his whole weight on the other, the girth
unfortunately gave way, the saddle turned, down came the cavalier
to the ground, and his hat and perriwig falling off, displayed a
head-piece of various colours, patched and plaistered in a woeful
condition -- The ladies, at the window above, shrieked with
affright, on the supposition that the stranger had received some
notable damages in his fall; but the greatest injury he had
sustained arose from the dishonour of his descent, aggravated by
the disgrace of exposing the condition of his cranium; for
certain plebeians that were about the door, laughed aloud, in the
belief that the captain had got either a scald head, or a broken
head, both equally opprobrious.

He forthwith leaped up in a fury, and snatching one of his
pistols, threatened to put the ostler to death, when another
squall from the women checked his resentment. He then bowed to
the window, while he kissed the butt-end of his pistol, which he
replaced; adjusted his wig in great confusion, and led his horse
into the stable -- By this time I had come to the door, and could
not help gazing at the strange figure that presented itself to my
view. He would have measured above six feet in height had he stood
upright; but he stooped very much; was very narrow in the
shoulders, and very thick in the calves of his legs, which were
cased in black spatterdashes -- As for his thighs, they were long
and slender, like those of a grasshopper; his face was, at least,
half a yard in length, brown and shrivelled, with projecting
cheek-bones, little grey eyes on the greenish hue, a large hook-nose,
a pointed chin, a mouth from ear to car, very ill furnished
with teeth, and a high, narrow fore-head, well furrowed with
wrinkles. His horse was exactly in the stile of its rider; a
resurrection of dry bones, which (as we afterwards learned) he
valued exceedingly, as the only present he had ever received in
his life.

Having seen this favourite steed properly accommodated in the
stable, he sent up his compliments to the ladies, begging
permission to thank them in person for the marks of concern they
had shewn at his disaster in the court yard -- As the 'squire said
they could not decently decline his visit, he was shewn up stairs
and paid his respects in the Scotch dialect, with much formality
'Leddies (said he), perhaps ye may be scandaleezed at the
appearance of my heed made, when it was uncovered by accident;
but I can assure you, the condition you saw it in, is neither the
effects of diseases, nor of drunkenness: but an honest scar
received in the service of my country.' He then gave us to
understand, that having been wounded at Ticonderoga, in America,
a party of Indians rifled him, scalped him, broke his scull with
the blow of a tomahawk, and left him for dead on the field of
battle; but that being afterwards found with signs of life, he
had been cured in the French hospital, though the loss of
substance could not be repaired; so that the scull was left naked
in several places, and these he covered with patches.

There is no hold by which an Englishman is sooner taken than that
of compassion -- We were immediately interested in behalf of this
veteran. Even Tabby's heart was melted; but our pity was warmed
with indignation, when we learned, that in the course of two
sanguinary wars, he had been wounded, maimed, mutilated, taken,
and enslaved, without ever having attained a higher rank than
that of lieutenant -- My uncle's eyes gleamed, and his nether lip
quivered, while he exclaimed, 'I vow to God, sir, your case is a
reproach to the service -- The injustice you have met with is so
flagrant' -- 'I must crave your pardon, sir (cried the other,
interrupting him), I complain of no injustice -- I purchased an
ensigncy thirty years ago; and, in the course of service rose to
a lieutenant, according to my seniority' -- 'But in such a length
of time (resumed the 'squire), you must have seen a great many
young officers put over your head' -- 'Nevertheless (said he), I
have no cause to murmur -- They bought their preferment with their
money -- I had no money to carry to market that was my misfortune;
but no body was to blame' -- 'What! no friend to advance a sum of
money?' (said Mr Bramble) 'Perhaps, I might have borrowed money
for the purchase of a company (answered the other); but that loan
must have been refunded; and I did not chuse to incumber myself
with a debt of a thousand pounds, to be payed from an income of
ten shillings a-day.' 'So you have spent the best part of your
life (cried Mr Bramble), your youth, your blood, and your
constitution, amidst the dangers, the difficulties, the horrors
and hardships of a war, for the consideration of three or four
shillings a-day a consideration --' 'Sir (replied the Scot, with
great warmth), you are the man that does me injustice, if you say
or think I have been actuated by any such paltry consideration -- I
am a gentleman; and entered the service as other gentlemen do,
with such hopes and sentiments as honourable ambition inspires --
If I have not been lucky in the lottery of life, so neither do I
think myself unfortunate -- I owe to no man a farthing; I can
always command a clean shirt, a mutton-chop, and a truss of
straw; and when I die, I shall leave effects sufficient to defray
the expence of my burial.'

My uncle assured him, he had no intention to give him the least
offence, by the observations he had made; but, on the contrary,
spoke from a sentiment of friendly regard to his interest -- The
lieutenant thanked him with a stiffness of civility, which
nettled our old gentleman, who perceived that his moderation was
all affected; for, whatsoever his tongue might declare, his whole
appearance denoted dissatisfaction -- In short, without pretending
to judge of his military merit, I think I may affirm, that this
Caledonian is a self-conceited pedant, aukward, rude, and
disputacious -- He has had the benefit of a school-education, seems
to have read a good number of books, his memory is tenacious, and
he pretends to speak several different languages; but he is so
addicted to wrangling, that he will cavil at the clearest truths,
and, in the pride of argumentation, attempt to reconcile
contradictions -- Whether his address and qualifications are really
of that stamp which is agreeable to the taste of our aunt, Mrs
Tabitha, or that indefatigable maiden is determined to shoot at
every sort of game, certain it is she has begun to practice upon
the heart of the lieutenant, who favoured us with his company to
supper.

I have many other things to say of this man of war, which I shall
communicate in a post or two; mean while, it is but reasonable
that you should be indulged with some respite from those weary
lucubrations of

Yours,
J. MELFORD
NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE, July 10.



To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

In my last I treated you with a high flavoured dish, in the
character of the Scotch lieutenant, and I must present him once
more for your entertainment. It was our fortune to feed upon him
the best part of three days; and I do not doubt that he will
start again in our way before we shall have finished our northern
excursion. The day after our meeting with him at Durham proved so
tempestuous that we did not choose to proceed on our journey; and
my uncle persuaded him to stay till the weather should clear up,
giving him, at the same time, a general invitation to our mess.
The man has certainly gathered a whole budget of shrewd
observations, but he brings them forth in such an ungracious
manner as would be extremely disgusting, if it was not marked by
that characteristic oddity which never fails to attract the
attention -- He and Mr Bramble discoursed, and even disputed, on
different subjects in war, policy, the belles lettres, law, and
metaphysics; and sometimes they were warmed into such altercation
as seemed to threaten an abrupt dissolution of their society; but
Mr Bramble set a guard over his own irascibility, the more
vigilantly as the officer was his guest; and when, in spite of
all his efforts, he began to wax warm, the other prudently cooled
in the same proportion.

Mrs Tabitha chancing to accost her brother by the familiar
diminutive of Matt, 'Pray, sir (said the lieutenant), 'is your
name Matthias?' You must know it is one of our uncle's foibles to
be ashamed of his name Matthew, because it is puritanical; and
this question chagrined him so much, that he answered, 'No, by G-d!'
in a very abrupt tone of displeasure. -- The Scot took umbrage
at the manner of his reply, and bristling up, 'If I had known
(said he) that you did not care to tell your name, I should not
have asked the question -- The leddy called you Matt, and I
naturally thought it was Matthias: -- perhaps, it may be
Methuselah, or Metrodorus, or Metellus, or Mathurinus, or
Malthinnus, or Matamorus, or --' 'No (cried my uncle laughing), it
is neither of those, captain: my name is Matthew Bramble, at,
your service. -- The truth is, have a foolish pique at the name of
Matthew, because it favours of those canting hypocrites, who, in
Cromwell's time, christened all their children by names taken
from the scripture.' 'A foolish pique indeed. (cried Mrs Tabby),
and even sinful, to fall out with your name because it is taken
from holy writ. -- I would have you to know, you was called after
great-uncle Matthew ap Madoc ap Meredith, esquire, of
Llanwysthin, in Montgomeryshire, justice of the quorum, and
crusty ruttleorum, a gentleman of great worth and property,
descended in a strait line, by the female side, from Llewellyn,
prince of Wales.'

This genealogical anecdote seemed to make some impression upon
the North-Briton, who bowed very low to the descendant of
Llewellyn, and observed that he himself had the honour of a
scriptural nomination. The lady expressing a desire of knowing
his address, he said, he designed himself Lieutenant Obadiah
Lismahago; and in order to assist her memory, he presented her
with a slip of paper inscribed with these three words, which she
repeated with great emphasis, declaring, it was one of the most
noble and sonorous names she had ever heard. He observed that
Obadiah was an adventitious appellation, derived from his great-
grandfather, who had been one of the original covenanters; but
Lismahago was the family surname, taken from a place in Scotland
so called. He likewise dropped some hints about the antiquity of
his pedigree, adding, with a smile of self-denial, Sed genus et
proavos, et quoe non fecimus ipsi, vix ea nostra voco, which
quotation he explained in deference to the ladies; and Mrs
Tabitha did not fail to compliment him on his modesty in waving
the merit of his ancestry, adding, that it was the less necessary
to him, as he had such a considerable fund of his own. She now
began to glew herself to his favour with the grossest adulation. --
She expatiated upon the antiquity and virtues of the Scottish
nation, upon their valour, probity, learning, and politeness. She
even descended to encomiums on his own personal address, his
gallantry, good sense, and erudition. -- She appealed to her
brother, whether the captain was not the very image of our cousin
governor Griffith. She discovered a surprising eagerness to know
the particulars of his life, and asked a thousand questions
concerning his atchievements in war; all which Mr Lismahago
answered with a sort of jesuitical reserve, affecting a
reluctance to satisfy her curiosity on a subject that concerned
his own exploits.

By dint of her interrogations, however, we learned, that he and
ensign Murphy had made their escape from the French hospital at
Montreal, and taken to the woods, in hope of reaching some
English settlement; but mistaking their route, they fell in with
a party of Miamis, who carried them away in captivity. The
intention of these Indians was to give one of them as an adopted
son to a venerable sachem, who had lost his own in the course of
the war, and to sacrifice the other according to the custom of
the country. Murphy, as being the younger and handsomer of the
two, was designed to fill the place of the deceased, not only as
the son of the sachem, but as the spouse of a beautiful squaw, to
whom his predecessor had been betrothed; but in passing through
the different whigwhams or villages of the Miamis, poor Murphy
was so mangled by the women and children, who have the privilege
of torturing all prisoners in their passage, that, by the time
they arrived at the place of the sachem's residence, he was
rendered altogether unfit for the purposes of marriage: it was
determined therefore, in the assembly of the warriors, that
ensign Murphy should be brought to the stake, and that the lady
should be given to lieutenant Lismahago, who had likewise
received his share of torments, though they had not produced
emasculation. -- A joint of one finger had been cut, or rather
sawed off with a rusty knife; one of his great toes was crushed
into a mash betwixt two stones; some of his teeth were drawn, or
dug out with a crooked nail; splintered reeds had been thrust up
his nostrils and other tender parts; and the calves of his legs
had been blown up with mines of gunpowder dug in the flesh with
the sharp point of the tomahawk.

The Indians themselves allowed that Murphy died with great
heroism, singing, as his death song, the Drimmendoo, in concert
with Mr Lismahago, who was present at the solemnity. After the
warriors and the matrons had made a hearty meal upon the muscular
flesh which they pared from the victim, and had applied a great
variety of tortures, which he bore without flinching, an old
lady, with a sharp knife, scooped out one of his eyes, and put a
burning coal in the socket. The pain of this operation was so
exquisite that he could not help bellowing, upon which the
audience raised a shout of exultation, and one of the warriors
stealing behind him, gave him the coup de grace with a hatchet.

Lismahago's bride, the squaw Squinkinacoosta, distinguished
herself on this occasion. -- She shewed a great superiority of
genius in the tortures which she contrived and executed with her
own hands. -- She vied with the stoutest warrior in eating the
flesh of the sacrifice; and after all the other females were
fuddled with dram-drinking, she was not so intoxicated but that
she was able to play the game of the platter with the conjuring
sachem, and afterwards go through the ceremony of her own
wedding, which was consummated that same evening. The captain had
lived very happily with this accomplished squaw for two years,
during which she bore him a son, who is now the representative of
his mother's tribe; but, at length, to his unspeakable grief, she
had died of a fever, occasioned by eating too much raw bear,
which they had killed in a hunting excursion.

By this time, Mr Lismahago was elected sachem, acknowledged first
warrior of the Badger tribe, and dignified with the name or
epithet of Occacanastaogarora, which signifies nimble as a
weasel; but all these advantages and honours he was obliged to
resign, in consequence of being exchanged for the orator of the
community, who had been taken prisoner by the Indians that were
in alliance with the English. At the peace, he had sold out upon
half pay, and was returned to Britain, with a view to pass the
rest of his life in his own country, where he hoped to find some
retreat where his slender finances would afford him a decent
subsistence. Such are the outlines of Mr Lismahago's history, to
which Tabitha did seriously incline her ear; -- indeed, she seemed
to be taken with the same charms that captivated the heart of
Desdemona, who loved the Moor for the dangers he had past.

The description of poor Murphy's sufferings, which threw my
sister Liddy into a swoon, extracted some sighs from the breast
of Mrs Tabby: when she understood he had been rendered unfit for
marriage, she began to spit, and ejaculated, 'Jesus, what cruel
barbarians!' and she made wry faces at the lady's nuptial repast;
but she was eagerly curious to know the particulars of her
marriage-dress; whether she wore high-breasted stays or bodice, a
robe of silk or velvet, and laces of Mechlin or minionette -- she
supposed, as they were connected with the French, she used rouge,
and had her hair dressed in the Parisian fashion. The captain
would have declined giving a catagorical explanation of all these
particulars, observing, in general, that the Indians were too
tenacious of their own customs to adopt the modes of any nation
whatsoever; he said, moreover, that neither the simplicity of
their manners nor the commerce of their country, would admit of
those articles of luxury which are deemed magnificence in Europe;
and that they were too virtuous and sensible to encourage the
introduction of any fashion which might help to render them
corrupt and effeminate.

These observations served only to inflame her desire of knowing
the particulars about which she had enquired; and, with all his
evasion, he could not help discovering the following
circumstances -- that his princess had neither shoes, stockings,
shift, nor any kind of linen -- that her bridal dress consisted of
a petticoat of red bays, and a fringed blanket, fastened about
her shoulders with a copper skewer; but of ornaments she had
great plenty. -- Her hair was curiously plaited, and interwoven
with bobbins of human bone -- one eye-lid was painted green, and
the other yellow; the cheeks were blue, the lips white, the teeth
red, and there was a black list drawn down the middle of the
forehead as far as the tip of the nose -- a couple of gaudy
parrot's feathers were stuck through the division of the
nostrils -- there was a blue stone set in the chin, her ear-rings
consisted of two pieces of hickery, of the size and shape of
drum-sticks -- her arms and legs were adorned with bracelets of
wampum -- her breast glittered with numerous strings of glass
beads -- she wore a curious pouch, or pocket of woven grass,
elegantly painted with various colours -- about her neck was hung
the fresh scalp of a Mohawk warrior, whom her deceased lover had
lately slain in battle -- and, finally, she was anointed from head
to foot with bear's grease, which sent forth a most agreeable
odour.

One would imagine that these paraphernalia would not have been
much admired by a modern fine lady; but Mrs Tabitha was resolved
to approve of all the captains connexions. -- She wished, indeed,
the squaw had been better provided with linen; but she owned
there was much taste and fancy in her ornaments; she made no
doubt, therefore, that madam Squinkinacoosta was a young lady of
good sense and rare accomplishments, and a good christian at
bottom. Then she asked whether his consort had been high church
or low-church, presbyterian or anabaptist, or had been favoured
with any glimmering of the new light of the gospel? When he
confessed that she and her whole nation were utter strangers to
the christian faith, she gazed at him with signs of astonishment,
and Humphry Clinker, who chanced to be in the room, uttered a
hollow groan.

After some pause, 'In the name of God, captain Lismahago (cried
she), what religion do they profess?' 'As to religion, madam
(answered the lieutenant), it is among those Indians a matter of
great simplicity -- they never heard of any Alliance between Church
and State. -- They, in general, worship two contending principles;
one the Fountain of all Good, the other the source of all evil.
The common people there, as in other countries, run into the
absurdities of superstition; but sensible men pay adoration to a
Supreme Being, who created and sustains the universe.' 'O! what
pity (exclaimed the pious Tabby), that some holy man has not been
inspired to go and convert these poor heathens!'

The lieutenant told her, that while he resided among them, two
French missionaries arrived, in order to convert them to the
catholic religion; but when they talked of mysteries and
revelations, which they could neither explain nor authenticate,
and called in the evidence of miracles which they believed upon
hearsay; when they taught that the Supreme Creator of Heaven and
Earth had allowed his only Son, his own equal in power and glory,
to enter the bowels of a woman, to be born as a human creature,
to be insulted, flagellated, and even executed as a malefactor;
when they pretended to create God himself, to swallow, digest,
revive, and multiply him ad infinitum, by the help of a little
flour and water, the Indians were shocked at the impiety of their
presumption. -- They were examined by the assembly of the sachems
who desired them to prove the divinity of their mission by some
miracle. -- They answered, that it was not in their power. -- 'If you
were really sent by Heaven for our conversion (said one of the
sachems), you would certainly have some supernatural endowments,
at least you would have the gift of tongues, in order to explain
your doctrine to the different nations among which you are
employed; but you are so ignorant of our language, that you
cannot express yourselves even on the most trifling subjects.' In
a word, the assembly were convinced of their being cheats, and
even suspected them of being spies: they ordered them a bag of
Indian corn apiece, and appointed a guide to conduct them to the
frontiers; but the missionaries having more zeal than discretion,
refused to quit the vineyard. -- They persisted in saying mass, in
preaching, baptizing, and squabbling with the conjurers, or
priests of the country, till they had thrown the whole community
into confusion. -- Then the assembly proceeded to try them as
impious impostors, who represented the Almighty as a trifling,
weak, capricious being, and pretended to make, unmake, and
reproduce him at pleasure; they were, therefore, convicted of
blasphemy and sedition, and condemned to the stale, where they
died singing Salve regina, in a rapture of joy, for the crown of
martyrdom which they had thus obtained.

In the course of this conversation, lieutenant Lismahago dropt
some hints by which it appeared he himself was a free-thinker.
Our aunt seemed to be startled at certain sarcasms he threw out
against the creed of saint Athanasius -- He dwelt much upon the
words, reason, philosophy, and contradiction in terms -- he bid
defiance to the eternity of hell-fire; and even threw such squibs
at the immortality of the soul, as singed a little the whiskers
of Mrs Tabitha's faith; for, by this time she began to look upon
Lismahago as a prodigy of learning and sagacity. -- In short, he
could be no longer insensible to the advances she made towards
his affection; and although there was something repulsive in his
nature, he overcame it so far as to make some return to her
civilities. -- Perhaps, he thought it would be no bad scheme, in a
superannuated lieutenant on half-pay, to effect a conjunction
with an old maid, who, in all probability, had fortune enough to
keep him easy and comfortable in the fag-end of his days -- An
ogling correspondence forthwith commenced between this amiable
pair of originals -- He began to sweeten the natural acidity of his
discourse with the treacle of compliment and commendation -- He
from time to time offered her snuff, of which he himself took
great quantities, and even made her a present of a purse of silk
grass, woven by the hands of the amiable Squinkinacoosta, who had
used it as a shot-pouch in her hunting expeditions.

From Doncaster northwards, all the windows of all the inns are
scrawled with doggeral rhimes, in abuse of the Scotch nation; and
what surprised me very much, I did not perceive one line written
in the way of recrimination -- Curious to hear what Lismahago would
say on this subject, I pointed out to him a very scurrilous
epigram against his countrymen, which was engraved on one of the
windows of the parlour where we sat. -- He read it with the most
starched composure; and when I asked his opinion of the poetry,
'It is vara terse and vara poignant (said he); but with the help
of a wat dish-clout, it might be rendered more clear and
parspicuous. -- I marvel much that some modern wit has not
published a collection of these essays under the title of the
Glaziers Triumph over Sawney the Scot -- I'm persuaded it would be
a vara agreeable offering to the patriots of London and
Westminster.' When I expressed some surprize that the natives of
Scotland, who travel this way, had not broke all the windows upon
the road, 'With submission (replied the lieutenant), that were
but shallow policy -- it would only serve to make the satire more
cutting and severe; and I think it is much better to let it stand
in the window, than have it presented in the reckoning.'

My uncle's jaws began to quiver with indignation. -- He said, the
scribblers of such infamous stuff deserved to be scourged at the
cart's tail for disgracing their country with such monuments of
malice and stupidity. -- 'These vermin (said he) do not consider,
that they are affording their fellow subjects, whom they abuse,
continual matter of self-gratulation, as well as the means of
executing the most manly vengeance that can be taken for such
low, illiberal attacks. For my part, I admire the philosophic
forbearance of the Scots, as much as I despise the insolence of
those wretched libellers, which is akin to the arrogance of the
village cock, who never crows but upon his own dunghill.' The
captain, with an affectation of candour, observed, that men of
illiberal minds were produced in every soil; that in supposing
those were the sentiments of the English in general, he should
pay too great a compliment to is own country, which was not of
consequence enough to attract the envy of such a flourishing and
powerful people.

Mrs Tabby broke forth again in praise of his moderation, and
declared that Scotland was the soil which produced every virtue
under heaven. When Lismahago took his leave for the night, she
asked her brother if the captain was not the prettiest gentleman
he had ever seen; and whether there was not something wonderfully
engaging in his aspect? -- Mr Bramble having eyed her sometime in
silence, 'Sister (said he), the lieutenant is, for aught I know,
an honest man and a good officer -- he has a considerable share of
understanding, and a title to more encouragement than he seems to
have met with in life; but I cannot, with a safe conscience,
affirm, that he is the prettiest gentleman I ever saw; neither
can I descern any engaging charm in his countenance, which, I vow
to God, is, on the contrary, very hard-favoured and forbidding.'

I have endeavoured to ingratiate myself with this North-Briton,
who is really a curiosity; but he has been very shy of my
conversation ever since I laughed at his asserting that the
English tongue was spoke with more propriety at Edinburgh than at
London. Looking at me with a double squeeze of souring in his
aspect, 'If the old definition be true (said he), that risibility
is the distinguishing characteristic of a rational creature, the
English are the most distinguished for rationality of any people
I ever knew.' I owned, that the English were easily struck with
any thing that appeared ludicrous, and apt to laugh accordingly;
but it did not follow, that, because they were more given to
laughter, they had more rationality than their neighbours: I
said, such an inference would be an injury to the Scots, who were
by no means defective in rationality, though generally supposed
little subject to the impressions of humour.

The captain answered, that this supposition must have been
deduced either from their conversation or their compositions, of
which the English could not possibly judge with precision, as
they did not understand the dialect used by the Scots in common
discourse, as well as in their works of humour. When I desired to
know what those works of humour were, he mentioned a considerable
number of pieces, which he insisted were equal in point of humour
to any thing extant in any language dead or living -- He, in
particular, recommended a collection of detached poems, in two
small volumes, intituled, The Ever-Green, and the works of Allan
Ramsay, which I intend to provide myself with at Edinburgh. -- He
observed, that a North-Briton is seen to a disadvantage in an
English company, because he speaks in a dialect that they can't
relish, and in a phraseology which they don't understand. -- He
therefore finds himself under a restraint, which is a great enemy
to wit and humour. -- These are faculties which never appear in
full lustre, but when the mind is perfectly at ease, and, as an
excellent writer says, enjoys her elbow-room.

He proceeded to explain his assertion that the English language
was spoken with greater propriety at Edinburgh than in London. He
said, what we generally called the Scottish dialect was, in fact,
true, genuine old English, with a mixture of some French terms
and idioms, adopted in a long intercourse betwixt the French and
Scotch nations; that the modern English, from affectation and
false refinement, had weakened, and even corrupted their
language, by throwing out the guttural sounds, altering the
pronunciation and the quantity, and disusing many words and terms
of great significance. In consequence of these innovations, the
works of our best poets, such as Chaucer, Spenser, and even
Shakespeare, were become, in many parts, unintelligible to the
natives of South Britain, whereas the Scots, who retain the
antient language, understand them without the help of a glossary.
'For instance (said he), how have your commentators been puzzled
by the following expression in the Tempest -- He's gentle and not
fearful: as if it was a paralogism to say, that being gentle, he
must of course be courageous: but the truth is, one of the
original meanings, if not the sole meaning, of that word was,
noble, high-minded; and to this day, a Scotch woman, in the
situation of the young lady in the Tempest, would express herself
nearly in the same terms -- Don't provoke him; for being gentle,
that is, high-spirited, he won't tamely bear an insult. Spenser,
in the very first stanza of his Fairy Queen, says,

A gentle knight was pricking on the plain;

which knight, far from being tame and fearful, was so stout that

Nothing did he dread, but ever was ydrad.

To prove that we had impaired the energy of our language by false
refinement, he mentioned the following words, which, though
widely different in signification, are pronounced exactly in the
same manner wright, write, right, rite; but among the Scots,
these words are as different in pronunciation, as they are in
meaning and orthography; and this is the case with many others
which he mentioned by way of illustration. -- He, moreover, took
notice, that we had (for what reason he could never learn)
altered the sound of our vowels from that which is retained by
all the nations in Europe; an alteration which rendered the
language extremely difficult to foreigners, and made it almost
impracticable to lay down general rules for orthography and
pronunciation. Besides, the vowels were no longer simple sounds
in the mouth of an Englishman, who pronounced both i and u as
dipthongs. Finally, he affirmed, that we mumbled our speech with
our lips and teeth, and ran the words together without pause or
distinction, in such a manner, that a foreigner, though he
understood English tolerably well, was often obliged to have
recourse to a Scotchman to explain what a native of England had
said in his own language.

The truth of this remark was confirmed by Mr Bramble from his own
experience; but he accounted for it on another principle. He
said, the same observation would hold in all languages; that a
Swiss talking French was more easily understood than a Parisian,
by a foreigner who had not made himself master of the language;
because every language had its peculiar recitative, and it would
always require more pains, attention, and practice, to acquire
both the words and the music, than to learn the words only; and
yet no body would deny, that the one was imperfect without the
other: he therefore apprehended, that the Scotchman and the Swiss
were better understood by learners, because they spoke the words
only, without the music, which they could not rehearse. One would
imagine this check might have damped the North Briton; but it
served only to agitate his humour for disputation. -- He said, if
every nation had its own recitative or music, the Scots had
theirs, and the Scotchman who had not yet acquired the cadence of
the English, would naturally use his own in speaking their
language; therefore, if he was better understood than the native,
his recitative must be more intelligible than that of the
English; of consequence, the dialect of the Scots had an
advantage over that of their fellow-subjects, and this was
another strong presumption that the modern English had corrupted
their language in the article of pronunciation.

The lieutenant was, by this time, become so polemical, that every
time he opened his mouth out flew a paradox, which he maintained
with all the enthusiasm of altercation; but all his paradoxes
favoured strong of a partiality for his own country. He undertook
to prove that poverty was a blessing to a nation; that oatmeal
was preferable to wheat-flour; and that the worship of Cloacina,
in temples which admitted both sexes, and every rank of votaries
promiscuously, was a filthy species of idolatry that outraged
every idea of delicacy and decorum. I did not so much wonder at
his broaching these doctrines, as at the arguments, equally
whimsical and ingenious, which he adduced in support of them.

In fine, lieutenant Lismahago is a curiosity which I have not yet
sufficiently perused; and therefore I shall be sorry when we lose
his company, though, God knows, there is nothing very amiable in
his manner or disposition. -- As he goes directly to the south-west
division of Scotland, and we proceed in the road to Berwick, we
shall part tomorrow at a place called Feltonbridge; and, I dare
say, this separation will be very grievous to our aunt Mrs
Tabitha, unless she has received some flattering assurance of his
meeting her again. If I fail in my purpose of entertaining you
with these unimportant occurrences, they will at least serve as
exercises of patience, for which you are indebted to


Yours always,
J. MELFORD
MORPETH, July 13.



To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DOCTOR,

I have now reached the northern extremity of England, and see,
close to my chamber-window, the Tweed gliding through the arches
of that bridge which connects this suburb to the town of
Berwick. -- Yorkshire you have seen, and therefore I shall say
nothing of that opulent province. The city of Durham appears like
a confused heap of stones and brick, accumulated so as to cover a
mountain, round which a river winds its brawling course. The
Streets are generally narrow, dark, and unpleasant, and many of
them almost impassible in consequence of their declivity. The
cathedral is a huge gloomy pile; but the clergy are well lodged. --
The bishop lives in a princely manner -- the golden prebends keep
plentiful tables -- and, I am told, there is some good sociable
company in the place; but the country, when viewed from the top
of Gateshead-Fell, which extends to Newcastle, exhibits the
highest scene of cultivation that ever I beheld. As for
Newcastle, it lies mostly in a bottom, on the banks of the Tyne,
and makes an appearance still more disagreeable than that of
Durham; but it is rendered populous and rich by industry and
commerce; and the country lying on both sides the river, above
the town, yields a delightful prospect of agriculture and
plantation. Morpeth and Alnwick are neat, pretty towns, and this
last is famous for the castle which has belonged so many ages to
the noble house of Piercy, earls of Northumberland. -- It is,
doubtless, a large edifice, containing a great number of
apartments, and stands in a commanding  situation; but the
strength of it seems to have consisted not so much in its site,
or the manner in which it is fortified, as in the valour of its
defendants.

Our adventures since we left Scarborough, are scarce worth
reciting; and yet I must make you acquainted with my sister
Tabby's progress in husband-hunting, after her disappointments at
Bath and London. She had actually begun to practise upon a
certain adventurer, who was in fact a highwayman by profession;
but he had been used to snares much more dangerous than any she
could lay, and escaped accordingly. Then she opened her batteries
upon an old weather-beaten Scotch lieutenant, called Lismahago,
who joined us at Durham, and is, I think, one of the most
singular personages I ever encountered -- His manner is as harsh as
his countenance; but his peculiar turn of thinking, and his pack
of knowledge made up of the remnants of rarities, rendered his
conversation desirable, in spite of his pedantry and ungracious
address. I have often met with a crab-apple in a hedge, which I
have been tempted to eat for its flavour, even while I was
disgusted by its austerity. The spirit of contradiction is
naturally so strong in Lismahago, that I believe in my conscience
he has rummaged, and read, and studied with indefatigable
attention, in order to qualify himself to refute established
maxims, and thus raise trophies for the gratification of
polemical pride. -- Such is the asperity of his self-conceit, that
he will not even acquiesce in a transient compliment made to his
own individual in particular, or to his country in general.

When I observed, that he must have read a vast number of books to
be able to discourse on such a variety of subjects, he declared
he had read little or nothing, and asked how he should find books
among the woods of America, where he had spent the greatest part
of his life. My nephew remarking that the Scots in general were
famous for their learning, he denied the imputation, and defied
him to prove it from their works -- 'The Scots (said he) have a
slight tincture of letters, with which they make a parade among
people who are more illiterate than themselves; but they may be
said to float on the surface of science, and they have made very
small advances in the useful arts.' 'At least (cried Tabby), all
the world allows that the Scots behaved gloriously in fighting
and conquering the savages of America.' 'I can assure you, madam,
you have been misinformed (replied the lieutenant); in that
continent the Scots did nothing more than their duty, nor was
there one corps in his majesty's service that distinguished
itself more than another. -- Those who affected to extol the Scots
for superior merit, were no friends to that nation.'

Though he himself made free with his countrymen, he would not
suffer any other person to glance a sarcasm at them with
impunity. One of the company chancing to mention lord B--'s
inglorious peace, the lieutenant immediately took up the cudgels
in his lordship's favour, and argued very strenuously to prove
that it was the most honourable and advantageous peace that
England had ever made since the foundation of the monarchy. -- Nay,
between friends, he offered such reasons on this subject, that I
was really confounded, if not convinced. -- He would not allow that
the Scots abounded above their proportion in the army and navy of
Great-Britain, or that the English had any reason to say his
countrymen had met with extraordinary encouragement in the
service. 'When a South and North-Briton (said he) are competitors
for a place or commission, which is in the disposal of an English
minister or an English general, it would be absurd to suppose
that the preference will not be given to the native of England,
who has so many advantages over his rival. -- First and foremost,
he has in his favour that laudable partiality, which, Mr Addison
says, never fails to cleave to the heart of an Englishman; secondly,
he has more powerful connexions, and a greater share of parliamentary
interest, by which those contests are generally decided; and
lastly, he has a greater command of money to smooth the way to
his success. For my own part (said he), I know no Scotch officer,
who has risen in the army above the rank of a subaltern, without
purchasing every degree of preferment either with money or
recruits; but I know many gentlemen of that country, who, for
want of money and interest, have grown grey in the rank of
lieutenants; whereas very few instances of this ill-fortune are
to be found among the natives of South-Britain. -- Not that I would
insinuate that my countrymen have the least reason to complain.
Preferment in the service, like success in any other branch of
traffic, will naturally favour those who have the greatest stock
of cash and credit, merit and capacity being supposed equal on
all sides.'

But the most hardy of all this original's positions were these:
That commerce would, sooner or later, prove the ruin of every
nation, where it flourishes to any extent -- that the parliament
was the rotten part of the British constitution -- that the liberty
of the press was a national evil -- and that the boasted
institution of juries, as managed in England, was productive of
shameful perjury and flagrant injustice. He observed, that
traffick was an enemy to all the liberal passions of the soul,
founded on the thirst of lucre, a sordid disposition to take
advantage of the necessities of our fellow creatures. -- He
affirmed, the nature of commerce was such, that it could not be
fixed or perpetuated, but, having flowed to a certain height,
would immediately begin to ebb, and so continue till the
channels should be left almost dry; but there was no instance of
the tide's rising a second time to any considerable influx in the
same nation. Mean while the sudden affluence occasioned by trade,
forced open all the sluices of luxury and overflowed the land
with every species of profligacy and corruption; a total pravity
of manners would ensue, and this must be attended with bankruptcy
and ruin. He observed of the parliament, that the practice of
buying boroughs, and canvassing for votes, was an avowed system
of venality, already established on the ruins of principle,
integrity, faith, and good order, in consequence of which the
elected and the elector, and, in short, the whole body of the
people, were equally and universally contaminated and corrupted.
He affirmed, that of a parliament thus constituted, the crown
would always have influence enough to secure a great majority in
its dependence, from the great number of posts, places, and
pensions it had to bestow; that such a parliament would (as it
had already done) lengthen the term of its sitting and authority,
whenever the prince should think it for his interest to continue
the representatives, for, without doubt, they had the same right
to protect their authority ad infinitum, as they had to extend it
from three to seven years. -- With a parliament, therefore,
dependent upon the crown, devoted to the prince, and supported by
a standing army, garbled and modelled for the purpose, any king
of England may, and probably some ambitious sovereign will,
totally overthrow all the bulwarks of the constitution; for it is
not to be supposed that a prince of high spirit will tamely
submit to be thwarted in all his measures, abused and insulted by
a populace of unbridled ferocity, when he has it in his power to
crush all opposition under his feet with the concurrence of the
legislature. He said, he should always consider the liberty of
the press as a national evil, while it enabled the vilest reptile
to soil the lustre of the most shining merit, and furnished the
most infamous incendiary with the means of disturbing the peace
and destroying the good order of the community. He owned,
however, that under due restrictions, it would be a valuable
privilege; but affirmed, that at present there was no law in
England sufficient to restrain it within proper bounds.

With respect to juries, he expressed himself to this effect: --
juries are generally composed of illiterate plebeians, apt to be
mistaken, easily misled, and open to sinister influence; for if
either of the parties to be tried, can gain over one of the
twelve jurors, he has secured the verdict in his favour; the
juryman thus brought over will, in despight of all evidence and
conviction, generally hold out till his fellows are fatigued, and
harassed, and starved into concurrence; in which case the verdict
is unjust, and the jurors are all perjured: but cases will often
occur, when the jurors are really divided in opinion, and each
side is convinced in opposition to the other; but no verdict will
be received, unless they are unanimous, and they are all bound,
not only in conscience, but by oath, to judge and declare
according to their conviction. -- What then will be the
consequence? -- They must either starve in company, or one side
must sacrifice their conscience to their convenience, and join in
a verdict which they believe to be false. This absurdity is
avoided in Sweden, where a bare majority is sufficient; and in
Scotland, where two thirds of the jury are required to concur in
the verdict.

You must not imagine that all these deductions were made on his
part, without contradictions on mine. -- No -- the truth is, I found
myself piqued in point of honour, at his pretending to be so much
wiser than his neighbours. -- I questioned all his assertions,
started innumerable objections, argued and wrangled with uncommon
perseverance, and grew very warm, and even violent, in the
debate. -- Sometimes he was puzzled, and once or twice, I think,
fairly refuted; but from those falls he rose again, like Antaeus,
with redoubled vigour, till at length I was tired, exhausted, and
really did not know how to proceed, when luckily he dropped a
hint, by which he discovered he had been bred to the law; a
confession which enabled me to retire from the dispute with a
good grace, as it could not be supposed that a man like me, who
had been bred to nothing, should be able to cope with a veteran
in his own profession. I believe, however, that I shall for some
time continue to chew the cud of reflection upon many
observations which this original discharged.

Whether our sister Tabby was really struck with his conversation,
or is resolved to throw at every thing she meets in the shape of
a man, till she can fasten the matrimonial noose, certain it is,
she has taken desperate strides towards the affection of
Lismahago, who cannot be said to have met her half way, though he
does not seem altogether insensible to her civilities. -- She
insinuated more than once how happy we should be to have his
company through that part of Scotland which we proposed to visit,
till at length he plainly told us, that his road was totally
different from that which we intended to take; that, for his
part, his company would be of very little service to us in our
progress, as he was utterly unacquainted with the country, which
he had left in his early youth, consequently, he could neither
direct us in our enquiries, nor introduce us to any family of
distinction. He said, he was stimulated by an irresistible
impulse to revisit the paternus lar, or patria domus, though he
expected little satisfaction, inasmuch as he understood that his
nephew, the present possessor, was but ill qualified to support
the honour of the family. -- He assured us, however, as we design
to return by the west road, that he will watch our motions, and
endeavour to pay his respects to us at Dumfries. -- Accordingly he
took his leave of us at a place half way betwixt Morpeth and
Alnwick, and pranced away in great state, mounted on a tall,
meagre, raw-boned, shambling grey gelding, without e'er a tooth
in his head, the very counter-part of the rider; and, indeed, the
appearance of the two was so picturesque, that I would give
twenty guineas to have them tolerably presented on canvas.

Northumberland is a fine county, extending to the Tweed, which is
a pleasant pastoral stream; but you will be surprised when I tell
you that the English side of that river is neither so well
cultivated nor so populous as the other. -- The farms are thinly
scattered, the lands uninclosed, and scarce a gentleman's seat
is to be seen in some miles from the Tweed; whereas the Scots are
advanced in crowds to the very brink of the river, so that you
may reckon above thirty good houses, in the compass of a few
miles, belonging to proprietors whose ancestors had fortified
castles in the same situations, a circumstance that shews what
dangerous neighbours the Scots must have formerly been to the
northern counties of England.

Our domestic oeconomy continues on the old footing. -- My sister
Tabby still adheres to methodism, and had the benefit of a sermon
at Wesley's meeting in Newcastle; but I believe the Passion of
love has in some measure abated the fervour of devotion both in
her and her woman, Mrs Jenkins, about whose good graces there has
been a violent contest betwixt my nephew's valet, Mr Dutton, and
my man, Humphry Clinker. -- Jery has been obliged to interpose his
authority to keep the peace, and to him I have left the
discussion of that important affair, which had like to have
kindled the flames of discord in the family of

Yours always,
MATT. BRAMBLE
TWEEDMOUTH, July 15.



To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. at Oxon.

DEAR WAT,

In my two last you had so much of Lismahago, that I suppose you
are glad he is gone off the stage for the present. -- I must now
descend to domestic occurrences. -- Love, it seems, is resolved to
assert his dominion over all the females of our family. -- After
having practised upon poor Liddy's heart, and played strange
vagaries with our aunt Mrs Tabitha, he began to run riot in the
affections of her woman, Mrs Winifred Jenkins, whom I have had
occasion to mention more than once in the course of our memoirs.
Nature intended Jenkins for something very different from the
character of her mistress; yet custom and habit have effected a
wonderful resemblance betwixt them in many particulars. Win, to
be sure, is much younger and more agreeable in her person; she is
likewise tender-hearted and benevolent, qualities for which her
mistress is by no means remarkable, no more than she is for being
of a timorous disposition, and much subject to fits of the
mother, which are the infirmities of Win's constitution: but then
she seems to have adopted Mrs Tabby's manner with her cast
cloaths. -- She dresses and endeavours to look like her mistress,
although her own looks are much more engaging. -- She enters into
her scheme of oeconomy, learns her phrases, repeats her remarks,
imitates her stile in scolding the inferior servants, and,
finally, subscribes implicitly to her system of devotion. -- This,
indeed, she found the more agreeable, as it was in a great
measure introduced and confirmed by the ministry of Clinker, with
whose personal merit she seems to have been struck ever since he
exhibited the pattern of his naked skin at Marlborough.

Nevertheless, though Humphry had this double hank upon her
inclinations, and exerted all his power to maintain the conquest
he had made, he found it impossible to guard it on the side of
vanity, where poor Win was as frail as any female in the kingdom.
In short, my rascal Dutton professed himself her admirer, and, by
dint of his outlandish qualifications, threw his rival Clinker
out of the saddle of her heart. Humphry may be compared to an
English pudding, composed of good wholesome flour and suet, and
Dutton to a syllabub or iced froth, which, though agreeable to
the taste, has nothing solid or substantial. The traitor not only
dazzled her, with his second-hand finery, but he fawned, and
flattered, and cringed -- he taught her to take rappee, and
presented her with a snuff-box of papier mache -- he supplied her
with a powder for her teeth -- he mended her complexion, and he
dressed her hair in the Paris fashion -- he undertook to be her
French master and her dancing-master, as well as friseur, and
thus imperceptibly wound himself into her good graces. Clinker
perceived the progress he had made, and repined in secret. -- He
attempted to open her eyes in the way of exhortation, and finding
it produced no effect had recourse to prayer. At Newcastle, while
he attended Mrs Tabby to the methodist meeting his rival
accompanied Mrs Jenkins to the play. He was dressed in a silk
coat, made at Paris for his former master, with a tawdry
waistcoat of tarnished brocade; he wore his hair in a great bag
with a huge solitaire, and a long sword dangled from his thigh.
The lady was all of a flutter with faded lutestring, washed
gauze, and ribbons three times refreshed; but she was most
remarkable for the frisure of her head, which rose, like a
pyramid, seven inches above the scalp, and her face was primed
and patched from the chin up to the eyes; nay, the gallant
himself had spared neither red nor white in improving the nature
of his own complexion. In this attire, they walked together
through the high street to the theatre, and as they passed for
players ready dressed for acting, they reached it unmolested; but
as it was still light when they returned, and by that time the
people had got information of their real character and condition,
they hissed and hooted all the way, and Mrs Jenkins was all
bespattered with dirt, as well as insulted with the opprobrious
name of painted Jezabel, so that her fright and mortification
threw her into an hysteric fit the moment she came home.

Clinker was so incensed at Dutton, whom he considered as the
cause of her disgrace, that he upbraided him severely for having
turned the poor woman's brain. The other affected to treat him
with contempt, and mistaking his forbearance for want of courage,
threatened to horse-whip him into good manners. Humphry then came
to me, humbly begging I would give him leave to chastise my
servant for his insolence -- 'He has challenged me to fight him at
sword's point (said he); but I might as well challenge him to
make a horse-shoe, or a plough iron; for I know no more of the
one than he does of the other. -- Besides, it doth not become
servants to use those weapons, or to claim the privilege of
gentlemen to kill one another when they fall out; moreover, I
would not have his blood upon my conscience for ten thousand
times the profit or satisfaction I should get by his death; but
if your honour won't be angry, I'll engage to gee 'en a good
drubbing, that, may hap, will do 'en service, and I'll take care
it shall do 'en no harm.' I said, I had no objection to what he
proposed, provided he could manage matters so as not to be found
the aggressor, in case Dutton should prosecute him for an assault
and battery.

Thus licensed, he retired; and that same evening easily provoked
his rival to strike the first blow, which Clinker returned with
such interest that he was obliged to call for quarter, declaring,
at the same time, that he would exact severe and bloody
satisfaction the moment we should pass the border, when he could
run him through the body without fear of the consequence. -- This
scene passed in presence of lieutenant Lismahago, who encouraged
Clinker to hazard a thrust of cold iron with his antagonist.
'Cold iron (cried Humphry) I shall never use against the life of
any human creature; but I am so far from being afraid of his cold
iron, that I shall use nothing in my defence but a good cudgel,
which shall always be at his service.' In the mean time, the fair
cause of this contest, Mrs Winifred Jenkins, seemed overwhelmed
with affliction, and Mr Clinker acted much on the reserve, though
he did not presume to find fault with her conduct.

The dispute between the two rivals was soon brought to a very
unexpected issue. Among our fellow-lodgers at Berwick, was a
couple from London, bound to Edinburgh, on the voyage of
matrimony. The female was the daughter and heiress of a
pawnbroker deceased, who had given her guardians the slip, and
put herself under the tuition of a tall Hibernian, who had
conducted her thus far in quest of a clergyman to unite them in
marriage, without the formalities required by the law of England.
I know not how the lover had behaved on the road, so as to
decline in the favour of his inamorata; but, in all probability,
Dutton perceived a coldness on her side, which encouraged him to
whisper, it was a pity she should have cast affections upon a
taylor, which he affirmed the Irishman to be. This discovery
completed her disgust, of which my man taking the advantage,
began to recommend himself to her good graces, and the smooth-tongued
rascal found no difficulty to insinuate himself into the
place of her heart, from which the other had been discarded --
Their resolution was immediately taken. In the morning, before
day, while poor Teague lay snoring a-bed, his indefatigable rival
ordered a post-chaise, and set out with the lady for Coldstream,
a few miles up the Tweed, where there was a parson who dealt in
this branch of commerce, and there they were noosed, before the
Irishman ever dreamt of the matter. But when he got up at six
o'clock, and found the bird was flown, he made such a noise as
alarmed the whole house. One of the first persons he encountered,
was the postilion returned from Coldstream, where he had been
witness to the marriage, and over and above an handsome gratuity,
had received a bride's favour, which he now wore in his cap -- When
the forsaken lover understood they were actually married, and set
out for London; and that Dutton had discovered to the lady, that
he (the Hibernian) was a taylor, he had like to have run
distracted. He tore the ribbon from the fellow's cap, and beat it
about his ears. He swore he would pursue him to the gates of
hell, and ordered a post-chaise and four to be got ready as soon
as possible; but, recollecting that his finances would not admit
of this way of travelling, he was obliged to countermand this
order.

For my part, I knew nothing at all of what had happened, till the
postilion brought me the keys of my trunk and portmanteau, which
he had received from Dutton, who sent me his respects, hoping I
would excuse him for his abrupt departure, as it was a step upon
which his fortune depended. Before I had time to make my uncle
acquainted with this event, the Irishman burst into my chamber,
without any introduction, exclaiming, -- 'By my soul, your sarvant
has robbed me of five thousand pounds, and I'll have
satisfaction, if I should be hanged tomorrow.' -- When I asked him
who he was, 'My name (said he) is Master Macloughlin but it
should be Leighlin Oneale, for I am come from Tir-Owen the Great;
and so I am as good a gentleman as any in Ireland; and that
rogue, your sarvant, said I was a taylor, which was as big a lie
as if he had called me the pope -- I'm a man of fortune, and have
spent all I had; and so being in distress, Mr Coshgrave, the
fashioner in Shuffolk-street, tuck me out, and made me his own
private shecretary: by the same token, I was the last he bailed;
for his friends obliged him to tie himself up, that he would bail
no more above ten pounds; for why, becaase as how, he could not
refuse any body that asked, and therefore in time would have
robbed himself of his whole fortune, and, if he had lived long at
that rate, must have died bankrupt very soon and so I made my
addresses to Miss Skinner, a young lady of five thousand pounds
fortune, who agreed to take me for better nor worse; and, to be
sure, this day would have put me in possession, if it had not
been for that rogue, your sarvant, who came like a tief, and
stole away my property, and made her believe I was a taylor; and
that she was going to marry the ninth part of a man: but the
devil burn my soul, if ever I catch him on the mountains of
Tulloghobegly, if I don't shew him that I'm nine times as good a
man as he, or e'er a bug of his country.'

When he had rung out his first alarm, I told him I was sorry he
had allowed himself to be so jockied; but it was no business of
mine; and that the fellow who robbed him of his bride, had
likewise robbed me of my servant -- 'Didn't I tell you then (cried
he) that Rogue was his true Christian name. -- Oh if I had but one
fair trust with him upon the sod, I'd give him lave to brag all
the rest of his life.'

My uncle hearing the noise, came in, and being informed of this
adventure, began to comfort Mr Oneale for the lady's elopement;
observing that he seemed to have had a lucky escape, that it was
better she should elope before, than after marriage -- The
Hibernian was of a very different opinion. He said, 'If he had
been once married, she might have eloped as soon as she pleased;
he would have taken care that she should not have carried her
fortune along with her -- Ah (said he) she's a Judas Iscariot, and
has betrayed me with a kiss; and, like Judas, she carried the
bag, and has not left me money enough to bear my expences back to
London; and so I'm come to this pass, and the rogue that was the
occasion of it has left you without a sarvant, you may put me in
his place; and by Jasus, it is the best thing you can do.' -- I
begged to be excused, declaring I could put up with any
inconvenience, rather than treat as a footman the descendant of
Tir-Owen the Great. I advised him to return to his friend, Mr
Cosgrave, and take his passage from Newcastle by sea, towards
which I made him a small present, and he retired, seemingly
resigned to his evil fortune. I have taken upon trial a
Scotchman, called Archy M'Alpin, an old soldier, whose last
master, a colonel, lately died at Berwick. The fellow is old and
withered; but he has been recommended to me for his fidelity, by
Mrs Humphreys, a very good sort of a woman, who keeps the inn at
Tweedmouth, and is much respected by all the travellers on this
road.

Clinker, without doubt, thinks himself happy in the removal of a
dangerous rival, and he is too good a Christian, to repine at
Dutton's success. Even Mrs Jenkins will have reason to
congratulate herself upon this event, when she cooly reflects
upon the matter; for, howsoever she was forced from her poise for
a season, by snares laid for her vanity, Humphry is certainly the
north-star to which the needle of her affection would have
pointed at the long run. At present, the same vanity is
exceedingly mortified, upon finding herself abandoned by her new
admirer, in favour of another inamorata. She received the news
with a violent burst of laughter, which soon brought on a fit of
crying; and this gave the finishing blow to the patience of her
mistress, which had held out beyond all expectation. She now
opened all those floodgates of reprehension, which had been shut
so long. She not only reproached her with her levity and
indiscretion, but attacked her on the score of religion,
declaring roundly that she was in a state of apostacy and
reprobation; and finally, threatened to send her a packing at
this extremity of the kingdom. All the family interceded for poor
Winifred, not even excepting her slighted swain, Mr Clinker, who,
on his knees, implored and obtained her pardon.

There was, however, another consideration that gave Mrs Tabitha
some disturbance. At Newcastle, the servants had been informed by
some wag, that there was nothing to eat in Scotland, but oat-meal
and sheep's-heads; and lieutenant Lismahago being consulted, what
he said served rather to confirm than to refute the report. Our
aunt being apprised of this circumstance, very gravely
advised her brother to provide a sumpter horse with store of
hams, tongues, bread, biscuit, and other articles for our
subsistence, in the course of our peregrination, and Mr Bramble
as gravely replied, that he would take the hint into
consideration: but, finding no such provision was made, she now
revived the proposal, observing that there was a tolerable market
at Berwick, where we might be supplied; and that my man's horse
would serve as a beast of burthen -- The 'squire, shrugging his
shoulders, eyed her askance with a look of ineffable contempt:
and, after some pause, 'Sister (said he), I can hardly persuade
myself you are serious.' She was so little acquainted with the
geography of the island, that she imagined we could not go to
Scotland but by sea; and, after we had passed through the town of
Berwick, when he told her we were upon Scottish ground, she could
hardly believe the assertion -- If the truth must be told, the
South Britons in general are woefully ignorant in this
particular. What, between want of curiosity, and traditional
sarcasms, the effect of ancient animosity, the people at the
other end of the island know as little of Scotland as of Japan.

If I had never been in Wales, I should have been more struck with
the manifest difference in appearance betwixt the peasants and
commonalty on different sides of the Tweed. The boors of
Northumberland are lusty fellows, fresh complexioned, cleanly,
and well cloathed; but the labourers in Scotland are generally
lank, lean, hard-featured, sallow, soiled, and shabby, and their
little pinched blue caps have a beggarly effect. The cattle are
much in the same stile with their drivers, meagre, stunted, and
ill equipt. When I talked to my uncle on this subject, he said,
'Though all the Scottish hinds would not bear to be compared with
those of the rich counties of South Britain, they would stand
very well in competition with the peasants of France, Italy, and
Savoy -- not to mention the mountaineers of Wales, and the red-shanks
of Ireland.'

We entered Scotland by a frightful moor of sixteen miles, which
promises very little for the interior parts of the kingdom; but
the prospect mended as we advanced. Passing through Dunbar, which
is a neat little town, situated on the sea-side, we lay at a
country inn, where our entertainment far exceeded our
expectation; but for this we cannot give the Scots credit, as the
landlord is a native of England. Yesterday we dined at
Haddington, which has been a place of some consideration, but is
now gone to decay; and in the evening arrived at this metropolis,
of which I can say very little. It is very romantic, from its
situation on the declivity of a hill, having a fortified castle
at the top, and a royal palace at the bottom. The first thing
that strikes the nose of a stranger, shall be nameless; but what
first strikes the eye, is the unconscionable height of the
houses, which generally rise to five, six, seven, and eight
stories, and, in some places (as I am assured), to twelve. This
manner of building, attended with numberless inconveniences, must
have been originally owing to want of room. Certain it is, the
town seems to be full of people: but their looks, their language,
and their customs, are so different from ours, that I can hardly
believe myself in Great-Britain.

The inn at which we put up (if it may be so called) was so filthy
and disagreeable in all respects, that my uncle began to fret,
and his gouty symptoms to recur -- Recollecting, however, that he
had a letter of recommendation to one Mr Mitchelson, a lawyer, he
sent it by his servant, with a compliment, importing that we
would wait upon him next day in person; but that gentleman
visited us immediately, and insisted upon our going to his own
house, until he could provide lodgings for our accommodation. We
gladly accepted, of his invitation, and repaired to his house,
where we were treated with equal elegance and hospitality, to the
utter confusion of our aunt, whose prejudices, though beginning
to give way, were not yet entirely removed. To-day, by the
assistance of our friend, we are settled in convenient lodgings,
up four pair of stairs, in the High-street, the fourth story
being, in this city, reckoned more genteel than the first. The
air is, in all probability, the better; but it requires good
lungs to breathe it at this distance above the surface of the
earth. -- While I do remain above it, whether higher or lower,
provided I breathe at all,


I shall ever be,
Dear Phillips, yours,
J. MELFORD
July 18.



To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR LEWIS,

That part of Scotland contiguous to Berwick, nature seems to have
intended as a barrier between two hostile nations. It is a brown
desert of considerable extent, that produces nothing but heath
and fern; and what rendered it the more dreary when we passed,
there was a thick fog that hindered us from seeing above twenty
yards from the carriage -- My sister began to make wry faces, and
use her smelling-bottle; Liddy looked blank, and Mrs Jenkins
dejected; but in a few hours these clouds were dissipated; the
sea appeared upon our right, and on the left the mountains
retired a little, leaving an agreeable plain betwixt them and the
beach; but, what surprised us all, this plain, to the extent of
several miles, was covered with as fine wheat as ever I saw in
the most fertile parts of South Britain -- This plentiful crop is
raised in the open field, without any inclosure, or other manure
than the alga marina, or seaweed, which abounds on this coast; a
circumstance which shews that the soil and climate are
favourable; but that agriculture in this country is not yet
brought to that perfection which it has attained in England.
Inclosures would not only keep the grounds warm, and the several
fields distinct, but would also protect the crop from the high
winds, which are so frequent in this part of the island.

Dunbar is well situated for trade, and has a curious bason, where
ships of small burthen may be perfectly secure; but there is
little appearance of business in the place -- From thence, all the
way to Edinburgh, there is a continual succession of fine seats,
belonging to noblemen and gentlemen; and as each is surrounded by
its own parks and plantation, they produce a very pleasing effect
in a country which lies otherwise open and exposed. At Dunbar
there is a noble park, with a lodge, belonging to the Duke of
Roxburgh, where Oliver Cromwell had his head-quarters, when
Lesley, at the head of a Scotch army, took possession of the
mountains in the neighbourhood, and hampered him in such a
manner, that he would have been obliged to embark and get away by
sea, had not the fanaticism of the enemy forfeited the advantage
which they had obtained by their general's conduct -- Their
ministers, by exhortation, prayer, assurance, and prophecy,
instigated them to go down and slay the Philistines in Gilgal,
and they quitted their ground accordingly, notwithstanding all
that Lesley could do to restrain the madness of their enthusiasm --
When Oliver saw them in motion, he exclaimed, 'Praised be the
Lord, he hath delivered them into the hands of his servant!' and
ordered his troops to sing a psalm of thanksgiving, while they
advanced in order to the plain, where the Scots were routed with
great slaughter.

In the neighbourhood of Haddington, there is a gentleman's house,
in the building of which, and the improvements about it, he is
said to have expended forty thousand pounds: but I cannot say I
was much pleased with either the architecture or the situation;
though it has in front a pastoral stream, the banks of which are
laid out in a very agreeable manner. I intended to pay my
respects to Lord Elibank, whom I had the honour to know at London
many years ago. He lives in this part of Lothian; but was gone to
the North, on a visit -- You have often heard me mention this
nobleman, whom I have long revered for his humanity and universal
intelligence, over and above the entertainment arising from
originality of his character -- At Musselburgh, however, I had the
good-fortune to drink tea with my old friend Mr Cardonel; and at
his house I met with Dr C--, the parson of the parish, whose
humour and conversation inflamed me with a desire of being better
acquainted with his person -- I am not at all surprised that these
Scots make their way in every quarter of the globe.

This place is but four miles from Edinburgh, towards which we
proceeded along the sea-shore, upon a firm bottom of smooth sand,
which the tide had left uncovered in its retreat -- Edinburgh, from
this avenue, is not seen to much advantage -- We had only an
imperfect view of the Castle and upper parts of the town, which
varied incessantly according to the inflexions of the road, and
exhibited the appearance of detached spires and turrets,
belonging to some magnificent edifice in ruins. The palace of
Holyrood house stands on the left, as you enter the Canon-gate --
This is a street continued from hence to the gate called Nether
Bow, which is now taken away; so that there is no interruption
for a long mile, from the bottom to the top of the hill on which
the castle stands in a most imperial situation -- Considering its
fine pavement, its width, and the lofty houses on each side, this
would be undoubtedly one of the noblest streets in Europe, if an
ugly mass of mean buildings, called the Lucken-Booths, had not
thrust itself, by what accident I know not, into the middle of
the way, like Middle-Row in Holborn. The city stands upon two
hills, and the bottom between them; and, with all its defects,
may very well pass for the capital of a moderate kingdom. -- It is
full of people, and continually resounds with the noise of
coaches and other carriages, for luxury as well as commerce. As
far as I can perceive, here is no want of provisions -- The beef
and mutton are as delicate here as in Wales; the sea affords
plenty of good fish; the bread is remarkably fine; and the water
is excellent, though I'm afraid not in sufficient quantity to
answer all the purposes of cleanliness and convenience; articles
in which, it must be allowed, our fellow-subjects are a little
defective -- The water is brought in leaden pipes from a mountain
in the neighbourhood, to a cistern on the Castle-hill, from
whence it is distributed to public conduits in different parts of
the city. From these it is carried in barrels, on the backs of
male and female porters, up two, three, four, five, six, seven,
and eight pairs of stairs, for the use of particular families --
Every story is a complete house, occupied by a separate family;
and the stair being common to them all, is generally left in a
very filthy condition; a man must tread with great circumspection
to get safe housed with unpolluted shoes -- Nothing can form a
stronger contrast, than the difference betwixt the outside and
inside of the door, for the good-women of this metropolis are
remarkably nice in the ornaments and propriety of their
apartments, as if they were resolved to transfer the imputation
from the individual to the public. You are no stranger to their
method of discharging all their impurities from their windows, at
a certain hour of the night, as the custom is in Spain, Portugal,
and some parts of France and Italy -- A practice to which I can by
no means be reconciled; for notwithstanding all the care that is
taken by their scavengers to remove this nuisance every morning
by break of day, enough still remains to offend the eyes, as well
as other organs of those whom use has not hardened against all
delicacy of sensation.

The inhabitants seem insensible to these impressions, and are apt
to imagine the disgust that we avow is little better than
affectation; but they ought to have some compassion for
strangers, who have not been used to this kind of sufferance; and
consider, whether it may not be worth while to take some pains to
vindicate themselves from the reproach that, on this account,
they bear among their neighbours. As to the surprising height of
their houses, it is absurd in many respects; but in one
particular light I cannot view it without horror; that is, the
dreadful situation of all the families above, in case the common
staircase should be rendered impassable by a fire in the lower
stories -- In order to prevent the shocking consequences that must
attend such an accident, it would be a right measure to open
doors of communication from one house to another, on every story,
by which the people might fly from such a terrible visitation. In
all parts of the world, we see the force of habit prevailing over
all the dictates of convenience and sagacity. All the people of
business at Edinburgh, and even the genteel company, may be seen
standing in crowds every day, from one to two in the afternoon,
in the open street, at a place where formerly stood a market-cross,
which (by the bye) was a curious piece of Gothic
architecture, still to be seen in lord Sommerville's garden in
this neighbourhood -- I say, the people stand in the open street
from the force of custom, rather than move a few yards to an
Exchange that stands empty on one side, or to the Parliament-close
on the other, which is a noble square adorned with a fine
equestrian statue of king Charles II. -- The company thus
assembled, are entertained with a variety of tunes, played upon a
set of bells, fixed in a steeple hard by -- As these bells are
well-toned, and the musician, who has a salary from the city, for
playing upon them with keys, is no bad performer, the
entertainment is really agreeable, and very striking to the ears
of a stranger.

The public inns of Edinburgh are still worse than those of
London; but by means of a worthy gentleman, to whom I was
recommended, we have got decent lodgings in the house of a widow
gentlewoman of the name of Lockhart; and here I shall stay until
I have seen every thing that is remarkable in and about this
capital. I now begin to feel the good effects of exercise -- I eat
like a farmer, sleep from mid-night till eight in the morning
without interruption, and enjoy a constant tide of spirits,
equally distant from inanition and excess; but whatever ebbs or
flows my constitution may undergo, my heart will still declare
that I am,

Dear Lewis,
Your affectionate friend and servant,
MATT. BRAMBLE
EDR. July 18.



To Mrs MARY JONES, at Brambleton-hall.

DEAR MARY,

The 'squire has been so kind as to rap my bit of nonsense under
the kiver of his own sheet -- O, Mary Jones! Mary Jones! I have had
trials and trembulation. God help me! I have been a vixen and a
griffin these many days -- Sattin has had power to temp me in the
shape of van Ditton, the young 'squire's wally de shamble; but by
God's grease he did not purvail -- I thoft as how, there was no arm
in going to a play at Newcastle, with my hair dressed in the
Parish fashion; and as for the trifle of paint, he said as how my
complexion wanted touch, and so I let him put it on with a little
Spanish owl; but a mischievous mob of colliers, and such
promiscous ribble rabble, that could bare no smut but their own,
attacked us in the street, and called me hoar and painted
Issabel, and splashed my close, and spoiled me a complete set of
blond lace triple ruffles, not a pin the worse for the ware -- They
cost me seven good sillings, to lady Griskin's woman at London.

When I axed Mr Clinker what they meant by calling me Issabel, he
put the byebill into my hand, and I read of van Issabel a painted
harlot, that vas thrown out of a vindore, and the dogs came and
licked her blood. But I am no harlot; and, with God's blessing, no
dog shall have my poor blood to lick: marry, Heaven forbid, amen!
As for Ditton, after all his courting, and his compliment, he
stole away an Irishman's bride, and took a French leave of me and
his master; but I vally not his going a farting; but I have had
hanger on his account -- Mistriss scoulded like mad; thof I have
the comfit that all the family took my part, and even Mr Clinker
pleaded for me on his bended knee; thof, God he knows, he had
raisins enuff to complain; but he's a good sole, abounding with
Christian meekness, and one day will meet with his reward.

And now, dear Mary, we have got to Haddingborrough, among the
Scots, who are civil enuff for our money, thof I don't speak
their lingo -- But they should not go for to impose upon
foreigners; for the bills in their houses say, they have
different easements to let; and behold there is nurro geaks in
the whole kingdom, nor any thing for poor sarvants, but a barrel
with a pair of tongs thrown a-cross; and all the chairs in the
family are emptied into this here barrel once a-day; and at ten
o'clock at night the whole cargo is flung out of a back windore
that looks into some street or lane, and the maids calls gardy
loo to the passengers which signifies Lord have mercy upon you!
and this is done every night in every house in Haddingborrough;
so you may guess, Mary Jones, what a sweet savour comes from such
a number of profuming pans; but they say it is wholesome, and,
truly, I believe it is; for being in the vapours, and thinking of
Issabel and Mr Clinker, I was going into a fit of astericks, when
this fiff, saving your presence, took me by the nose so
powerfully that I sneezed three times, and found myself
wonderfully refreshed; and this to be sure is the raisin why
there are no fits in Haddingborrough.

I was likewise made believe, that there was nothing to be had but
oatmeal and seeps-heads; but if I hadn't been a fool, I mought
have known there could be no heads without kerkasses -- This very
blessed day I dined upon a delicate leg of Velsh mutton and
cully-flower; and as for the oat-meal, I leave that to the
sarvants of the country, which are pore drudges, many of them
without shoes or stockings -- Mr Clinker tells me here is a great
call of the gospel; but I wish, I wish some of our family be not
fallen off from the rite way -- O, if I was given to tailbaring, I
have my own secrets to discover -- There has been a deal of
huggling and flurtation betwixt mistress and an ould Scotch
officer, called Kismycago. He looks for all the orld like the
scare-crow that our gardener has set up to frite away the
sparrows; and what will come of it, the Lord knows; but come what
will, it shall never be said that I menchioned a syllabub of the
matter -- Remember me kindly to Saul and the kitten -- I hope they
got the horn-buck, and will put it to a good yuse, which is the
constant prayer of,

Dear Molly,
Your loving friend,
WIN. JENKINS
ADDINGBOROUGH, July 18.



To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR PHILLIPS,

If I stay much longer at Edinburgh, I shall be changed into a
downright Caledonian -- My uncle observes, that I have already
acquired something of the country accent. The people here are so
social and attentive in their civilities to strangers, that I am
insensibly sucked into the channel of their manners and customs,
although they are in fact much more different from ours than you
can imagine -- That difference, however, which struck me very much
at my first arrival, I now hardly perceive, and my ear is
perfectly reconciled to the Scotch accent, which I find even
agreeable in the mouth of a pretty woman -- It is a sort of Doric
dialect, which gives an idea of amiable simplicity -- You cannot
imagine how we have been caressed and feasted in the good town of
Edinburgh of which we are become free denizens and guild
brothers, by the special favour of the magistracy.

I had a whimsical commission from Bath, to a citizen of this
metropolis. Quin, understanding our intention to visit Edinburgh,
pulled out a guinea, and desired the favour I would drink it at a
tavern, with a particular friend and bottle-companion of his, Mr
R-- C--, a lawyer of this city -- I charged myself with the
commission, and, taking the guinea, 'You see (said I) I have
pocketed your bounty.' 'Yes (replied Quin, laughing); and a
headake into the bargain, if you drink fair.' I made use of this
introduction to Mr C--, who received me with open arms, and gave
me the rendezvous, according to the cartel. He had provided a
company of jolly fellows, among whom I found myself extremely
happy; and did Mr C-- and Quin all the justice in my power; but,
alas, I was no more than a tiro among a troop of veterans, who
had compassion upon my youth and conveyed me home in the morning
by what means I know not -- Quin was mistaken, however, as to the
head-ake; the claret was too good to treat me so roughly.

While Mr Bramble holds conferences with the graver literati of
the place, and our females are entertained at visits by the
Scotch ladies, who are the best and kindest creatures upon earth,
I pass my time among the bucks of Edinburgh; who, with a great
share of spirit and vivacity, have a certain shrewdness and self-
command that is not often found among their neighbours, in the
high-day of youth and exultation -- Not a hint escapes a Scotchman
that can be interpreted into offence by any individual in the
company; and national reflections are never heard -- In this
particular, I must own, we are both unjust and ungrateful to the
Scots; for, as far as I am able to judge, they have a real esteem
for the natives of South-Britain; and never mention our country,
but with expressions of regard -- Nevertheless, they are far from
being servile imitators of our modes and fashionable vices. All
their customs and regulations of public and private oeconomy, of
business and diversion, are in their own stile. This remarkably
predominates in their looks, their dress and manner, their music,
and even their cookery. Our 'squire declares, that he knows not
another people upon earth, so strongly marked with a national
character -- Now we are upon the article of cookery, I must own,
some of their dishes are savoury, and even delicate; but I am not
yet Scotchman enough to relish their singed sheep's-head and
haggice, which were provided at our request, one day at Mr
Mitchelson's, where we dined -- The first put me in mind of the
history of Congo, in which I had read of negroes' heads sold
publickly in the markets; the last, being a mess of minced
lights, livers, suet, oat-meal, onions, and pepper, inclosed in a
sheep's stomach, had a very sudden effect upon mine, and the
delicate Mrs Tabby changed colour; when the cause of our disgust
was instantaneously removed at the nod of our entertainer. The
Scots, in general, are attached to this composition, with a sort
of national fondness, as well as to their oat-meal bread; which
is presented at every table, in thin triangular cakes, baked upon
a plate of iron, called a girdle; and these, many of the natives,
even in the higher ranks of life, prefer to wheaten-bread, which
they have here in perfection -- You know we used to vex poor Murray
of Baliol college, by asking, if there was really no fruit but
turnips in Scotland? -- Sure enough, I have seen turnips make their
appearance, not as a desert, but by way of hors d'oeuvres, or
whets, as radishes are served betwixt more substantial dishes in
France and Italy; but it must be observed, that the turnips of
this country are as much superior in sweetness, delicacy, and
flavour, to those in England, as a musk-melon is to the stock of
a common cabbage. They are small and conical, of a yellowish
colour, with a very thin skin and, over and above their agreeable
taste, are valuable for their antiscorbutic quality -- As to the
fruit now in season, such as cherries, gooseberries, and
currants, there is no want of them at Edinburgh; and in the
gardens of some gentlemen, who live in the neighbourhood, there
is now a very favourable appearance of apricots, peaches,
nectarines, and even grapes: nay, I have seen a very fine shew of
pineapples within a few miles of this metropolis. Indeed, we have
no reason to be surprised at these particulars, when we consider
how little difference there is, in fact, betwixt this climate and
that of London.

All the remarkable places in the city and its avenues, for ten
miles around, we have visited, much to our satisfaction. In the
Castle are some royal apartments, where the sovereign
occasionally resided; and here are carefully preserved the
regalia of the kingdom, consisting of a crown, said to be of
great value, a sceptre, and a sword of state, adorned with
jewels -- Of these symbols of sovereignty, the people are
exceedingly jealous -- A report being spread during the sitting of
the union-parliament, that they were removed to London, such a
tumult arose, that the lord commissioner would have been torn to
pieces, if he had not produced them for the satisfaction of the
populace.

The palace of Holyrood-house is an elegant piece of architecture,
but sunk in an obscure, and, as I take it, unwholesome bottom,
where one would imagine it had been placed on purpose to be
concealed. The apartments are lofty, but unfurnished; and as for
the pictures of the Scottish kings, from Fergus I. to king
William, they are paultry daubings, mostly by the same hand,
painted either from the imagination, or porters hired to sit for
the purpose. All the diversions of London we enjoy at Edinburgh,
in a small compass. Here is a well conducted concert, in which
several gentlemen perform on different instruments -- The Scots are
all musicians -- Every man you meet plays on the flute, the violin,
or violoncello; and there is one nobleman, whose compositions are
universally admired -- Our company of actors is very tolerable; and
a subscription is now on foot for building a new theatre; but
their assemblies please me above all other public exhibitions.

We have been at the hunters' ball, where I was really astonished
to see such a number of fine women -- The English, who have never
crossed the Tweed, imagine erroneously, that the Scotch ladies
are not remarkable for personal attractions; but, I can declare
with a safe conscience, I never saw so many handsome females
together, as were assembled on this occasion. At the Leith races,
the best company comes hither from the remoter provinces; so
that, I suppose, we had all the beauty of the kingdom
concentrated as it were into one focus; which was, indeed, so
vehement, that my heart could hardly resist its power. Between
friends, it has sustained some damage from the bright eyes of the
charming miss R[ento]n, whom I had the honour to dance with at
the ball -- The countess of Melville attracted all eyes, and the
admiration of all present -- She was accompanied by the agreeable
miss Grieve, who made many conquests; nor did my sister Liddy
pass unnoticed in the assembly -- She is become a toast at
Edinburgh, by the name of the Fair Cambrian, and has already been
the occasion of much wine-shed; but the poor girl met with an
accident at the ball, which has given us great disturbance.

A young gentleman, the express image of that rascal Wilson, went
up to ask her to dance a minuet; and his sudden appearance
shocked her so much, that she fainted away -- I call Wilson a
rascal, because, if he had been really a gentleman, with
honourable intentions, he would have, ere now, appeared in his
own character -- I must own, my blood boils with indignation when I
think of that fellow's presumption; and Heaven confound me if I
don't -- But I won't be so womanish as to rail -- Time will, perhaps,
furnish occasion -- Thank God, the cause of Liddy's disorder
remains a secret. The lady directress of the ball, thinking she
was overcome by the heat of the place, had her conveyed to
another room, where she soon recovered so well, as to return and
join in the country dances, in which the Scotch lasses acquit
themselves with such spirit and agility, as put their partners to
the height of their mettle. I believe our aunt, Mrs Tabitha, had
entertained hopes of being able to do some execution among the
cavaliers at this assembly. She had been several days in
consultation with milliners and mantua-makers, preparing for the
occasion, at which she made her appearance in a full suit of
damask, so thick and heavy, that the sight of it alone, at this
season of the year, was sufficient to draw drops of sweat from
any man of ordinary imagination -- She danced one minuet with our
friend Mr Mitchelson, who favoured her so far, in the spirit of
hospitality and politeness; and she was called out a second time
by the young laird of Ballymawhawple, who, coming in by accident,
could not readily find any other partner; but as the first was a
married man, and the second payed no particular homage to her
charms, which were also over-looked by the rest of the company,
she became dissatisfied and censorious -- At supper, she observed
that the Scotch gentlemen made a very good figure, when they were
a little improved by travelling; and therefore it was pity they
did not all take the benefit of going abroad. She said the women
were awkward, masculine creatures; that, in dancing, they lifted
their legs like so many colts; that they had no idea of graceful
motion, and put on their clothes in a frightful manner; but if
the truth must be told, Tabby herself was the most ridiculous
figure, and the worst dressed of the whole assembly. The neglect
of the male sex rendered her malcontent and peevish; she now
found fault with every thing at Edinburgh, and teized her brother
to leave the place, when she was suddenly reconciled to it on a
religious consideration -- There is a sect of fanaticks, who have
separated themselves from the established kirk, under the name of
Seceders -- They acknowledge no earthly head of the church, reject
lay-patronage, and maintain the methodist doctrines of the new
birth, the new light, the efficacy of grace, the insufficiency of
works, and the operations of the spirit. Mrs Tabitha, attended by
Humphry Clinker, was introduced to one of their conventicles,
where they both received much edification; and she has had the
good fortune to come acquainted with a pious Christian, called Mr
Moffat, who is very powerful in prayer, and often assists her in
private exercises of devotion.

I never saw such a concourse of genteel company at any races in
England, as appeared on the course of Leith -- Hard by, in the
fields called the Links, the citizens of Edinburgh divert
themselves at a game called golf, in which they use a curious
kind of bats, tipt with horn, and small elastic balls of leather,
stuffed with feathers, rather less than tennis balls, but of a
much harder consistence -- This they strike with such force and
dexterity from one hole to another, that they will fly to an
incredible distance. Of this diversion the Scots are so fond,
that when the weather will permit, you may see a multitude of all
ranks, from the senator of justice to the lowest tradesman,
mingled together in their shirts, and following the balls with
the utmost eagerness. Among others, I was shewn one particular set
of golfers, the youngest of whom was turned of fourscore -- They
were all gentlemen of independent fortunes, who had amused
themselves with this pastime for the best part of a century,
without having ever felt the least alarm from sickness or
disgust; and they never went to bed, without having each the best
part of a gallon of claret in his belly. Such uninterrupted
exercise, co-operating with the keen air from the sea, must,
without all doubt, keep the appetite always on edge, and steel
the constitution against all the common attacks of distemper.

The Leith races gave occasion to another entertainment of a very
singular nature -- There is at Edinburgh a society or corporation
of errand-boys, called cawdies, who ply in the streets at night
with paper lanthorns, and are very serviceable in carrying
messages -- These fellows, though shabby in their appearance, and
rudely familiar in their address, are wonderfully acute, and so
noted for fidelity, that there is no instance of [a] cawdy's
having betrayed his trust -- Such is their intelligence, that they
know, not only every individual of the place, but also every
stranger, by that time he has been four and twenty hours in
Edinburgh; and no transaction, even the most private, can escape
their notice. They are particularly famous for their dexterity in
executing one of the functions of Mercury; though, for my own
part, I never employed them in this department of business -- Had I
occasion for any service of this nature, my own man, Archy
M'Alpine, is as well qualified as e'er a cawdie in Edinburgh; and
I am much mistaken, if he has not been heretofore of their
fraternity. Be that as it may, they resolved to give a dinner and
a ball at Leith, to which they formally invited all the young
noblemen and gentlemen that were at the races; and this
invitation was reinforced by an assurance that all the celebrated
ladies of pleasure would grace the entertainment with their
company. -- I received a card on this occasion, and went thither
with half a dozen of my acquaintance. -- In a large hall the cloth
was laid on a long range of tables joined together, and here the
company seated themselves, to the number of about fourscore,
lords, and lairds, and other gentlemen, courtezans and cawdies
mingled
together, as the slaves and their masters were in the time of the
Saturnalia in ancient Rome. -- The toast master, who sat at the
upper end, was one Cawdie Fraser, a veteran pimp, distinguished
for his humour and sagacity, well known and much respected in his
profession by all the guests, male and female, that were here
assembled. -- He had bespoke the dinner and the wine: he had taken
care that all his brethren should appear in decent apparel and
clean linen; and he himself wore a periwig with three tails in
honour of the festival. -- I assure you the banquet was both
elegant and plentiful, and seasoned with a thousand sallies, that
promoted a general spirit of mirth and good humour. -- After the
desert, Mr Fraser proposed the following toasts, which I don't
pretend to explain. 'The best in Christendom.' -- 'Gibbs'
contract.' -- 'The beggar's benison,' -- 'King and kirk.' -- 'Great
Britain and Ireland.' Then, filling a bumper, and turning to me,
'Mester Malford (said he), may a' unkindness cease betwixt John
Bull and his sister Moggy.' -- The next person he singled out, was
a nobleman who had been long abroad. -- 'Ma lord (cried Fraser),
here is a bumper to a' those noblemen who have virtue enough to
spend their rents in their ain countray.' -- He afterwards
addressed himself to a member of parliament in these words: --
'Meester -- I'm sure ye'll ha' nae objection to my drinking,
disgrace and dule to ilka Scot, that sells his conscience and his
vote.' -- He discharged a third sarcasm at a person very gaily
dressed, who had risen from small beginnings, and made a
considerable fortune at play. -- Filling his glass, and calling him
by name, 'Lang life (said he), to the wylie loon that gangs a-field
with a toom poke at his lunzie, and comes hame with a
sackful of siller.' -- All these toasts being received with loud
bursts of applause, Mr Fraser called for pint glasses, and filled
his own to the brim: then standing up, and all his brethren
following his example, 'Ma lords and gentlemen (cried he), here
is a cup of thanks for the great and undeserved honour you have
done your poor errand-boys this day.' -- So saying, he and they
drank off their glasses in a trice, and quitting their seats,
took their station each behind one of the other guests;
exclaiming, 'Noo we're your honours cawdies again.'

The nobleman who had bore the first brunt of Mr Fraser's satire,
objected to his abdication. He said, as the company was assembled
by invitation from the cawdies, he expected they were to be
entertained at their expense. 'By no means, my lord (cried
Fraser), I wad na he guilty of sic presumption for the wide
warld -- I never affronted a gentleman since I was born; and sure
at this age I wonnot offer an indignity to sic an honourable
convention.' 'Well (said his Lordship) as you have expended some
wit, you have a right to save your money. You have given me good
counsel, and I take it in good part. As you have voluntarily
quitted your seat, I will take your place with the leave of the
good company, and think myself happy to be hailed, Father of the
Feast.' He was forthwith elected into the chair, and complimented
in a bumper in his new character.

The claret continued to circulate without interruption, till the
glasses seemed to dance upon the table, and this, perhaps, was a
hint to the ladies to call for music -- At eight in the evening the
ball began in another apartment: at midnight we went to supper;
but it was broad day before I found the way to my lodgings; and,
no doubt, his Lordship had a swinging bill to discharge.

In short, I have lived so riotously for some weeks, that my uncle
begins to be alarmed on the score of my constitution, and very
seriously observes, 'that all his own infirmities are owing to
such excesses indulged in his youth -- Mrs Tabitha says it would be
more to the advantage of my soul as well as body, if, instead of
frequenting these scenes of debauchery, I would accompany Mr
Moffat and her to hear a sermon of the reverend Mr M'Corkindale. --
Clinker often exhorts me, with a groan, to take care of my
precious health; and even Archy M'Alpine, when he happens to be
overtaken (which is oftener the case than I could wish), reads me
a long lecture upon temperance and sobriety; and is so very wise
and sententious, that, if I could provide him with a professor's
chair, I would willingly give up the benefit of his amonitions
and service together; for I was tutor-sick at alma mater.

I am not, however, so much engrossed by the gaieties of
Edinburgh, but that I find time to make parties in the family
way. We have not only seen all the villas and villages within ten
miles of the capital, but we have also crossed the Firth, which
is an arm of the sea seven miles broad, that divides Lothian from
the shire, or, as the Scots call it, the kingdom of Fife. There
is a number of large open sea-boats that ply on this passage
from Leith to Kinghorn, which is a borough on the other side.
In one of these our whole family embarked three days ago, excepting
my sister, who, being exceedingly fearful of the water, was left
to the care of Mrs Mitchelson. We had an easy and quick passage
into Fife, where we visited a number of poor towns on the sea-side,
including St Andrew's, which is the skeleton of a venerable city;
but we were much better pleased with some noble and elegant seats
and castles, of which there is a great number in that part of
Scotland. Yesterday we took boat again on our return to Leith,
with fair wind and agreeable weather; but we had not advanced
half-way when the, sky was suddenly overcast, and the wind
changing, blew directly in our teeth so that we were obliged to
turn, or tack the rest of the way. In a word, the gale increased
to a storm of wind and rain, attended with such a fog, that we
could not see the town of Leith, to which we were bound, nor even
the castle of Edinburgh, notwithstanding its high situation. It
is not to be doubted but that we were all alarmed on this
occasion. And at the same time, most of the passengers were
seized with a nausea that produced violent retchings. My aunt
desired her brother to order the boatmen, to put back to
Kinghorn, and this expedient he actually proposed; but they
assured him there was no danger. Mrs Tabitha finding them
obstinate, began to scold, and insisted upon my uncle's exerting
his authority as a justice of the peace. Sick and peevish as he
was, he could not help laughing at this wise proposal, telling
her, that his commission did not extend so far, and, if it did,
he should let the people take their own way; for he thought it
would be great presumption in him to direct them in the exercise
of their own profession. Mrs Winifred Jenkins made a general
clearance with the assistance of Mr Humphry Clinker, who joined
her both in prayer and ejaculation. -- As he took it for granted
that we should not be long in this world, he offered some
spiritual consolation to Mrs Tabitha, who rejected it with great
disgust, bidding him keep his sermons for those who had leisure
to hear such nonsense. -- My uncle sat, collected in himself,
without speaking; my man Archy had recourse to a brandy-bottle,
with which he made so free, that I imagined he had sworn to die
of drinking any thing rather than sea-water: but the brandy had
no more effect upon him in the way of intoxication, than if it
had been sea-water in good earnest. -- As for myself, I was too
much engrossed by the sickness at my stomach, to think of any
thing else. Meanwhile the sea swelled mountains high, the boat
pitched with such violence, as if it had been going to pieces;
the cordage rattled, the wind roared; the lightning flashed, the
thunder bellowed, and the rain descended in a deluge -- Every time
the vessel was put about, we ship'd a sea that drenched us all to
the skin. -- When, by dint of turning, we thought to have cleared
the pier head, we were driven to leeward, and then the boatmen
themselves began to fear that the tide would fail before we
should fetch up our lee-way: the next trip, however, brought us
into smooth water, and we were safely landed on the quay, about
one o'clock in the afternoon. -- 'To be sure (cried Tabby, when she
found herself on terra firma), we must all have perished, if we
had not been the particular care of Providence.' 'Yes (replied my
uncle), but I am much of the honest highlander's mind -- after he
had made such a passage as this: his friend told him he was much
indebted to Providence; -- "Certainly (said Donald), but, by my
saul, mon, I'se ne'er trouble Providence again, so long as the
brig of Stirling stands."' -- You must know the brig, or bridge of
Stirling, stands above twenty miles up the river Forth, of which
this is the outlet -- I don't find that our 'squire has suffered in
his health from this adventure; but poor Liddy is in a peaking
way -- I'm afraid this unfortunate girl is uneasy in her mind; and
this apprehension distracts me, for she is really an amiable
creature.

We shall set out to-morrow or next day for Stirling and Glasgow;
and we propose to penetrate a little way into the Highlands,
before we turn our course to the southward -- In the mean time,
commend me to all our friends round Carfax, and believe me to be,
ever yours,

EDINBURGH, Aug. 8.
J. MELFORD



To Dr LEWIS.

I should be very ungrateful, dear Lewis, if I did not find myself
disposed to think and speak favourably of this people, among whom
I have met with more kindness, hospitality, and rational
entertainment, in a few weeks, than ever I received in any other
country during the whole course of my life. -- Perhaps, the
gratitude excited by these benefits may interfere with the
impartiality of my remarks; for a man is as apt to be
prepossessed by particular favours as to be prejudiced by private
motives of disgust. If I am partial, there is, at least, some
merit in my conversion from illiberal prejudices which had grown
up with my constitution.

The first impressions which an Englishman receives in this
country, will not contribute to the removal of his prejudices;
because he refers every thing he sees to a comparison with the
same articles in his own country; and this comparison is
unfavourable to Scotland in all its exteriors, such as the face
of the country in respect to cultivation, the appearance of the
bulk of the people, and the language of conversation in general. --
I am not so far convinced by Mr Lismahago's arguments, but that
I think the Scots would do well, for their own sakes, to adopt
the English idioms and pronunciation; those of them especially,
who are resolved to push their fortunes in South-Britain -- I know,
by experience, how easily an Englishman is influenced by the ear,
and how apt he is to laugh, when he hears his own language spoken
with a foreign or provincial accent -- I have known a member of the
house of commons speak with great energy and precision, without
being able to engage attention, because his observations were
made in the Scotch dialect, which (no offence to lieutenant
Lismahago) certainly gives a clownish air even to sentiments of
the greatest dignity and decorum. -- I have declared my opinion on
this head to some of the most sensible men of this country,
observing, at the same time, that if they would employ a few
natives of England to teach the pronunciation of our vernacular
tongue, in twenty years there would be no difference, in point of
dialect, between the youth of Edinburgh and of London.

The civil regulations of this kingdom and metropolis are taken
from very different models from those of England, except in a few
particular establishments, the necessary consequences of the
union. -- Their college of justice is a bench of great dignity,
filled with judges of character and ability. -- I have heard some
causes tried before this venerable tribunal; and was very much
pleased with the pleadings of their advocates, who are by no
means deficient either in argument or elocution. The Scottish
legislation is founded, in a great measure, on the civil law;
consequently, their proceedings vary from those of the English
tribunals; but, I think, they have the advantage of us in their
method of examining witnesses apart, and in the constitution of
their jury, by which they certainly avoid the evil which I
mentioned in my last from Lismahago's observation.

The university of Edinburgh is supplied with excellent professors
in all the sciences; and the medical school, in particular, is
famous all over Europe. -- The students of this art have the best
opportunity of learning it to perfection, in all its branches, as
there are different courses for the theory of medicine and the
practice of medicine; for anatomy, chemistry, botany, and the
materia medica, over and above those of mathematics and
experimental philosophy; and all these are given by men of
distinguished talents. What renders this part of education still
more complete, is the advantage of attending the infirmary, which
is the best instituted charitable foundation that I ever knew.
Now we are talking of charities, here are several hospitals,
exceedingly well endowed, and maintained under admirable
regulations; and these are not only useful, but ornamental to the
city. Among these, I shall only mention the general work-house,
in which all the poor, not otherwise provided for, are employed,
according to their different abilities, with such judgment and
effect, that they nearly maintain themselves by their labour, and
there is not a beggar to be seen within the precincts of this
metropolis. It was Glasgow that set the example of this
establishment, about thirty years ago. -- Even the kirk of
Scotland, so long reproached with fanaticism and canting, abounds
at present with ministers celebrated for their learning, and
respectable for their moderation. -- I have heard their sermons
with equal astonishment and pleasure. -- The good people of
Edinburgh no longer think dirt and cobwebs essential to the house
of God. -- Some of their churches have admitted such ornaments as
would have excited sedition, even in England, a little more than
a century ago; and Psalmody is here practised and taught by a
professor from the cathedral of Durham: -- I should not be
surprised, in a few years, to hear it accompanied with an organ.

Edinburgh is a hot-bed of genius. -- I have had the good fortune to
be made acquainted with many authors of the first distinction;
such as the two Humes, Robertson, Smith, Wallace, Blair,
Ferguson, Wilkie, &c. and I have found them all as agreeable in
conversation as they are instructive and entertaining in their
writings. These acquaintances I owe to the friendship of Dr
Carlyle, who wants nothing but inclination to figure with the
rest upon paper. The magistracy of Edinburgh is changed every
year by election, and seems to be very well adapted both for
state and authority. -- The lord provost is equal in dignity to the
lord mayor of London; and the four bailies are equivalent to the
rank of aldermen. -- There is a dean of guild, who takes cognizance
of mercantile affairs; a treasurer; a town-clerk; and the council
is composed of deacons, one of whom is returned every year, in
rotation, as representative of every company of artificers or
handicraftsmen. Though this city, from the nature of its
situation, can never be made either very convenient or very
cleanly, it has, nevertheless, an air of magnificence that
commands respect. -- The castle is an instance of the sublime in
scite and architecture. -- Its fortifications are kept in good
order, and there is always in it a garrison of regular soldiers,
which is relieved every year; but it is incapable of sustaining a
siege carried on according to the modern operations of war. -- The
castle hill, which extends from the outward gate to the upper end
of the high street, is used as a public walk for the citizens,
and commands a prospect, equally extensive and delightful, over
the county of Fife, on the other side of the Frith, and all along
the sea-coast, which is covered with a succession of towns that
would seem to indicate a considerable share of commerce; but, if
the truth must be told, these towns have been falling to decay
ever since the union, by which the Scots were in a great measure
deprived of their trade with France. -- The palace of Holyrood-house
is a jewel in architecture, thrust into a hollow where it
cannot be seen; a situation which was certainly not chosen by the
ingenious architect, who must have been confined to the site of
the old palace, which was a convent. Edinburgh is considerably
extended on the south side, where there are divers little elegant
squares built in the English manner; and the citizens have
planned some improvements on the north, which, when put in
execution, will add greatly to the beauty and convenience of this
capital.

The sea-port is Leith, a flourishing town, about a mile from the
city, in the harbour of which I have seen above one hundred ships
lying all together. You must know, I had the curiosity to cross
the Frith in a passage boat, and stayed two days in Fife, which
is remarkably fruitful in corn, and exhibits a surprising number
of fine seats, elegantly built, and magnificently furnished.
There is an incredible number of noble houses in every part of
Scotland that I have seen. -- Dalkeith, Pinkie, Yester, and lord
Hopton's [Hopetoun's], all of them within four or five miles of
Edinburgh, are princely palaces, in every one of which a
sovereign might reside at his case. -- I suppose the Scots affect
these monuments of grandeur. -- If I may be allowed to mingle
censure with my remarks upon a people I revere, I must observe,
that their weak side seems to be vanity. -- I am afraid that even
their hospitality is not quite free of ostentation. I think I
have discovered among them uncommon pains taken to display their
fine linen, of which, indeed, they have great plenty, their
furniture, plate, housekeeping, and variety of wines, in which
article, it must be owned, they are profuse, if not prodigal -- A
burgher of Edinburgh, not content to vie with a citizen of
London, who has ten times his fortune, must excel him in the
expence as well as elegance of his entertainments.

Though the villas of the Scotch nobility and gentry have
generally an air of grandeur and state, I think their gardens and
parks are not comparable to those of England; a circumstance the
more remarkable, as I was told by the ingenious Mr Phillip Miller
of Chelsea, that almost all the gardeners of South-Britain were
natives of Scotland. The verdure of this country is not equal to
that of England. -- The pleasure-grounds are, in my opinion, not so
well laid out according to the genius loci; nor are the lawns,
and walks, and hedges kept in such delicate order. -- The trees are
planted in prudish rows, which have not such an agreeable natural
effect, as when they are thrown into irregular groupes, with
intervening glades; and firs, which they generally raise around
their houses, look dull and funereal in the summer season. -- I
must confess, indeed, that they yield serviceable timber, and
good shelter against the northern blasts; that they grow and
thrive in the most barren soil, and continually perspire a fine
balsam of turpentine, which must render the air very salutary and
sanative to lungs of a tender texture.

Tabby and I have been both frightened in our return by sea from
the coast of Fife -- She was afraid of drowning, and I of catching
cold, in consequence of being drenched with sea-water; but my
fears as well as hers, have been happily disappointed. She is now
in perfect health; I wish I could say the same of Liddy --
Something uncommon is the matter with that poor girl; her colour
fades, her appetite fails, and her spirits flag -- She is become
moping and melancholy, and is often found in tears -- Her brother
suspects internal uneasiness on account of Wilson, and denounces
vengeance against that adventurer. -- She was, it seems, strongly
affected at the ball by the sudden appearance of one Mr Gordon,
who strongly resembles the said Wilson; but I am rather
suspicious that she caught cold by being overheated with
dancing. -- I have consulted Dr Gregory, an eminent physician of an
amiable character, who advises the highland air, and the use of
goat-milk whey, which, surely, cannot have a bad effect upon a
patient who was born and bred among the mountains of Wales -- The
doctors opinion is the more agreeable, as we shall find those
remedies in the very place which I proposed as the utmost extent
of our expedition -- I mean the borders of Argyle.

Mr Smollett, one of the judges of the commissary court, which is
now sitting, has very kindly insisted upon our lodging at his
country-house, on the banks of Lough-Lomond, about fourteen miles
beyond Glasgow. For this last city we shall set out in two days,
and take Stirling in our way, well provided with recommendations
from our friends at Edinburgh, whom, I protest, I shall leave
with much regret. I am so far from thinking it any hardship to
live in this country, that, if I was obliged to lead a town life,
Edinburgh would certainly be the headquarters of


Yours always,
MATT. BRAMBLE
EDIN., August 8.



To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR KNIGHT,

I am now little short of the Ultima Thule, if this appellation
properly belongs to the Orkneys or Hebrides. These last are now
lying before me, to the amount of some hundreds, scattered up and
down the Deucalidonian sea, affording the most picturesque and
romantic prospect I ever beheld -- I write this letter in a
gentleman's house, near the town of Inverary which may be deemed
the capital of the West Highlands, famous for nothing so much as
for the stately castle begun, and actually covered in by the late
duke of Argyle, at a prodigious expence -- Whether it will ever be
completely finished is a question. --

But, to take things in order -- We left Edinburgh ten days ago; and
the further North we proceed, we find Mrs Tabitha the less
manageable; so that her inclinations are not of the nature of the
loadstone; they point not towards the pole. What made her leave
Edinburgh with reluctance at last, if we may believe her own
assertions, was a dispute which she left unfinished with Mr
Moffat, touching the eternity of hell torments. That gentleman,
as he advanced in years, began to be sceptical on this head,
till, at length, he declared open war against the common
acceptation of the word eternal. He is now persuaded, that
eternal signifies no more than an indefinite number of years; and
that the most enormous sinner may be quit for nine millions, nine
hundred thousand, nine hundred and ninety-nine years of hell-
fire; which term or period, as he very well observes, forms but
an inconsiderable drop, as it were, in the ocean of eternity -- For
this mitigation he contends, as a system agreeable to the ideas
of goodness and mercy, which we annex to the supreme Being -- Our
aunt seemed willing to adopt this doctrine in favour of the
wicked; but he hinted that no person whatever was so righteous as
to be exempted entirely from punishment in a future state; and
that the most pious Christian upon earth might think himself very
happy to get off for a fast of seven or eight thousand years in
the midst of fire and brimstone. Mrs Tabitha revolted at this
dogma, which filled her at once with horror and indignation -- She
had recourse to the opinion of Humphry Clinker, who roundly
declared it was the popish doctrine of purgatory, and quoted
scripture in defence of the fire everlasting, prepared for the
devil and his angels -- The reverend master Mackcorkendal, and all
the theologists and saints of that persuasion were consulted, and
some of them had doubts about the matter; which doubts and
scruples had begun to infect our aunt, when we took our departure
from Edinburgh.

We passed through Linlithgow, where there was an elegant royal
palace, which is now gone to decay, as well as the town itself --
This too is pretty much the case with Stirling, though it still
boasts of a fine old castle in which the kings of Scotland were
wont to reside in their minority -- But Glasgow is the pride of
Scotland, and, indeed, it might very well pass for an elegant and
flourishing city in any part of Christendom. There we had the
good fortune to be received into the house of Mr Moore, an
eminent surgeon, to whom we were recommended by one of our
friends at Edinburgh; and, truly, he could not have done us more
essential service -- Mr Moore is a merry facetious companion,
sensible and shrewd, with a considerable fund of humour; and his
wife an agreeable woman, well bred, kind, and obliging. Kindness,
which I take to be the essence of good-nature and humanity, is
the distinguishing characteristic of the Scotch ladies in their
own country -- Our landlord shewed us every thing, and introduced
us to all the world at Glasgow; where, through his
recommendation, we were complimented with the freedom of the
town. Considering the trade and opulence of this place, it cannot
but abound with gaiety and diversions. Here is a great number of
young fellows that rival the youth of the capital in spirit and
expence; and I was soon convinced, that all the female beauties
of Scotland were not assembled at the hunters ball in Edinburgh --
The town of Glasgow flourishes in learning as well as in
commerce -- Here is an university, with professors in all the
different branches of science, liberally endowed, and judiciously
chosen -- It was vacation time when I passed, so that I could not
entirely satisfy my curiosity; but their mode of education is
certainly preferable to ours in some respects. The students are
not left to the private instruction of tutors; but taught in
public schools or classes, each science by its particular
professor or regent.

My uncle is in raptures with Glasgow -- He not only visited all the
manufactures of the place, but made excursions all round to
Hamilton, Paisley, Renfrew, and every other place within a dozen
miles, where there was any thing remarkable to be seen in art or
nature. I believe the exercise, occasioned by those jaunts, was
of service to my sister Liddy, whose appetite and spirits begin
to revive -- Mrs Tabitha displayed her attractions as usual, and
actually believed she had entangled one Mr Maclellan, a rich
inkle-manufacturer, in her snares; but when matters came to an
explanation, it appeared that his attachment was altogether
spiritual, founded upon an intercourse of devotion, at the
meeting of Mr John Wesley; who, in the course of his evangelical
mission, had come hither in person -- At length, we set out for the
banks of Lough-Lomond, passing through the little borough of
Dumbarton, or (as my uncle will have it) Dunbritton, where there
is a castle, more curious than any thing of the kind I had ever
seen. It is honoured with a particular description by the elegant
Buchanan, as an arx inexpugnabilis, and, indeed, it must have
been impregnable by the antient manner of besieging. It is a rock
of considerable extent, rising with a double top, in an angle
formed by the confluence of two rivers, the Clyde and the Leven;
perpendicular and inaccessible on all sides, except in one place
where the entrance is fortified; and there is no rising ground in
the neighbourhood from whence it could be damaged by any kind of
battery.

From Dumbarton, the West Highlands appear in the form of huge,
dusky mountains, piled one over another; but this prospect is not
at all surprising to a native of Glamorgan -- We have fixed our
headquarters at Cameron, a very neat country-house belonging to
commissary Smollet, where we found every sort of accommodation we
could desire -- It is situated like a Druid's temple, in a grove of
oak, close by the side of Lough-Lomond, which is a surprising
body of pure transparent water, unfathomably deep in many places,
six or seven miles broad, four and twenty miles in length,
displaying above twenty green islands, covered with wood; some of
them cultivated for corn, and many of them stocked with red deer --
They belong to different gentlemen, whose seats are scattered
along the banks of the lake, which are agreeably romantic beyond
all conception. My uncle and I have left the women at Cameron, as
Mrs Tabitha would by no means trust herself again upon the water,
and to come hither it was necessary to cross a small inlet of the
sea, in an open ferry-boat -- This country appears more and more
wild and savage the further we advance; and the People are as
different from the Low-land Scots, in their looks, garb, and
language, as the mountaineers of Brecknock are from the
inhabitants of Herefordshire.

When the Lowlanders want to drink a chearupping-cup, they go to
the public house, called the Change-house, and call for a chopine
of two-penny, which is a thin, yeasty beverage, made of malt; not
quite so strong as the table-beer of England, -- This is brought in
a pewter stoop, shaped like a skittle, from whence it is emptied
into a quaff; that is, a curious cup made of different pieces of
wood, such as box and ebony, cut into little staves, joined
alternately, and secured with delicate hoops, having two cars or
handles -- It holds about a gill, is sometimes tipt round the mouth
with silver, and has a plate of the same metal at bottom, with
the landlord's cypher engraved. -- The Highlanders, on the
contrary, despise this liquor, and regale themselves with whisky;
a malt spirit, as strong as geneva, which they swallow in great
quantities, without any signs of inebriation. They are used to it
from the cradle, and find it an excellent preservative against
the winter cold, which must be extreme on these mountains -- I am
told that it is given with great success to infants, as a cordial
in the confluent smallpox, when the eruption seems to flag, and
the symptoms grow unfavourable -- The Highlanders are used to eat
much more animal food than falls to the share of their neighbours
in the Low-country -- They delight in hunting; have plenty of deer
and other game, with a great number of sheep, goats, and black-cattle
running wild, which they scruple not to kill as vension,
without being much at pains to ascertain the property.

Inverary is but a poor town, though it stands immediately under
the protection of the duke of Argyle, who is a mighty prince in
this part of Scotland. The peasants live in wretched cabins, and
seem very poor; but the gentlemen are tolerably well lodged, and
so loving to strangers, that a man runs some risque of his life
from their hospitality -- It must be observed that the poor
Highlanders are now seen to disadvantage. They have been not only
disarmed by act of parliament, but also deprived of their ancient
garb, which was both graceful and convenient; and what is a
greater hardship still, they are compelled to wear breeches; a
restraint which they cannot bear with any degree of patience:
indeed, the majority wear them, not in the proper place, but on
poles or long staves over their shoulders -- They are even debarred
the use of their striped stuff called Tartane, which was their
own manufacture, prized by them above all the velvets, brocades,
and tissues of Europe and Asia. They now lounge along in loose
great coats, of coarse russet, equally mean and cumbersome, and
betray manifest marks of dejection -- Certain it is, the government
could not have taken a more effectual method to break their
national spirit.

We have had princely sport in hunting the stag on these mountains.
These are the lonely hills of Morven, where Fingal and his heroes
enjoyed the same pastime; I feel an enthusiastic pleasure when I
survey the brown heath that Ossian wont to tread; and hear the
wind whistle through the bending grass -- When I enter our
landlord's hall, I look for the suspended harp of that divine
bard, and listen in hopes of hearing the aerial sound of his
respected spirit -- The poems of Ossian are in every mouth -- A
famous antiquarian of this country, the laird of Macfarlane, at
whose house we dined a few days ago, can repeat them all in the
original Gallick, which has a great affinity to the Welch, not
only in the general sound, but also in a great number of radical
words; and I make no doubt that they are both sprung from the
same origin. I was not a little surprised, when asking a
Highlander one day, if he knew where we should find any game? he
replied, 'hu niel Sassenagh', which signifies no English: the
very same answer I should have received from a Welchman, and
almost in the same words. The Highlanders have no other name for
the people of the Low-country, but Sassenagh, or Saxons; a strong
presumption, that the Lowland Scots and the English are derived
from the same stock -- The peasants of these hills strongly
resemble those of Wales in their looks, their manners, and
habitations; every thing I see , and hear, and feel, seems Welch --
The mountains, vales, and streams; the air and climate; the
beef, mutton, and game, are all Welch -- It must be owned, however,
that this people are better Provided than we in some articles --
They have plenty of red deer and roebuck, which are fat and
delicious at this season of the year. Their sea teems with amazing
quantities of the finest fish in the world. and they find means
to procure very good claret at a very small expence.

Our landlord is a man of consequence in this part of the country;
a cadet from the family of Argyle and hereditary captain of one
of his castles -- His name, in plain English, is Dougal Campbell;
but as there is a great number of the same appellation, they are
distinguished (like the Welch) by patronimics; and as I have
known an antient Briton called Madoc ap-Morgan ap-Jenkin, ap-Jones,
our Highland chief designs himself Dou'l Mac-amish mac-'oul ichian,
signifying Dougal, the son of James, the son of
Dougal, the son of John. He has travelled in the course of his
education, and is disposed to make certain alterations in his
domestic oeconomy; but he finds it impossible to abolish the
ancient customs of the family; some of which are ludicrous
enough -- His piper for example, who is an hereditary officer of
the household, will not part with the least particle of his
privileges. He has a right to wear the kilt, or ancient Highland
dress, with the purse, pistol, and durk -- a broad yellow ribbon,
fixed to the chanter-pipe, is thrown over his shoulder, and
trails along the ground, while he performs the function of his
minstrelsy; and this, I suppose, is analogous to the pennon or
flag which was formerly carried before every knight in battle. --
He plays before the laird every Sunday in his way to the kirk,
which he circles three times, performing the family march which
implies defiance to all the enemies of the clan; and every
morning he plays a full hour by the clock, in the great hall,
marching backwards and forwards all the time, with a solemn pace,
attended by the laird's kinsmen, who seem much delighted with the
music -- In this exercise, he indulges them with a variety of
pibrochs or airs, suited to the different passions, which he
would either excite or assuage.

Mr Campbell himself, who performs very well on the violin, has an
invincible antipathy to the sound of the Highland bagpipe, which
sings in the nose with a most alarming twang, and, indeed, is
quite intolerable to ears of common sensibility, when aggravated
by the echo of a vaulted hall -- He therefore begged the piper
would have some mercy upon him, and dispense with this part of
the morning service -- A consultation of the clan being held on
this occasion, it was unanimously agreed, that the laird's
request could not be granted without a dangerous encroachment
upon the customs of the family -- The piper declared, he could not
give up for a moment the privilege he derived from his ancestors;
nor would the laird's relations forego an entertainment which
they valued above all others -- There was no remedy; Mr Campbell,
being obliged to acquiesce, is fain to stop his ears with cotton;
to fortify his head with three or four night-caps and every
morning retire into the penetralia of his habitation, in order to
avoid this diurnal annoyance. When the music ceases, he produces
himself at an open window that looks into the courtyard, which is
by this time filled with a crowd of his vassals and dependents,
who worship his first appearance, by uncovering their heads, and
bowing to the earth with the most humble prostration. As all
these people have something to communicate in the way of
proposal, complaint, or petition, they wait patiently till the
laird comes forth, and, following him in his walks, are favoured
each with a short audience in his turn. Two days ago, he
dispatched above an hundred different sollicitors, in walking
with us to the house of a neighbouring gentleman, where we dined
by invitation. Our landlord's housekeeping is equally rough and
hospitable, and savours much of the simplicity of ancient times:
the great hall, paved with flat stones, is about forty-five feet
by twenty-two, and serves not only for a dining-room, but also
for a bedchamber, to gentlemen-dependents and hangers-on of the
family. At night, half a dozen occasional beds are ranged on each
side along the wall. These are made of fresh heath, pulled up by
the roots, and disposed in such a manner as to make a very
agreeable couch, where they lie, without any other covering than
the plaid -- My uncle and I were indulged with separate chambers
and down beds which we begged to exchange for a layer of heath;
and indeed I never slept so much to my satisfaction. It was not
only soft and elastic, but the plant, being in flower, diffused
an agreeable fragrance, which is wonderfully refreshing and
restorative.

Yesterday we were invited to the funeral of an old lady, the
grandmother of a gentleman in this neighbourhood, and found
ourselves in the midst of fifty people, who were regaled with a
sumptuous feast, accompanied by the music of a dozen pipers. In
short, this meeting had all the air of a grand festival; and the
guests did such honour to the entertainment, that many of them
could not stand when we were reminded of the business on which
we had met. The company forthwith taking horse, rode in a very
irregular cavalcade to the place of interment, a church, at the
distance of two long miles from the castle. On our arrival,
however, we found we had committed a small oversight, in leaving
the corpse behind; so we were obliged to wheel about, and met the
old gentlewoman half way, being carried upon poles by the nearest
relations of her family, and attended by the coronach, composed
of a multitude of old hags, who tore their hair, beat their
breasts, and howled most hideously. At the grave, the orator, or
senachie, pronounced the panegyric of the defunct, every period
being confirmed by a yell of the coronach. The body was committed
to the earth, the pipers playing a pibroch all the time; and all
the company standing uncovered. The ceremony was closed with the
discharge of pistols; then we returned to the castle, resumed the
bottle, and by midnight there was not a sober person in the
family, the females excepted. The 'squire and I were, with some
difficulty, permitted to retire with our landlord in the evening;
but our entertainer was a little chagrined at our retreat; and
afterwards seemed to think it a disparagement to his family, that
not above a hundred gallons of whisky had been drunk upon such a
solemn occasion. This morning we got up by four, to hunt the
roebuck, and, in half an hour, found breakfast ready served in
the hall. The hunters consisted of Sir George Colquhoun and me,
as strangers (my uncle not chusing to be of the party), of the
laird in person, the laird's brother, the laird's brother's son,
the laird's sister's son, the laird's father's brother's son, and
all their foster brothers, who are counted parcel of the family:
but we were attended by an infinite number of Gaelly's, or ragged
Highlanders without shoes or stockings.

The following articles formed our morning's repast: one kit of
boiled eggs; a second, full of butter; a third full of cream; an
entire cheese, made of goat's milk; a large earthen pot full of
honey; the best part of a ham; a cold venison pasty; a bushel of
oat meal, made in thin cakes and bannocks, with a small wheaten
loaf in the middle for the strangers; a large stone bottle full
of whisky, another of brandy, and a kilderkin of ale. There was
a ladle chained to the cream kit, with curious wooden bickers to
be filled from this reservoir. The spirits were drank out of a
silver quaff, and the ale out of hems: great justice was done to
the collation by the guest in general; one of them in particular
ate above two dozen of hard eggs, with a proportionable quantity
of bread, butter, and honey; nor was one drop of liquor left upon
the board. Finally, a large roll of tobacco was presented by way
of desert, and every individual took a comfortable quid, to
prevent the bad effects of the morning air. We had a fine chace
over the mountains, after a roebuck, which we killed, and I got
home time enough to drink tea with Mrs Campbell and our 'squire.
To-morrow we shall set out on our return for Cameron. We propose
to cross the Frith of Clyde, and take the towns of Greenock and
Port-Glasgow in our way. This circuit being finished, we shall
turn our faces to the south, and follow the sun with augmented
velocity, in order to enjoy the rest of the autumn in England,
where Boreas is not quite so biting as he begins already to be on
the tops of these northern hills. But our progress from place to
place shall continue to be specified in these detached journals of

Yours always,
J. MELFORD
ARGYLSHIRE, Sept. 3.



To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DICK,

About a fortnight is now elapsed, since we left the capital of
Scotland, directing our course towards Stirling, where we lay. The
castle of this place is such another as that of Edinburgh, and
affords a surprising prospect of the windings of the river Forth,
which are so extraordinary, that the distance from hence to Alloa
by land, is but forty miles, and by water it is twenty-four.
Alloa is a neat thriving town, that depends in a great measure on
the commerce of Glasgow, the merchants of which send hither
tobacco and other articles, to be deposited in warehouses for
exportation from the Frith of Forth. In our way hither we visited
a flourishing iron-work, where, instead of burning wood, they use
coal, which they have the art of clearing in such a manner as
frees it from the sulphur, that would otherwise render the metal
too brittle for working. Excellent coal is found in almost every
part of Scotland.

The soil of this district produces scarce any other grain but
oats, lid barley; perhaps because it is poorly cultivated, and
almost altogether uninclosed. The few inclosures they have
consist of paultry walls of loose stones gathered from the
fields, which indeed they cover, as if they had been scattered on
purpose. When I expressed my surprize that the peasants did not
disencumber their grounds of these stones; a gentleman, well
acquainted with the theory as well as practice of farming,
assured me that the stones, far from being prejudicial, were
serviceable to the crop. This philosopher had ordered a field of
his own to be cleared, manured and sown with barley, and the
produce was more scanty than before. He caused the stones to be
replaced, and next year the crop was as good as ever. The stones
were removed a second time, and the harvest failed; they were
again brought back, and the ground retrieved its fertility. The
same experiment has been tried in different parts of Scotland
with the same success--Astonished at this information, I desired
to know in what manner he accounted for this strange phenomenon;
and he said there were three ways in which the stones might be
serviceable. They might possibly restrain an excess in the
perspiration of the earth, analogous to colliquative sweats, by
which the human body is sometimes wasted and consumed. They might
act as so many fences to protect the tender blade from the
piercing winds of the spring; or, by multiplying the reflexion of
the sun, they might increase the warmth, so as to mitigate the
natural chilness of the soil and climate -- But, surely this
excessive perspiration might be more effectually checked by
different kinds of manure, such as ashes, lime, chalk, or marl,
of which last it seems there are many pits in this kingdom: as
for the warmth, it would be much more equally obtained by
inclosures; the cultivation would require less labour; and the
ploughs, harrows, and horses, would not suffer half the damage
which they now sustain.

These north-western parts are by no means fertile in corn. The
ground is naturally barren and moorish. The peasants are poorly
lodged, meagre in their looks, mean in their apparel, and
remarkably dirty. This last reproach they might easily wash off,
by means of those lakes, rivers, and rivulets of pure water, with
which they are so liberally supplied by nature. Agriculture
cannot be expected to flourish where the farms are small, the
leases short, and the husbandman begins upon a rack rent, without
a sufficient stock to answer the purposes of improvement. The
granaries of Scotland are the banks of the Tweed, the counties of
East and Mid-Lothian, the Carse of Gowrie, in Perthshire, equal
in fertility to any part of England, and some tracts in
Aberdeenshire and Murray, where I am told the harvest is more
early than in Northumberland, although they lie above two degrees
farther north. I have a strong curiosity to visit many places
beyond the Forth and the Tay, such as Perth, Dundee, Montrose,
and Aberdeen, which are towns equally elegant and thriving; but
the season is too far advanced to admit of this addition to my
original plan.

I am so far happy as to have seen Glasgow, which, to the best of
my recollection and judgment, is one of the prettiest towns in
Europe; and, without all doubt, it is one of the most flourishing
in Great Britain. In short, it is a perfect bee-hive in point of
industry. It stands partly on a gentle declivity; but the
greatest part of it is in a plain, watered by the river Clyde.
The streets are straight, open, airy, and well paved; and the
houses lofty and well built of hewn stone. At the upper end of
the town, there is a venerable cathedral, that may be compared
with York-minster or West-minster; and, about the middle of the
descent from this to the Cross, is the college, a respectable
pile of building, with all manner of accommodation for the
professors and students, including an elegant library, and a
observatory well provided with astronomical instruments. The
number of inhabitants is said to amount to thirty thousand; and
marks of opulence and independency appear in every quarter of
this commercial city, which, however, is not without its
inconveniences and defects. The water of their public pumps is
generally hard and brackish, an imperfection the loss excusable,
as the river Clyde runs by their doors, in the lower part of the
town; and there are rivulets and springs above the cathedral,
sufficient to fill a large reservoir with excellent water, which
might be thence distributed to all the different parts of the
city. It is of more consequence to consult the health of the
inhabitants in this article than to employ so much attention in
beautifying their town with new streets, squares, and churches.
Another defect, not so easily remedied, is the shallowness of the
river, which will not float vessels of any burthen within ten or
twelve miles of the city; so that the merchants are obliged to
load and unload their ships at Greenock and Port-Glasgow,
situated about fourteen miles nearer the mouth of the Frith,
where it is about two miles broad.

The people of Glasgow have a noble spirit of enterprise -- Mr
Moore, a surgeon, to whom I was recommended from Edinburgh,
introduced me to all the principal merchants of the place. Here I
became acquainted with Mr Cochran, who may be stiled one of the
sages of this kingdom. He was first magistrate at the time of the
last rebellion. I sat as member when he was examined in the house
of commons, upon which occasion Mr P-- observed he had never
heard such a sensible evidence given at that bar. I was also
introduced to Dr John Gordon, a patriot of a truly Roman spirit,
who is the father of the linen manufacture in this place, and was
the great promoter of the city workhouse, infirmary, and other
works of public utility. Had he lived in ancient Rome, he would
have been honoured with a statue at the public expence. I
moreover conversed with one Mr G--ssf--d, whom I take to be one
of the greatest merchants in Europe. In the last war, he is said
to have had at one time five and twenty ships with their cargoes,
his own property, and to have traded for above half a million
sterling a-year. The last war was a fortunate period for the
commerce of Glasgow -- The merchants, considering that their ships
bound for America, launching out at once into the Atlantic by the
north of Ireland, pursued a track very little frequented by
privateers, resolved to insure one another, and saved a very
considerable sum by this resolution, as few or none of their
ships were taken -- You must know I have a sort of national
attachment to this part of Scotland -- The great church dedicated
to St Mongah, the river Clyde, and other particulars that smack
of our Welch language and customs, contribute to flatter me with
the notion, that these people are the descendants of the Britons,
who once possessed this country. Without all question, this was a
Cumbrian kingdom: its capital was Dumbarton (a corruption of
Dunbritton) which still exists as a royal borough, at the influx
of the Clyde and Leven, ten miles below Glasgow. The same
neighbourhood gave birth to St Patrick, the apostle of Ireland,
at a place where there is still a church and village, which
retain his name. Hard by are some vestiges of the famous Roman
wall, built in the reign of Antonine, from the Clyde to the
Forth, and fortified with castles, to restrain the incursions of
the Scots or Caledonians, who inhabited the West-Highlands. In a
line parallel to this wall, the merchants of Glasgow have
determined to make a navigable canal betwixt the two Firths which
will be of incredible advantage to their commerce, in
transporting merchandize from one side of the island to the
other.

From Glasgow we travelled along the Clyde, which is a delightful
stream, adorned on both sides with villas, towns, and villages.
Here is no want of groves, and meadows, and corn-fields
interspersed; but on this side of Glasgow, there is little other
grain than oats and barley; the first are much better, the last
much worse, than those of the same species in England. I wonder,
there is so little rye, which is a grain that will thrive in
almost any soil; and it is still more surprising, that the
cultivation of potatoes should be so much neglected in the
Highlands, where the poor people have not meal enough to supply
them with bread through the winter. On the other side of the
river are the towns of Paisley and Renfrew. The first, from an
inconsiderable village, is become one of the most flourishing
places of the kingdom, enriched by the linen, cambrick, flowered
lawn, and silk manufactures. It was formerly noted for a rich
monastery of the monks of Clugny, who wrote the famous Scoti-Chronicon,
called The Black Book of Paisley. The old abbey still
remains, converted into a dwelling-house, belonging to the earl
of Dundonald. Renfrew is a pretty town, on the banks of Clyde,
capital of the shire, which was heretofore the patrimony of the
Stuart family, and gave the title of baron to the king's eldest
son, which is still assumed by the prince of Wales.

The Clyde we left a little on our left-hand at Dunbritton, where
it widens into an aestuary or frith, being augmented by the
influx of the Leven. On this spot stands the castle formerly
called Alcluyd, washed, by these two rivers on all sides, except
a narrow isthmus, which at every spring-tide is overflowed. The
whole is a great curiosity, from the quality and form of the
rock, as well as from the nature of its situation -- We now crossed
the water of Leven, which, though nothing near so considerable as
the Clyde, is much more transparent, pastoral, and delightful.
This charming stream is the outlet of Lough-Lomond, and through a
tract of four miles pursues its winding course, murmuring over a
bed of pebbles, till it joins the Frith at Dunbritton. A very
little above its source, on the lake, stands the house of
Cameron, belonging to Mr Smollett, so embosomed in an oak wood,
that we did not see it till we were within fifty yards of the
door. I have seen the Lago di Garda, Albano, De Vico, Bolsena,
and Geneva, and, upon my honour, I prefer Lough-Lomond to them
all, a preference which is certainly owing to the verdant islands
that seem to float upon its surface, affording the most
inchanting objects of repose to the excursive view. Nor are the
banks destitute of beauties, which even partake of the sublime.
On this side they display a sweet variety of woodland, cornfield,
and pasture, with several agreeable villas emerging as it were
out of the lake, till, at some distance, the prospect terminates
in huge mountains covered with heath, which being in the bloom,
affords a very rich covering of purple. Every thing here is
romantic beyond imagination. This country is justly stiled the
Arcadia of Scotland; and I don't doubt but it may vie with
Arcadia in every thing but climate. -- I am sure it excels it in
verdure, wood, and water. -- What say you to a natural bason of
pure water, near thirty miles long, and in some places seven
miles broad, and in many above a hundred fathom deep, having four
and twenty habitable islands, some of them stocked with deer, and
all of them covered with wood; containing immense quantities of
delicious fish, salmon, pike, trout, perch, flounders, eels, and
powans, the last a delicate kind of fresh-water herring peculiar
to this lake; and finally communicating with the sea, by sending
off the Leven, through which all those species (except the powan)
make their exit and entrance occasionally?

Inclosed I send you the copy of a little ode to this river, by Dr
Smollett, who was born on the banks of it, within two miles of
the place where I am now writing. -- It is at least picturesque and
accurately descriptive, if it has no other merit. -- There is an
idea of truth in an agreeable landscape taken from nature, which
pleases me more than the gayest fiction which the most luxuriant
fancy can display.

I have other remarks to make; but as my paper is full, I must
reserve them till the next occasion. I shall only observe at
present, that I am determined to penetrate at least forty miles
into the Highlands, which now appear like a vast fantastic vision
in the clouds, inviting the approach of

Yours always,
MATT. BRAMBLE
CAMERON, Aug. 28.

ODE TO LEVEN-WATER

On Leven's banks, while free to rove,
And tune the rural pipe to love;
I envied not the happiest swain
That ever trod th' Arcadian plain.

Pure stream! in whose transparent wave
My youthful limbs I wont to lave;
No torrents stain thy limpid source;
No rocks impede thy dimpling course,
That sweetly warbles o'er its bed,
With white, round, polish'd pebbles spread;
While, lightly pois'd, the scaly brood
In myriads cleave thy crystal flood;
The springing trout in speckled pride;
The salmon, monarch of the tide;
The ruthless pike, intent on war;
The silver eel, and motled par.*

Devolving from thy parent lake,
A charming maze thy waters make,
By bow'rs of birch, and groves of pine,
And hedges flow'r'd with eglantine.

Still on thy banks so gayly green,
May num'rous herds and flocks be seen,
And lasses chanting o'er the pail,
And shepherds piping in the dale,
And ancient faith that knows no guile,
And industry imbrown'd with toil,
And hearts resolv'd, and hands prepar'd,
The blessings they enjoy to guard.

* The par is a small fish, not unlike the smelt, which it rivals
in delicacy and flavour.



To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DOCTOR,

If I was disposed to be critical, I should say this house of
Cameron is too near the lake, which approaches, on one side, to
within six or seven yards of the window. It might have been
placed in a higher site, which would have afforded a more
extensive prospect and a drier atmosphere; but this imperfection
is not chargeable on the present proprietor, who purchased it
ready built, rather than be at the trouble of repairing his own
family-house of Bonhill, which stands two miles from hence on the
Leven, so surrounded with plantation, that it used to be known by
the name of the Mavis (or thrush) Nest. Above that house is a
romantic glen or clift of a mountain, covered with hanging woods
having at bottom a stream of fine water that forms a number of
cascades in its descent to join the Leven; so that the scene is
quite enchanting. A captain of a man of war, who had made the
circuit of the globe with Mr Anson, being conducted to this glen,
exclaimed, 'Juan Fernandez, by God!'

Indeed, this country would be a perfect paradise, if it was not,
like Wales, cursed with a weeping climate, owing to the same
cause in both, the neighbourhood of high mountains, and a
westerly situation, exposed to the vapours of the Atlantic ocean.
This air, however, notwithstanding its humidity, is so healthy,
that the natives are scarce ever visited by any other disease
than the smallpox, and certain cutaneous evils, which are the
effects of dirty living, the great and general reproach of the
commonalty of this kingdom. Here are a great many living
monuments of longaevity; and among the rest a person, whom I
treat with singular respect, as a venerable druid, who has lived
near ninety years, without pain or sickness, among oaks of his
own planting. -- He was once proprietor of these lands; but being
of a projecting spirit, some of his schemes miscarried, and he
was obliged to part with his possession, which hath shifted hands
two or three times since that period; but every succeeding
proprietor hath done every thing in his power, to make his old
age easy and comfortable. He has a sufficiency to procure the
necessaries of life; and he and his old woman reside in a small
convenient farm-house, having a little garden which he cultivates
with his own hands. This ancient couple live in great health,
peace, and harmony, and, knowing no wants, enjoy the perfection
of content. Mr Smollet calls him the admiral, because he insists
upon steering his pleasure-boat upon the lake; and he spends most
of his time in ranging through the woods, which he declares he
enjoys as much as if they were still his own property -- I asked
him the other day, if he was never sick, and he answered, Yes;
he had a slight fever the year before the union. If he was not
deaf, I should take much pleasure in his conversation; for he is
very intelligent, and his memory is surprisingly retentive -- These
are the happy effects of temperance, exercise, and good nature --
Notwithstanding all his innocence, however, he was the cause of
great perturbation to my man Clinker, whose natural superstition
has been much injured, by the histories of witches, fairies,
ghosts, and goblins, which he has heard in this country -- On the
evening after our arrival, Humphry strolled into the wood, in the
course of his meditation, and all at once the admiral stood
before him, under the shadow of a spreading oak. Though the
fellow is far from being timorous in cases that are not supposed
preternatural, he could not stand the sight of this apparition,
but ran into the kitchen, with his hair standing on end, staring
wildly, and deprived of utterance. Mrs Jenkins, seeing him in
this condition, screamed aloud, 'Lord have mercy upon us, he has
seen something!' Mrs Tabitha was alarmed, and the whole house in
confusion. When he was recruited with a dram, I desired him to
explain the meaning of all this agitation; and, with some
reluctance, he owned he had seen a spirit, in the shape of an old
man with a white beard, a black cap, and a plaid night-gown. He
was undeceived by the admiral in person, who, coming in at this
juncture, appeared to be a creature of real flesh and blood.

Do you know how we fare in this Scottish paradise? We make free
with our landlord's mutton, which is excellent, his poultry-yard,
his garden, his dairy, and his cellar, which are all well stored.
We have delicious salmon, pike, trout, perch, par, &c. at the
door, for the taking. The Frith of Clyde, on the other side of
the hill, supplies us with mullet, red and grey, cod, mackarel,
whiting, and a variety of sea-fish, including the finest fresh
herrings I ever tasted. We have sweet, juicy beef, and tolerable
veal, with delicate bread
from the little town of Dunbritton; and plenty of partridge,
growse, heath cock, and other game in presents.

We have been visited by all the gentlemen in the neighbourhood,
and they have entertained us at their houses, not barely with
hospitality, but with such marks of cordial affection, as one
would wish to find among near relations, after an absence of many
years.

I told you, in my last, I had projected an excursion to the
Highlands, which project I have now happily executed, under the
auspices of Sir George Colquhoun, a colonel in the Dutch service,
who offered himself as our conductor on this occasion. Leaving
our women at Cameron, to the care and inspection of Lady H-- C--,
we set out on horseback for Inverary, the county town of Argyle,
and dined on the road with the Laird of Macfarlane, the greatest
genealogist I ever knew in any country, and perfectly acquainted
with all the antiquities of Scotland.

The Duke of Argyle has an old castle in Inverary, where he
resides when he is in Scotland; and hard by is the shell of a
noble Gothic palace, built by the last duke, which, when
finished, will be a great ornament to this part of the Highlands.
As for Inverary, it is a place of very little importance.

This country is amazingly wild, especially towards the mountains,
which are heaped upon the backs of one another, making a most
stupendous appearance of savage nature, with hardly any signs of
cultivation, or even of population. All is sublimity, silence,
and solitude. The people live together in glens or bottoms, where
they are sheltered from the cold and storms of winter: but there
is a margin of plain ground spread along the sea side, which is
well inhabited and improved by the arts of husbandry; and this I
take to be one of the most agreeable tracts of the whole island;
the sea not only keeps it warm, and supplies it with fish, but
affords one of the most ravishing prospects in the whole world; I
mean the appearance of the Hebrides, or Western Islands to the
number of three hundred, scattered as far as the eye can reach,
in the most agreeable confusion. As the soil and climate of the
Highlands are but ill adapted to the cultivation of corn, the
people apply themselves chiefly to the breeding and feeding of
black cattle, which turn to good account. Those animals run wild
all the winter, without any shelter or subsistence, but what they
can find among the heath. When the snow lies so deep and hard,
that they cannot penetrate to the roots of the grass, they make a
diurnal progress, guided by a sure instinct, to the seaside at
low water, where they feed on the alga marina, and other plants
that grow upon the beach.

Perhaps this branch of husbandry, which required very little
attendance and labour, is one of the principal causes of that
idleness and want of industry, which distinguishes these
mountaineers in their own country. When they come forth into the
world, they become as diligent and alert as any people upon
earth. They are undoubtedly a very distinct species from their
fellow subjects of the Lowlands, against whom they indulge an
ancient spirit of animosity; and this difference is very
discernible even among persons of family and education. The
Lowlanders are generally cool and circumspect, the Highlanders
fiery and ferocious:' but this violence of their passions serves
only to inflame the zeal of their devotion to strangers, which is
truly enthusiastic.

We proceeded about twenty miles beyond Inverary, to the house of
a gentleman, a friend of our conductor, where we stayed a few
days, and were feasted in such a manner, that I began to dread
the consequence to my constitution.

Notwithstanding the solitude that prevails among these mountains,
there is no want of people in the Highlands. I am credibly
informed that the duke of Argyle can assemble five thousand men
in arms, of his own clan and surname, which is Campbell; and
there is besides a tribe of the same appellation, whose chief' is
the Earl of Breadalbine. The Macdonalds are as numerous, and
remarkably warlike: the Camerons, M'Leods, Frasers, Grants,
M'Kenzies, M'Kays, M'Phersons, M'Intoshes, are powerful clans; so
that if all the Highlanders, including the inhabitants of the
Isles, were united, they could bring into the field an army of
forty thousand fighting men, capable of undertaking the most
dangerous enterprize. We have lived to see four thousand of them,
without discipline, throw the whole kingdom of Great Britain into
confusion. They attacked and defeated two armies of regular
troops accustomed to service. They penetrated into the centre of
England; and afterwards marched back with deliberation, in the
face of two other armies, through an enemy's country, where every
precaution was taken to cut off their retreat. I know not any
other people in Europe, who, without the use or knowledge of
arms, will attack regular forces sword in hand, if their chief
will head them in battle. When disciplined, they cannot fail of
being excellent soldiers. They do not walk like the generality of
mankind, but trot and bounce like deer, as if they moved upon
springs. They greatly excel the Lowlanders in all the exercises
that require agility; they are incredibly abstemious, and patient
of hunger and fatigue, -- so steeled against the weather, that in
travelling, even when the ground is covered with snow, they never
look for a house, or any other shelter but their plaid, in which
they wrap themselves up, and go to sleep under the cope of
heaven. Such people, in quality of soldiers, must be invincible,
when the business is to perform quick marches in a difficult
country, to strike sudden strokes, beat up the enemy's quarters,
harrass their cavalry, and perform expeditions without the
formality of magazines, baggage, forage, and artillery. The
chieftainship of the Highlanders is a very dangerous influence
operating at the extremity of the island, where the eyes and
hands of government cannot be supposed to see [and] act with
precision and vigour. In order to break the force of clanship,
administration has always practised the political maxim, Divide
et impera. The legislature hath not only disarmed these
mountaineers, but also deprived them of their antient garb, which
contributed in a great measure to keep up their military spirit;
and their slavish tenures are all dissolved by act of parliament;
so that they are at present as free and independent of their
chiefs, as the law can make them: but the original attachment
still remains, and is founded on something prior to the feudal
system, about which the writers of this age have made such a
pother, as if it was a new discovery, like the Copernican system.
Every peculiarity of policy, custom, and even temperament, is
affectedly traced to this origin, as if the feudal constitution
had not been common to almost all the natives of Europe. For my
part, I expect to see the use of trunk-hose and buttered ale
ascribed to the influence of the feudal system. The connection
between the clans and their chiefs is, without all doubt,
patriarchal. It is founded on hereditary regard and affection,
cherished through a long succession of ages. The clan consider
the chief as their father, they bear his name, they believe
themselves descended from his family, and they obey him as their
lord, with all the ardour of filial love and veneration; while
he, on his part, exerts a paternal authority, commanding,
chastising, rewarding, protecting, and maintaining them as his
own children. If the legislature would entirely destroy this
connection, it must compel the Highlanders to change their
habitation and their names. Even this experiment has been
formerly tried without success -- In the reign of James VI a battle
was fought within a few short miles of this place, between two
clans, the M'Gregors and the Colquhouns, in which the latter were
defeated: the Laird of M'Gregor made such a barbarous use of his
victory, that he was forfeited and outlawed by act of parliament:
his lands were given to the family of Montrose, and his clan were
obliged to change their name. They obeyed so far, as to call
themselves severally Campbell, Graham, or Drummond, the surnames
of the families of Argyle, Montrose, and Perth, that they might
enjoy the protection of those houses; but they still added
M'Gregor to their new appellation; and as their chief was
deprived of his estate, they robbed and plundered for his
subsistence. -- Mr Cameron of Lochiel, the chief of that clan,
whose father was attainted for having been concerned in the last
rebellion, returning from France in obedience to a proclamation
and act of parliament, passed at the beginning of the late war,
payed a visit to his own country, and hired a farm in the
neighbourhood of his father's house, which had been burnt to the
ground. The clan, though ruined and scattered, no sooner heard of
his arrival than they flocked to him from all quarters, to
welcome his return, and in a few days stocked his farm with seven
hundred black cattle, which they had saved in the general wreck
of their affairs: but their beloved chief, who was a promising
youth, did not live to enjoy the fruits of their fidelity and
attachment.

The most effectual method I know to weaken, and at length destroy
this influence, is to employ the commonalty in such a manner as
to give them a taste of property and independence. In vain the
government grants them advantageous leases on the forfeited
estates, if they have no property to prosecute the means of
improvement -- The sea is an inexhaustible fund of riches; but the
fishery cannot be carried on without vessels, casks, salt, lines,
nets, and other tackle. I conversed with a sensible man of this
country, who, from a real spirit of patriotism had set up a
fishery on the coast, and a manufacture of coarse linen, for the
employment of the poor Highlanders. Cod is here in such plenty,
that he told me he had seen several hundred taken on one line, at
one hawl -- It must be observed, however, that the line was of
immense length, and had two thousand hooks, baited with muscles;
but the fish was so superior to the cod caught on the banks of
Newfoundland, that his correspondent at Lisbon sold them
immediately at his own price, although Lent was just over when
they arrived, and the people might be supposed quite cloyed with
this kind of diet -- His linen manufacture was likewise in a
prosperous way, when the late war intervening, all his best hands
were pressed into the service.

It cannot be expected, that the gentlemen of this country should
execute commercial schemes to render their vassals independent;
nor, indeed, are such schemes suited to their way of life and
inclination; but a company of merchants might, with proper
management, turn to good account a fishery established in this
part of Scotland -- Our people have a strange itch to colonize
America, when the uncultivated parts of our own island might be
settled to greater advantage.

After having rambled through the mountains and glens of Argyle,
we visited the adjacent islands of Ila, Jura, Mull, and Icomkill.
In the first, we saw the remains of a castle, built in a lake,
where Macdonald, lord or king of the isles, formerly resided.
Jura is famous for having given birth to one Mackcrain, who lived
one hundred and eighty years in one house, and died in the reign
of Charles the Second. Mull affords several bays, where there is
safe anchorage: in one of which, the Florida, a ship of the
Spanish armada, was blown up by one of Mr Smollett's ancestors --
About forty years ago, John duke of Argyle is said to have
consulted the Spanish registers, by which it appeared, that this
ship had the military chest on board -- He employed experienced
divers to examine the wreck; and they found the hull of the
vessel still entire, but so covered with sand, that they could
not make their way between decks; however, they picked up several
pieces of plate, that were scattered about in the bay, and a
couple of fine brass cannon.

Icolmkill, or Iona, is a small island which St Columba chose for
his habitation -- It was respected for its sanctity, and college or
seminary of ecclesiastics -- Part of its church is still standing,
with the tombs of several Scottish, Irish, and Danish sovereigns,
who were here interred -- These islanders are very bold and
dexterous watermen, consequently the better adapted to the
fishery: in their manners they are less savage and impetuous than
their countrymen on the continent; and they speak the Erse or
Gaelick in its greatest purity.

Having sent round our horses by land, we embarked in the distinct
of Cowal, for Greenock, which is a neat little town, on the other
side of the Frith, with a curious harbour formed by three stone
jetties, carried out a good way into the sea -- Newport-Glasgow is
such another place, about two miles higher up. Both have a face of
business and plenty, and are supported entirely by the shipping
of Glasgow, of which I counted sixty large vessels in these
harbours -- Taking boat again at Newport, we were in less than an
hour landed on the other side, within two short miles of our
head-quarters, where we found our women in good health and
spirits. They had been two days before joined by Mr. Smollett and
his lady, to whom we have such obligations as I cannot mention,
even to you, without blushing.

To-morrow we shall bid adieu to the Scotch Arcadia, and begin our
progress to the southward, taking our way by Lanerk and
Nithsdale, to the west borders of England. I have received so
much advantage and satisfaction from this tour, that if my health
suffers no revolution in the winter, I believe I shall be tempted
to undertake another expedition to the Northern extremity of
Caithness, unencumbered by those impediments which now clog the
heels of,

Yours,
MATT. BRAMBLE
CAMERON, Sept. 6.



To Miss LAETITIA WILLIS, at Gloucester.

MY DEAREST LETTY,

Never did poor prisoner long for deliverance, more than I have
longed for an opportunity to disburthen my cares into your
friendly bosom; and the occasion which now presents itself, is
little less than miraculous -- Honest Saunders Macawly, the
travelling Scotchman, who goes every year to Wales, is now at
Glasgow, buying goods, and coming to pay his respects to our
family, has undertaken to deliver this letter into your own hand --
We have been six weeks in Scotland, and seen the principal towns
of the kingdom, where we have been treated with great civility --
The people are very courteous; and the country being exceedingly
romantic, suits my turn and inclinations -- I contracted some
friendships at Edinburgh, which is a large and lofty city, full
of gay company; and, in particular, commenced an intimate
correspondence with one miss R--t--n, an amiable young lady of my
own age, whose charms seemed to soften, and even to subdue the
stubborn heart of my brother Jery; but he no sooner left the
place than he relapsed into his former insensibility -- I feel,
however, that this indifference is not the family constitution -- I
never admitted but one idea of love, and that has taken such root
in my heart, as to be equally proof against all the pulls of
discretion, and the frosts of neglect.

Dear Letty! I had an alarming adventure at the hunters ball in
Edinburgh -- While I sat discoursing with a friend in a corner, all
at once the very image of Wilson stood before me, dressed exactly
as he was in the character of Aimwell! It was one Mr Gordon, whom
I had not seen before -- Shocked at the sudden apparition, I
fainted away, and threw the whole assembly in confusion -- However,
the cause of my disorder remained a secret to every body but my
brother, who was likewise struck with the resemblance, and
scolded after we came home -- I am very sensible of Jery's
affection, and know he spoke as well with a view to my own
interest and happiness, as in regard to the honour of the family;
but I cannot bear to have my wounds probed severely -- I was not so
much affected by the censure he passed upon my own indiscretion,
as with the reflection he made on the conduct of Wilson. He
observed, that if he was really the gentleman he pretended to be,
and harboured nothing but honourable designs, he would have
vindicated his pretensions in the face of day -- This remark made a
deep impression upon my mind -- I endeavoured to conceal my
thoughts; and this endeavour had a bad effect upon my health and
spirits; so it was thought necessary that I should go to the
Highlands, and drink the goat-milk-whey.

We went accordingly to Lough Lomond, one of the most enchanting
spots in the whole world; and what with this remedy, which I had
every morning fresh from the mountains, and the pure air, and
chearful company, I have recovered my flesh and appetite; though
there is something still at bottom, which it is not in the power
of air, exercise, company, or medicine to remove -- These incidents
would not touch me so nearly, if I had a sensible confidant to
sympathize with my affliction, and comfort me with wholesome
advice -- I have nothing of this kind, except Win Jenkins, who is
really a good body in the main, but very ill qualified for such
an office -- The poor creature is weak in her nerves, as well as in
her understanding; otherwise I might have known the true name and
character of that unfortunate youth -- But why do I call him
unfortunate? perhaps the epithet is more applicable to me for
having listened to the false professions of -- But, hold! I have as
yet no right, and sure I have no inclination to believe any thing
to the prejudice of his honour -- In that reflection I shall still
exert my patience. As for Mrs Jenkins, she herself is really an
object of compassion -- Between vanity, methodism, and love, her
head is almost turned. I should have more regard for her,
however, if she had been more constant in the object of her
affection; but, truly, she aimed at conquest, and flirted at the
same time with my uncle's footman, Humphrey Clinker, who is
really a deserving young man, and one Dutton, my brother's valet
de chambre, a debauched fellow; who, leaving Win in the lurch,
ran away with another man's bride at Berwick.

My dear Willis, I am truly ashamed of my own sex -- We complain of
advantages which the men take of our youth, inexperience,
insensibility, and all that; but I have seen enough to believe,
that our sex in general make it their business to ensnare the
other; and for this purpose, employ arts which are by no means to
be justified -- In point of constancy, they certainly have nothing
to reproach the male part of the creation -- My poor aunt, without
any regard to her years and imperfections, has gone to market
with her charms in every place where she thought she had the
least chance to dispose of her person, which, however, hangs
still heavy on her hands -- I am afraid she has used even religion
as a decoy, though it has not answered her expectation -- She has
been praying, preaching, and catechising among the methodists,
with whom this country abounds; and pretends to have such
manifestations and revelations, as even Clinker himself can
hardly believe, though the poor fellow is half crazy with
enthusiasm. As for Jenkins, she affects to take all her
mistress's reveries for gospel. She has also her heart-heavings
and motions of the spirit; and God forgive me if I think
uncharitably, but all this seems to me to be downright hypocrisy
and deceit -- Perhaps, indeed, the poor girl imposes on herself --
She is generally in a flutter, and is much subject to vapours --
Since we came to Scotland, she has seen apparitions, and pretends
to prophesy -- If I could put faith in all these supernatural
visitations, I should think myself abandoned of grace; for I have
neither seen, heard, nor felt anything of this nature, although I
endeavour to discharge the duties of religion with all the
sincerity, zeal, and devotion, that is in the power of,

Dear Letty,
your ever affectionate,
LYDIA MELFORD
GLASGOW, Sept. 7.

We are so far on our return to Brambleton-hall; and I would fain
hope we shall take Gloucester in our way, in which case I shall
have the inexpressible pleasure of embracing my dear Willis -- Pray
remember me to my worthy governess.



To Mrs MARY JONES, at Brambleton-hall.

DEAR MARY,

Sunders Macully, the Scotchman, who pushes directly for Vails,
has promised to give it you into your own hand, and therefore I
would not miss the opportunity to let you know as I am still in
the land of the living: and yet I have been on the brink of the
other world since I sent you my last letter. -- We went by sea to
another kingdom called Fife, and coming back, had like to have
gone to pot in a storm. -- What between the frite and sickness, I
thought I should have brought my heart up; even Mr Clinker was
not his own man for eight and forty hours after we got ashore. It
was well for some folks that we scaped drownding; for mistress
was very frexious, and seemed but indifferently prepared for a
change; but, thank God, she was soon put in a better frame by the
private exaltations of the reverend Mr Macrocodile. -- We
afterwards churned to Starling and Grascow, which are a kiple of
handsome towns; and then we went to a gentleman's house at Loff-Loming,
which is a wonderful sea of fresh water, with a power of
hylands in the midst on't. -- They say as how it has n'er a bottom,
and was made by a musician and, truly, I believe it; for it is
not in the coarse of nature. -- It has got waves without wind, fish
without fins, and a floating hyland; and one of them is a crutch-yard,
where the dead are buried; and always before the person
dies, a bell rings of itself to give warning.

O Mary! this is the land of congyration -- The bell knolled when we
were there -- I saw lights, and heard lamentations. -- The gentleman,
our landlord, has got another house, which he was fain to quit,
on account of a mischievous ghost, that would not suffer people
to lie in their beds. The fairies dwell in a hole of Kairmann, a
mounting hard by; and they steal away the good women that are in
the straw, if so be as how there a'n't a horshoe nailed to the
door: and I was shewn an ould vitch, called Elspath Ringavey,
with a red petticoat, bleared eyes, and a mould of grey bristles
on her sin. -- That she mought do me no harm, I crossed her hand
with a taster, and bid her tell my fortune; and she told me such
things descriving Mr Clinker to a hair -- but it shall ne'er be
said, that I minchioned a word of the matter. -- As I was troubled
with fits, she advised me to bathe in the loff, which was holy
water; and so I went in the morning to a private place along with
the house-maid, and we bathed in our birth-day soot, after the
fashion of the country; and behold whilst we dabbled in the loff,
sir George Coon started up with a gun; but we clapt our hands to
our faces, and passed by him to the place where we had left our
smocks -- A civil gentleman would have turned his head another
way. -- My comfit is, he new not which was which; and, as the
saying is, all cats in the dark are grey -- Whilst we stayed at
Loff-Loming, he and our two squires went three or four days
churning among the wild men of the mountings; a parcel of
selvidges that lie in caves among
the rocks, devour young children, speak Velch, but the vords are
different. Our ladies would not part with Mr Clinker, because he
is so stout and so pyehouse, that he fears neither man nor
devils, if so be as they don't take him by surprise. -- Indeed, he
was once so flurried by an operition, that he had like to have
sounded. -- He made believe as if it had been the ould edmiral; but
the old edmiral could not have made his air to stand on end,, and
his teeth to shatter; but he said so in prudence, that the ladies
mought not be afear'd. Miss Liddy has been puny, and like to go
into a decline -- I doubt her pore art is too tinder -- but the
got's-fey has set her on her legs again. -- You nows got's-fey is
mother's milk to a Velch woman. As for mistress, blessed be God,
she ails nothing. -- Her stomick is good, and she improves in
grease and godliness; but, for all that, she may have infections
like other people, and I believe, she wouldn't be sorry to be
called your ladyship, whenever sir George thinks proper to ax the
question -- But, for my part, whatever I may see or hear, not a
praticle shall ever pass the lips of,

Dear Molly,
Your loving friend,
WIN. JENKINS
GRASCO, Sept. 7.

Remember me, as usual, to Sall. -- We are now coming home, though
not the nearest road. -- I do suppose, I shall find the kitten a
fine boar at my return.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. at Oxon.

DEAR KNIGHT,

Once more I tread upon English ground, which I like not the worse
for the six weeks' ramble I have made among the woods and
mountains of Caledonia; no offence to the land of cakes, where
bannocks grow upon straw. I never saw my uncle in such health and
spirits as he now enjoys. Liddy is perfectly recovered; and Mrs
Tabitha has no reason to complain. Nevertheless, I believe, she
was, till yesterday, inclined to give the whole Scotch nation to
the devil, as a pack of insensible brutes, upon whom her
accomplishments had been displayed in vain. -- At every place where
we halted, did she mount the stage, and flourished her rusty
arms, without being able to make one conquest. One of her last
essays was against the heart of Sir George Colquhoun, with whom
she fought all the weapons more than twice over. -- She was grave
and gay by turns -- she moralized and methodized -- she laughed, and
romped, and danced, and sung, and sighed, and ogled, and lisped,
and fluttered, and flattered -- but all was preaching to the desart.
The baronet, being a well-bred man, carried his civilities as far
as she could in conscience expect, and, if evil tongues are to be
believed, some degrees farther; but he was too much a veteran in
gallantry, as well as in war, to fall into any ambuscade that she
could lay for his affection -- While we were absent in the
Highlands, she practised also upon the laird of Ladrishmore, and
even gave him the rendezvous in the wood of Drumscailloch; but
the laird had such a reverend care of his own reputation, that he
came attended with the parson of the parish, and nothing passed
but spiritual communication. After all these miscarriages, our
aunt suddenly recollected lieutenant Lismahago, whom, ever since
our first arrival at Edinburgh, she seemed to have utterly
forgot; but now she expressed her hopes of seeing him at
Dumfries, according to his promise.

We set out from Glasgow by the way of Lanerk, the county-town of
Clydesdale, in the neighbourhood of which, the whole river Clyde,
rushing down a steep rock, forms a very noble and stupendous
cascade. Next day we were obliged to halt in a small borough,
until the carriage, which had received some damage, should be
repaired; and here we met with an incident which warmly
interested the benevolent spirit of Mr Bramble -- As we stood at
the window of an inn that fronted the public prison, a person
arrived on horseback, genteelly, tho' plainly, dressed in a blue
frock, with his own hair cut short, and a gold-laced hat upon his
head. -- Alighting, and giving his horse to the landlord, he
advanced to an old man who was at work in paving the street, and
accosted him in these words: 'This is hard work for such an old
man as you.' -- So saying, he took the instrument out of his hand,
and began to thump the pavement. -- After a few strokes, 'Have you
never a son (said he) to ease you of this labour?' 'Yes, an
please Your honour (replied the senior), I have three hopeful
lads, but, at
present, they are out of the way.' 'Honour not me (cried the
stranger); but more becomes me to honour your grey hairs. Where
are those sons you talk of?' The ancient paviour said, his eldest
son was a captain in the East Indies; and the youngest had lately
inlisted as a soldier, in hopes of prospering like his brother.
The gentleman desiring to know what was become of the second, he
wiped his eyes, and owned, he had taken upon him his old father's
debts, for which he was now in the prison hard by.

The traveller made three quick steps towards the jail, then
turning short, 'Tell me (said he), has that unnatural captain
sent you nothing to relieve your distress?' 'Call him not
unnatural (replied the other); God's blessing be upon him! he
sent me a great deal of money; but I made a bad use of it; I lost
it by being security for a gentleman that was my landlord, and
was stript of all I had in the world besides.' At that instant a
young man, thrusting out his head and neck between two iron bars
in the prison-window, exclaimed, 'Father! father! if my brother
William is in life, that's he!' 'I am! -- I am! -- (cried the
stranger, clasping the old man in his arms, and shedding a flood
of tears) -- I am your son Willy, sure enough!' Before the father,
who was quite confounded, could make any return to this
tenderness, a decent old woman bolting out from the door of a
poor habitation, cried, 'Where is my bairn? where is my dear
Willy?' -- The captain no sooner beheld her, than he quitted his
father, and ran into her embrace.

I can assure you, my uncle, who saw and heard every thing that
passed, was as much moved as any one of the parties concerned in
this pathetic recognition -- He sobbed, and wept, and clapped his
hands, and hollowed, and finally ran down into the street. By
this time, the captain had retired with his parents, and all the
inhabitants of the place were assembled at the door. -- Mr Bramble,
nevertheless, pressed thro' the crowd, and entering the house,
'Captain (said he), I beg the favour of your acquaintance. I would
have travelled a hundred miles to see this affecting scene; and I
shall think myself happy if you and your parents will dine with
me at the public house.' The captain thanked him for his kind
invitation, which, he said, he would accept with pleasure; but in
the mean time, he could not think of eating or drinking, while
his poor brother was in trouble. He forthwith deposited a sum
equal to the debt in the hands of the magistrate, who ventured to
set his brother at liberty without farther process; and then the
whole family repaired to the inn with my uncle, attended by the
crowd, the individuals of which shook their townsman by the hand,
while he returned their caresses without the least sign of pride
or affectation.

This honest favourite of fortune, whose name was Brown, told my
uncle, that he had been bred a weaver, and, about eighteen years
ago, had, from a spirit of idleness and dissipation, enlisted as
a soldier in the service of the East-India company; that, in the
course of duty, he had the good fortune to attract the notice and
approbation of Lord Clive, who preferred him from one step to
another, till he attained the rank of captain and pay-master to
the regiment, in which capacities he had honestly amassed above
twelve thousand pounds, and, at the peace, resigned his
commission. -- He had sent several remittances to his father, who
received the first only, consisting of one hundred pounds; the
second had fallen into the hands of a bankrupt; and the third had
been consigned to a gentleman of Scotland, who died before it
arrived; so that it still remained to be accounted for by his
executors. He now presented the old man with fifty pounds for his
present occasions, over and above bank notes for one hundred,
which he had deposited for his brother's release. -- He brought
along with him a deed ready executed, by which he settled a
perpetuity of four-score pounds upon his parents, to be inherited
by their other two sons after their decease. -- He promised to
purchase a commission for his youngest brother; to take the other
as his own partner in a manufacture which he intended to set up,
to give employment and bread to the industrious; and to give five
hundred pounds, by way of dower, to his sister, who had married a
farmer in low circumstances. Finally, he gave fifty pounds to the
poor of the town where he was born, and feasted all the
inhabitants without exception.

My uncle was so charmed with the character of captain Brown, that
he drank his health three times successively at dinner -- He said,
he was proud of his acquaintance; that he was an honour to his
country, and had in some measure redeemed human nature from the
reproach of pride, selfishness, and ingratitude. -- For my part, I
was as much pleased with the modesty as with the filial virtue of
this honest soldier, who assumed no merit from his success, and
said very little of his own transactions, though the answers he
made to our inquiries were equally sensible and laconic, Mrs
Tabitha behaved very graciously to him until she understood that
he was going to make a tender of his hand to a person of low
estate, who had been his sweet-heart while he worked as a
journeyman weaver. -- Our aunt was no sooner made acquainted with
this design, than she starched up her behaviour with a double
proportion of reserve; and when the company broke up, she
observed with a toss of her nose, that Brown was a civil fellow
enough, considering the lowness of his original; but that
Fortune, though she had mended his circumstances, was incapable
to raise his ideas, which were still humble and plebeian.

On the day that succeeded this adventure, we went some miles out
of our road to see Drumlanrig, a seat belonging to the duke of
Queensberry, which appears like a magnificent palace erected by
magic, in the midst of a wilderness. -- It is indeed a princely
mansion, with suitable parks and plantations, rendered still more
striking by the nakedness of the surrounding country, which is
one of the wildest tracts in all Scotland. -- This wildness,
however, is different from that of the Highlands; for here the
mountains, instead of heath, are covered with a fine green
swarth, affording pasture to innumerable flocks of sheep. But the
fleeces of this country, called Nithsdale, are not comparable to
the wool of Galloway, which is said to equal that of Salisbury
plain. Having passed the night at the castle of Drumlanrig, by
invitation from the duke himself, who is one of the best men that
ever breathed, we prosecuted our journey to Dumfries, a very
elegant trading town near the borders of England, where we found
plenty of good provision and excellent wine, at very reasonable
prices, and the accommodation as good in all respects as in any
part of South-Britain. If I was confined to Scotland for life, I
would chuse Dumfries as the place of my residence. Here we made
enquiries about captain Lismahago, of whom hearing no tidings, we
proceeded by the Solway Frith, to Carlisle. You must know, that
the Solway sands, upon which travellers pass at low water, are
exceedingly dangerous, because, as the tide makes, they become
quick in different places, and the flood rushes in so
impetuously, that the passengers are often overtaken by the sea
and perish.

In crossing these treacherous Syrtes with a guide, we perceived a
drowned horse, which Humphry Clinker, after due inspection,
declared to be the very identical beast which Mr Lismahago rode
when he parted with us at Feltonbridge in Northumberland. This
information, which seemed to intimate that our friend the
lieutenant had shared the fate of his horse, affected us all, and
above all our aunt Tabitha, who shed salt tears, and obliged
Clinker to pull a few hairs out of the dead horse's tail, to be
worn in a ring as a remembrance of his master: but her grief and
ours was not of long duration; for one of the first persons we
saw in Carlisle, was the lieutenant in propria persona,
bargaining with a horse-dealer for another steed, in the yard of
the inn where we alighted. -- Mrs Bramble was the first that
perceived him, and screamed as if she had seen a ghost; and,
truly, at a proper time and place, he might very well have passed
for an inhabitant of another world; for he was more meagre and
grim than before. -- We received him the more cordially for having
supposed he had been drowned; and he was not deficient in
expressions of satisfaction at this meeting. He told us, he had
enquired for us at Dumfries, and been informed by a travelling
merchant from Glasgow, that we had resolved to return by the way
of Coldstream. He said, that in passing the sands without a
guide, his horse had knocked up, and he himself must have
perished, if he had not been providentially relieved by a return
post-chaise. -- He moreover gave us to understand, that his scheme
of settling in his own country having miscarried, he was so far
on his way to London, with a view to embark for North-America,
where he intended to pass the rest of his days among his old
friends the Miamis, and amuse himself in finishing the education
of the son he had by his beloved Squinkinacoosta.

This project was by no means agreeable to our good aunt, who
expatiated upon the fatigues and dangers that would attend such a
long voyage by sea, and afterwards such a tedious journey by
land -- She enlarged particularly on the risque he would run, with
respect to the concerns of his precious soul, among savages who
had not yet received the glad tidings of salvation; and she
hinted that his abandoning Great-Britain might, perhaps, prove
fatal to the inclinations of some deserving person, whom he was
qualified to make happy for life. My uncle, who is really a Don
Quixote in generosity, understanding that Lismahago's real reason
for leaving Scotland was the impossibility of subsisting in it
with any decency upon the wretched provision of a subaltern's
half-pay, began to be warmly interested on the side of
compassion. -- He thought it very hard, that a gentleman who had
served his country with honour, should be driven by necessity to
spend his old age, among the refuse of mankind, in such a remote
part of the world. -- He discoursed with me upon the subject;
observing, that he would willingly offer the lieutenant an asylum
at Brambleton-hall, if he did not foresee that his singularities
and humour of contradiction would render him an intolerable
housemate, though his conversation at some times might be both
instructive and entertaining: but, as there seemed to be
something particular in his attention to Mrs Tabitha, he and I
agreed in opinion, that this intercourse should be encouraged and
improved, if possible, into a matrimonial union; in which case
there would be a comfortable provision for both; and they might
be settled in a house of their own, so that Mr Bramble should
have no more of their company than he desired.

In pursuance of this design, Lismahago has been invited to pass
the winter at Brambleton-hall, as it will be time enough to
execute his American project in the spring. -- He has taken time to
consider of this proposal; mean while, he will keep us company as
far as we travel in the road to Bristol, where he has hopes of
getting a passage for America. I make no doubt but that he will
postpone his voyage, and prosecute his addresses to a happy
consummation; and sure, if it produces any fruit, it must be of a
very peculiar flavour. As the weather continues favourable, I
believe, we shall take the Peak of Derbyshire and Buxton Wells in
our way. -- At any rate, from the first place where we make any
stay, you shall hear again from

Yours always,
J. MELFORD
CARLISLE, Sep. 12.



To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DOCTOR,

The peasantry of Scotland are certainly on a poor footing all
over the kingdom; and yet they look better, and are better
cloathed than those of the same rank in Burgundy, and many other
places of France and Italy; nay, I will venture to say they are
better fed, notwithstanding the boasted wine of these foreign
countries. The country people of North-Britain live chiefly on
oat-meal, and milk, cheese, butter, and some garden-stuff, with
now and then a pickled-herring, by way of delicacy; but flesh-meat
they seldom or never taste; nor any kind of strong liquor,
except two-penny, at times of uncommon festivity -- Their breakfast
is a kind of hasty pudding, of oat-meal or pease-meal, eaten with
milk. They have commonly pottage for dinner, composed of cale or
cole, leeks, barley or big, and butter; and this is reinforced
with bread and cheese, made of skimmed-milk -- At night they sup on
sowens or flummery of oat-meal -- In a scarcity of oats, they use
the meal of barley and pease, which is both nourishing and
palatable. Some of them have potatoes; and you find parsnips in
every peasant's garden -- They are cloathed with a coarse kind of
russet of their own making, which is both decent and warm -- They
dwell in poor huts, built of loose stones and turf, without any
mortar, having a fireplace or hearth in the middle, generally
made of an old mill-stone, and a hole at top to let out the
smoke.

These people, however, are content, and wonderfully sagacious --
All of them read the Bible, and are even qualified to dispute
upon the articles of their faith; which in those parts I have
seen, is entirely Presbyterian. I am told, that the inhabitants
of Aberdeenshire are still more acute. I once knew a Scotch
gentleman at London, who had declared war against this part of
his countrymen; and swore that the impudence and knavery of the
Scots, in that quarter, had brought a reproach upon the whole
nation.

The river Clyde, above Glasgow, is quite pastoral; and the banks
of it are every where adorned with fine villas. From the sea to
its source, we may reckon the seats of many families of the first
rank, such as the duke of Argyle at Roseneath, the earl of Bute
in the isle of that name, the earl of Glencairn at Finlayston,
lord Blantyre at Areskine, the dutchess of Douglas at Bothwell,
duke Hamilton at Hamilton, the duke of Douglas at Douglas, and
the earl of Hyndford at Carmichael. Hamilton is a noble palace,
magnificently furnished; and hard by is the village of that name,
one of the neatest little towns I have seen in any country. The
old castle of Douglas being burned to the ground by accident, the
late duke resolved, as head of the first family of Scotland, to
have the largest house in the kingdom, and ordered a plan for
this purpose; but there was only one wing of it finished when he
died. It is to be hoped that his nephew, who is now in possession
of his great fortune, will complete the design of his
predecessor -- Clydesdale is in general populous and rich,
containing a great number of gentlemen, who are independent in
their fortune; but it produces more cattle than corn -- This is
also the case with Tweedale, through part of which we passed, and
Nithsdale, which is generally rough, wild, and mountainous -- These
hills are covered with sheep; and this is the small delicious
mutton, so much preferable to that of the London-market. As their
feeding costs so little, the sheep are not killed till five years
old, when their flesh, juices, and flavour are in perfection; but
their fleeces are much damaged by the tar, with which they are
smeared to preserve them from the rot in winter, during which
they run wild night and day, and thousands are lost under huge
wreaths of snow -- 'Tis pity the farmers cannot contrive some means
to shelter this useful animal from the inclemencies of a rigorous
climate, especially from the perpetual rains, which are more
prejudicial than the greatest extremity of cold weather.

On the little river Nid, is situated the castle of Drumlanrig,
one of the noblest seats in Great-Britain, belonging to the duke
of Queensberry; one of those few noblemen whose goodness of heart
does honour to human-nature -- I shall not pretend to enter into a
description of this palace, which is really an instance of the
sublime in magnificence, as well as in situation, and puts one in
mind of the beautiful city of Palmyra, rising like a vision in
the midst of the wilderness. His grace keeps open house, and
lives with great splendour -- He did us the honour to receive us
with great courtesy, and detain'd us all night, together with
above twenty other guests, with all their servants and horses to
a very considerable number -- The dutchess was equally gracious,
and took our ladies under her immediate protection. The longer I
live, I see more reason to believe that prejudices of education
are never wholly eradicated, even when they are discovered to be
erroneous and absurd. Such habits of thinking as interest the
grand passions, cleave to the human heart in such a manner, that
though an effort of reason may force them from their hold for a
moment, this violence no sooner ceases, than they resume their
grasp with an increased elasticity and adhesion.

I am led into this reflection, by what passed at the duke's table
after supper. The conversation turned upon the vulgar notions of
spirits and omens, that prevail among the commonalty of North-Britain,
and all the company agreed, that nothing could be more
ridiculous. One gentleman, however, told a remarkable story of
himself, by way of speculation 'Being on a party of hunting in
the North (said he), I resolved to visit an old friend, whom I
had not seen for twenty years -- So long he had been retired and
sequestered from all his acquaintance, and lived in a moping
melancholy way, much afflicted with lowness of spirits,
occasioned by the death of his wife, whom he had loved with
uncommon affection. As he resided in a remote part of the
country, and we were five gentlemen with as many servants, we
carried some provision with us from the next market town, lest we
should find him unprepared for our reception. The roads being
bad, we did not arrive at the house till two o'clock in the
afternoon; and were agreeably surprised to find a very good
dinner ready in the kitchen, and the cloth laid with six covers.
My friend himself appeared in his best apparel at the gate, and
received us with open arms, telling me he had been expecting us
these two hours. Astonished at this declaration, I asked who had
given him intelligence of our coming? and he smiled without
making any other reply. However, presuming upon our former
intimacy, I afterwards insisted upon knowing; and he told me,
very gravely, he had seen me in a vision of the second sight --
Nay, he called in the evidence of his steward, who solemnly
declared, that his master had the day before apprised him of my
coming, with four other strangers, and ordered him to provide
accordingly; in consequence of which intimation, he had prepared
the dinner which we were now eating; and laid the covers
according to the number foretold.' The incident we all owned to
be remarkable, and I endeavoured to account for it by natural
means. I observed, that as the gentleman was of a visionary turn,
the casual idea, or remembrance of his old friend, might suggest
those circumstances, which accident had for once realized; but
that in all probability he had seen many visions of the same
kind, which were never verified. None of the company directly
dissented from my opinion; but from the objections that were
hinted, I could plainly perceive that the majority were persuaded
there was something more extraordinary in the case.

Another gentleman of the company, addressing himself to me,
'Without all doubt (said he), a diseased imagination is very apt
to produce visions; but we must find some other method to account
for something of this kind, that happened within these eight days
in my neighbourhood -- A gentleman of a good family, who cannot be
deemed a visionary in any sense of the word, was near his own
gate, in the twilight, visited by his grandfather, who has been
dead these fifteen years -- The spectre was mounted seemingly on
the very horse he used to ride, with an angry and terrible
countenance, and said something, which his grandson, in the
confusion of fear, could not understand. But this was not all -- He
lifted up a huge horse whip, and applied it with great violence
to his back and shoulders, on which I saw the impression with my
own eyes. The apparition was afterwards seen by the sexton of the
parish, hovering about the tomb where his body lies interred; as
the man declared to several persons in the village, before he
knew what had happened to the gentleman -- Nay, he actually came to
me as a justice of the peace, in order to make oath of these
particulars, which, however, I declined administering. As for the
grandson of the defunct, he is a sober, sensible, worldly minded
fellow, too intent upon schemes of interest to give in to
reveries. He would have willingly concealed the affair; but he
bawled out in the first transport of his fear, and, running into
the house, exposed his back and his sconce to the whole family;
so that there was no denying it in the sequel. It is now the
common discourse of the country, that this appearance and
behaviour of the old man's spirit, portends some great calamity
to the family, and the good-woman has actually taken to her bed
in this apprehension.'

Though I did not pretend to explain this mystery, I said, I did
not at all doubt, but it would one day appear to be a deception;
and, in all probability, a scheme executed by some enemy of the
person who had sustained the assault; but still the gentleman
insisted upon the clearness of the evidence, and the concurrence
of testimony, by which two creditable witnesses, without any
communication one with another, affirmed the appearance of the
same man, with whose person they were both well acquainted -- From
Drumlanrig we pursued the course of the Nid to Dumfries, which
stands seven miles above the place where the river falls into the
sea; and is, after Glasgow, the handsomest town I have seen in
Scotland. The inhabitants, indeed, seem to have proposed that city
as their model; not only in beautifying their town and regulating
its police, but, also in prosecuting their schemes of commerce
and manufacture, by which they are grown rich and opulent.

We re-entered England, by the way of Carlisle, where we
accidentally met with our friend Lismahago, whom we had in vain
inquired after at Dumfries and other places -- It would seem that
the captain, like the prophets of old, is but little honoured in
his own country, which he has now renounced for ever -- He gave me
the following particulars of his visit to his native soil -- In his
way to the place of his nativity, he learned that his nephew had
married the daughter of a burgeois, who directed a weaving
manufacture, and had gone into partnership with his father-in-law:
chagrined with this information, he had arrived at the gate
in the twilight, where he heard the sound of treddles in the
great hall, which had exasperated him to such a degree, that he
had like to have lost his senses: while he was thus transported
with indignation, his nephew chanced to come forth, when, being
no longer master of his passion, he cried, 'Degenerate rascal!
you have made my father's house a den of thieves;' and at the
same time chastised him with his horse-whip; then, riding round
the adjoining village, he had visited the burying-ground of his
ancestors by moon-light; and, having paid his respects to their
manes, travelled all night to another part of the country --
Finding the head of the family in such a disgraceful situation,
all his own friends dead or removed from the places of their
former residence, and the expence of living increased to double
of what it had been, when he first left his native country, he
had bid it an eternal adieu, and was determined to seek for
repose among the forests of America.

I was no longer at a loss to account for the apparition, which
had been described at Drumlanrig; and when I repeated the story
to the lieutenant, he was much pleased to think his resentment
had been so much more effectual than he intended; and he owned,
he might at such an hour, and in such an equipage, very well pass
for the ghost of his father, whom he was said greatly to
resemble -- Between friends, I fancy Lismahago will find a retreat
without going so far as the wigwams of the Miamis. My sister
Tabby is making continual advances to him, in the way of
affection; and, if I may trust to appearances, the captain is
disposed to take opportunity by the forelock. For my part, I
intend to encourage this correspondence, and shall be glad to see
them united -- In that case, we shall find a way to settle them
comfortably in our own neighbourhood. I, and my servants, will
get rid of a very troublesome and tyrannic gouvernante; and I
shall have the benefit of Lismahago's conversation, without being
obliged to take more of his company than I desire; for though an
olla is a high-flavoured dish, I could not bear to dine upon it
every day of my life.

I am much pleased with Manchester, which is one of the most
agreeable and flourishing towns in Great-Britain; and I perceive
that this is the place which hath animated the spirit, and
suggested the chief manufactures of Glasgow. We propose to visit
Chatsworth, the Peak, and Buxton, from which last place we shall
proceed directly homewards, though by easy journies. If the
season has been as favourable in Wales as in the North, your
harvest is happily finished; and we have nothing left to think of
but our October, of which let Barns be properly reminded. You
will find me much better in flesh than I was at our parting; and
this short separation has given a new edge to those sentiments of
friendship with which I always have been, and ever shall be,

Yours,
MATT. BRAMBLE
MANCHESTER, Sept. 15.



To Mrs GWILLIM, house-keeper at Brambleton-hall.

MRS GWYLLIM,

It has pleased Providence to bring us safe back to England, and
partake us in many pearls by land and water, in particular the
Devil's Harse a pike, and Hoyden's Hole, which hath got no
bottom; and, as we are drawing huomwards, it may be proper to
uprise you, that Brambleton-hall may be in condition to receive
us, after this long gurney to the islands of Scotland. By the
first of next month you may begin to make constant fires in my
brother's chamber and mine; and burn a fagget every day in the
yellow damask room: have the tester and curtains dusted, and the
featherbed and matrosses well haired, because, perhaps, with the
blissing of haven, they may be yoosed on some occasion. Let the
ould hogsheads be well skewred and seasoned for bear, as Mat is
resolved to have his seller choak fool.

If the house was mine, I would turn over a new leaf -- I don't see
why the sarvants of Wales shouldn't drink fair water, and eat hot
cakes and barley cale, as they do in Scotland, without troubling
the botcher above once a quarter -- I hope you keep accunt of
Roger's purseeding in reverence to the buttermilk. I expect my
dew when I come huom, without baiting an ass, I'll assure you. --
As you must have layed a great many more eggs than would be
eaten, I do suppose there is a power of turks, chickings, and
guzzling about the house; and a brave kergo of cheese ready for
market; and that the owl has been sent to Crickhowel, saving what
the maids spun in the family.

Pray let the whole house and furniture have a thorough cleaning
from top to bottom, for the honour of Wales; and let Roger search
into, and make a general clearance of the slit holes, which the
maids have in secret; for I know they are much given to sloth and
uncleanness. I hope you have worked a reformation among them, as
I exhorted you in my last, and set their hearts upon better
things than they can find in junkitting and caterwauling with the
fellows of the country.

As for Win Jenkins, she has undergone a perfect metamurphysis,
and is become a new creeter from the ammunition of Humphry
Clinker, our new footman, a pious young man, who has laboured
exceedingly, that she may bring forth fruits of repentance. I
make no doubt but he will take the same pains with that pert
hussey Mary Jones, and all of you; and that he may have power
given to penetrate and instill his goodness, even into your most
inward parts, is the fervent prayer of

Your friend in the spirit,
TAB. BRAMBLE
Septr. 18.



To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR LEWIS,

Lismahago is more paradoxical than ever. -- The late gulp he had of
his native air, seems to have blown fresh spirit into all his
polemical faculties. I congratulated him the other day on the
present flourishing state of his country, observing that the
Scots were now in a fair way to wipe off the national reproach of
poverty, and expressing my satisfaction at the happy effects of
the union, so conspicuous in the improvement of their
agriculture, commerce, manufactures, and manners -- The lieutenant,
screwing up his features into a look of dissent and disgust,
commented on my remarks to this effect -- 'Those who reproach a
nation for its poverty, when it is not owing to the profligacy or
vice of the people, deserve no answer. The Lacedaemonians were
poorer than the Scots, when they took the lead among all the free
states of Greece, and were esteemed above them all for their
valour and their virtue. The most respectable heroes of ancient
Rome, such as Fabricius, Cincinnatus, and Regulus, were poorer
than the poorest freeholder in Scotland; and there are at this
day individuals in North-Britain, one of whom can produce more
gold and silver than the whole republic of Rome could raise at
those times when her public virtue shone with unrivalled lustre;
and poverty was so far from being a reproach, that it added fresh
laurels to her fame, because it indicated a noble contempt of
wealth, which was proof against all the arts of corruption -- If
poverty be a subject for reproach, it follows that wealth is the
object of esteem and veneration -- In that case, there are Jews and
others in Amsterdam and London, enriched by usury, peculation,
and different species of fraud and extortion, who are more
estimable than the most virtuous and illustrious members of the
community. An absurdity which no man in his senses will offer to
maintain. -- Riches are certainly no proof of merit: nay they are
often (if not most commonly) acquired by persons of sordid minds
and mean talents: nor do they give any intrinsic worth to the
possessor; but, on the contrary, tend to pervert his
understanding, and render his morals more depraved. But, granting
that poverty were really matter of reproach, it cannot be justly
imputed to Scotland. No country is poor that can supply its
inhabitants with the necessaries of life, and even afford
articles for exportation. Scotland is rich in natural advantages:
it produces every species of provision in abundance, vast herds
of cattle and flocks of sheep, with a great number of horses;
prodigious quantities of wool and flax, with plenty of copse
wood, and in some parts large forests of timber. The earth is
still more rich below than above the surface. It yields
inexhaustible stores of coal, free-stone, marble, lead, iron,
copper, and silver, with some gold. The sea abounds with
excellent fish, and salt to cure them for exportation; and there
are creeks and harbours round the whole kingdom, for the
convenience and security of navigation. The face of the country
displays a surprising number of cities, towns, villas, and
villages, swarming with people; and there seems to be no want of
art, industry, government, and police: such a kingdom can never
be called poor, in any sense of the word, though there may be
many others more powerful and opulent. But the proper use of
those advantages, and the present prosperity of the Scots, you
seem to derive from the union of the two kingdoms!'

I said, I supposed he would not deny that the appearance of the
country was much mended; that the people lived better, had more
trade, and a greater quantity of money circulating since the
union, than before. 'I may safely admit these premises (answered
the lieutenant), without subscribing to your inference. The
difference you mention, I should take to be the natural progress
of improvement -- Since that period, other nations, such as the
Swedes, the Danes, and in particular the French, have greatly
increased in commerce, without any such cause assigned. Before
the union, there was a remarkable spirit of trade among the
Scots, as appeared in the case of their Darien company, in which
they had embarked no less than four hundred thousand pounds
sterling; and in the flourishing state of the maritime towns in
Fife, and on the eastern coast, enriched by their trade with
France, which failed in consequence of the union. The only solid
commercial advantage reaped from that measure, was the privilege
of trading to the English plantations; yet, excepting Glasgow and
Dumfries, I don't know any other Scotch towns concerned in that
traffick. In other respects, I conceive the Scots were losers by
the union. -- They lost the independency of their state, the
greatest prop of national spirit; they lost their parliament, and
their courts of justice were subjected to the revision and
supremacy of an English tribunal.'

'Softly, captain (cried I), you cannot be said to have lost your
own parliament, while you are represented in that of Great-Britain.'
'True (said he, with a sarcastic grin), in debates of
national competition, the sixteen peers and forty-five commoners
of Scotland, must make a formidable figure in the scale, against
the whole English legislature.' 'Be that as it may (I observed)
while I had the honour to sit in the lower house, the Scotch
members had always the majority on their side.' 'I understand
you, Sir (said he), they generally side with the majority; so much
the worse for their constituents. But even this evil is not the
worst they have sustained by the union. Their trade has been saddled
with grievous impositions, and every article of living severely
taxed, to pay the interest of enormous debts, contracted by the
English, in support of measures and connections in which the
Scots had no interest nor concern.' I begged he would at least
allow, that by the union the Scots were admitted to all the
privileges and immunities of English subjects; by which means
multitudes of them were provided for in the army and navy, and
got fortunes in different parts of England, and its dominions.
'All these (said he) become English subjects to all intents and
purposes, and are in a great measure lost to their mother-country.
The spirit of rambling and adventure has been always
peculiar to the natives of Scotland. If they had not met with
encouragement in England, they would have served and settled, as
formerly, in other countries, such as Muscovy, Sweden, Denmark,
Poland, Germany, France, Piedmont, and Italy, in all which
nations their descendants continue to flourish even at this day.'

By this time my patience began to fail and I exclaimed, 'For
God's sake, what has England got by this union which, you say,
has been so productive of misfortune to the Scots.' ' Great and
manifold are the advantages which England derives from the union
(said Lismahago, in a solemn tone). First and foremost, the
settlement of the protestant succession, a point which the
English ministry drove with such eagerness, that no stone was
left unturned, to cajole and bribe a few leading men, to cram the
union down the throats of the Scottish nation, who were
surprisingly averse to the expedient. They gained by it a
considerable addition of territory, extending their dominion to
the sea on all sides of the island, thereby shutting up all back-doors
against the enterprizes of their enemies. They got an
accession of above a million of useful subjects, constituting a
never-failing nursery of seamen, soldiers, labourers, and
mechanics; a most valuable acquisition to a trading country,
exposed to foreign wars, and obliged to maintain a number of
settlements in all the four quarters of the globe. In the course
of seven years, during the last war, Scotland furnished the
English army and navy with seventy thousand men, over and above
those who migrated to their colonies, or mingled with them at
home in the civil departments of life. This was a very
considerable and seasonable supply to a nation, whose people had
been for many years decreasing in number, and whose lands and
manufactures were actually suffering for want of hands. I need
not remind you of the hackneyed maxim, that, to a nation in such
circumstances, a supply of industrious people is a supply of
wealth; nor repeat an observation, which is now received as an
eternal truth, even among the English themselves, that the Scots
who settle in South-Britain are remarkably sober, orderly, and
industrious.'

I allowed the truth of this remark, adding, that by their
industry, oeconomy, and circumspection, many of them in England,
as well as in her colonies, amassed large fortunes, with which
they returned to their own country, and this was so much lost to
South-Britain. -- 'Give me leave, sir (said he), to assure you,
that in your fact you are mistaken, and in your deduction
erroneous. Not one in two hundred that leave Scotland ever
returns to settle in his own country; and the few that do return,
carry thither nothing that can possibly diminish the stock of
South-Britain; for none of their treasure stagnates in Scotland --
There is a continual circulation, like that of the blood in the
human body, and England is the heart, to which all the streams
which it distributes are refunded and returned: nay, in
consequence of that luxury which our connexion with England hath
greatly encouraged, if not introduced, all the produce of our
lands, and all the profits of our trade, are engrossed by the
natives of South-Britain; for you will find that the exchange
between the two kingdoms is always against
Scotland; and that she retains neither gold nor silver sufficient
for her own circulation. -- The Scots, not content with their own
manufactures and produce, which would very well answer all
necessary occasions, seem to vie with each other in purchasing
superfluities from England; such as broad-cloth, velvets, stuffs,
silks, lace, furs, jewels, furniture of all sorts, sugar, rum,
tea, chocolate and coffee; in a word, not only every mode of the
most extravagant luxury, but even many articles of convenience,
which they might find as good, and much cheaper in their own
country. For all these particulars, I conceive, England may touch
about one million sterling a-year. -- I don't pretend to make an
exact calculation; perhaps, it may be something less, and
perhaps, a great deal more. The annual revenue arising from all
the private estates of Scotland cannot fall short of a million
sterling; and, I should imagine, their trade will amount to as
much more. -- I know the linen manufacture alone returns near half
a million, exclusive of the home-consumption of that article. --
If, therefore, North-Britain pays a ballance of a million
annually to England, I insist upon it, that country is more
valuable to her in the way of commerce, than any colony in her
possession, over and above the other advantages which I have
specified: therefore, they are no friends, either to England or
to truth, who affect to depreciate the northern part of the
united kingdom.'

I must own, I was at first a little nettled to find myself
schooled in so many particulars. -- Though I did not receive all
his assertions as gospel, I was not prepared to refute them; and
I cannot help now acquiescing in his remarks so far as to
think, that the contempt for Scotland, which prevails too much on
this side the Tweed, is founded on prejudice and error. -- After
some recollection, 'Well, captain (said I), you have argued
stoutly for the importance of your own country: for my part, I
have such a regard for our fellow-subjects of North-Britain, that
I shall be glad to see the day, when your peasants can afford to
give all their oats to their cattle, hogs, and poultry, and
indulge themselves with good wheaten loaves, instead of such
poor, unpalatable, and inflammatory diet.' Here again I brought
my self into a premunire with the disputative Caledonian. He said
he hoped he should never see the common people lifted out of that
sphere for which they were intended by nature and the course of
things; that they might have some reason to complain of their
bread, if it were mixed, like that of Norway, with saw dust and
fish-bones; but that oatmeal was, he apprehended, as nourishing
and salutary as wheat-flour, and the Scots in general thought it
at least as savoury. -- He affirmed, that a mouse, which, in the
article of self-preservation, might be supposed to act from
infallible instinct, would always prefer oats to wheat, as
appeared from experience; for, in a place where there was a
parcel of each, that animal has never begun to feed upon the
latter till all the oats were consumed: for their nutritive
quality, he appealed to the hale, robust constitutions of the
people who lived chiefly upon oatmeal; and, instead of being
inflammatory, he asserted, that it was a cooling sub-acid,
balsamic and mucilaginous; insomuch, that in all inflammatory
distempers, recourse was had to water-gruel, and flummery made of
oatmeal.

'At least (said I), give me leave to wish them such a degree of
commerce as may enable them to follow their own inclinations.' --
'Heaven forbid! (cried this philosopher). Woe be to that nation,
where the multitude is at liberty to follow their own
inclinations! Commerce is undoubtedly a blessing, while
restrained within its proper channels; but a glut of wealth
brings along with it a glut of evils: it brings false taste,
false appetite, false wants, profusion, venality, contempt of
order, engendering a spirit of licentiousness, insolence, and
faction, that keeps the community in continual ferment, and in
time destroys all the distinctions of civil society; so that
universal anarchy and uproar must ensue. Will any sensible man
affirm, that the national advantages of opulence are to be sought
on these terms?' 'No, sure; but I am one of those who think,
that, by proper regulations, commerce may produce every national
benefit, without the allay of such concomitant evils.'

So much for the dogmata of my friend Lismahago, whom I describe
the more circumstantially, as I firmly believe he will set up his
rest in Monmouthshire. Yesterday, while I was alone with him he
asked, in some confusion, if I should have any objection to the
success of a gentleman and a soldier, provided he should be so
fortunate as to engage my sister's affection. I answered without
hesitation, that my sister was old enough to judge for
herself; and that I should be very far from disapproving any
resolution she might take in his favour. -- His eyes sparkled at
this declaration. He declared, he should think himself the
happiest man on earth to be connected with my family; and that he
should never be weary of giving me proofs of his gratitude and
attachment. I suppose Tabby and he are already agreed; in which
case, we shall have a wedding at Brambleton-hall, and you shall
give away the bride. -- It is the least thing you can do, by way
of atonement for your former cruelty to that poor love-sick
maiden, who has been so long a thorn in the side of


Yours,
MATT. BRAMBLE
Sept. 20.

We have been at Buxton; but, as I did not much relish either the
company or the accommodations, and had no occasion for the water,
we stayed but two nights in the place.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR WAT,

Adventures begin to thicken as we advance to the southward.
Lismahago has now professed himself the admirer of our aunt, and
carries on his addresses under the sanction of her brother's
approbation; so that we shall certainly have a wedding by
Christmas. I should be glad you was present at the nuptials, to
help me throw the stocking, and perform other ceremonies peculiar
to that occasion. -- I am sure it will be productive of some
diversion; and, truly, it would be worth your while to come
across the country on purpose to see two such original figures in
bed together, with their laced night caps; he, the emblem of good
cheer, and she, the picture of good nature. All this agreeable
prospect was clouded, and had well nigh vanished entirely, in
consequence of a late misunderstanding between the future
brothers-in-law, which, however, is now happily removed.

A few days ago, my uncle and I, going to visit a relation, met
with lord Oxmington at his house, who asked us to dine with him,
next day, and we accepted the invitation. -- Accordingly, leaving
our women under the care of captain Lismahago, at the inn where
we had lodged the preceding night, in a little town, about a mile
from his lordship's dwelling, we went at the hour appointed, and
had a fashionable meal served up with much ostentation to a
company of about a dozen persons, none of whom he had ever seen
before. -- His lordship is much more remarkable for his pride and
caprice, than for his hospitality and understanding; and, indeed,
it appeared, that he considered his guests merely as objects to
shine upon, so as to reflect the lustre of his own magnificence --
There was much state, but no courtesy; and a great deal of
compliment without any conversation. -- Before the desert was
removed, our noble entertainer proposed three general toasts;
then calling for a glass of wine, and bowing all round, wished us
a good afternoon. This was the signal for the company to break
up, and they obeyed it immediately, all except our 'squire who
was greatly shocked at the manner of this dismission -- He changed
countenance, bit his lip in silence, but still kept his seat, so
that his lordship found himself obliged to give us another hint,
by saying, he should be glad to see us another time. 'There is no
time like the present (cried Mr Bramble); your lordship has not
yet drank a bumper to the best in Christendom.' 'I'll drink no
more bumpers to-day (answered our landlord); and I am sorry to
see you have drank too many. -- Order the gentleman's carriage to
the gate.' -- So saying, he rose and retired abruptly; our 'squire
starting up at the same time, laying his hand upon his sword, and
eyeing him with a most ferocious aspect. The master having
vanished in this manner, our uncle bad one of the servants to see
what was to pay; and the fellow answering, 'This is no inn,' 'I
cry you mercy (cried the other), I perceive it is not; if it
were, the landlord would be more civil. There's a guinea,
however; take it, and tell your lord, that I shall riot leave the
country till I have had the opportunity to thank him in person
for his politeness and hospitality.'

We then walked down stairs through a double range of lacqueys,
and getting into the chaise, proceeded homewards. Perceiving the
'squire much ruffled, I ventured to disapprove of his resentment,
observing, that as lord Oxmington was well known to have his
brain very ill timbered, a sensible man should rather laugh, than
be angry at his ridiculous want of breeding. -- Mr Bramble took
umbrage at my presuming to be wiser than he upon this occasion;
and told me, that as he had always thought for himself in every
occurrence in life, he would still use the same privilege, with
my good leave.

When we returned to our inn, he closeted Lismahago; and having
explained his grievance, desired that gentleman to go and demand
satisfaction of lord Oxmington in his name. -- The lieutenant
charged himself with this commission, and immediately set out a
horseback for his lordship's house, attended, at his own request,
by my man Archy Macalpine, who had been used to military service;
and truly, if Macalpine had been mounted upon an ass, this couple
might have passed for the knight of La Mancha and his 'squire
Panza. It was not till after some demur that Lismahago obtained a
private audience, at which he formally defied his lordship to
single combat, in the name of Mr Bramble, and desired him to
appoint the time and place. Lord Oxmington was so confounded at
this unexpected message, that he could not, for some time, make
any articulate reply; but stood staring at the lieutenant with
manifest marks of perturbation. At length, ringing a bell with
great vehemence, he exclaimed, 'What! a commoner send a challenge
to a peer of the realm! -- Privilege! privilege! -- Here's a person
brings me a challenge from the Welshman that dined at my table --
An impudent fellow. -- My wine is not yet out of his head.'

The whole house was immediately in commotion. -- Macalpine made a
soldierly retreat with two horses; but the captain was suddenly
surrounded and disarmed by the footmen, whom a French valet de
chambre headed in this exploit; his sword was passed through a
close-stool, and his person through the horse-pond. In this
plight he returned to the inn, half mad with his disgrace. So
violent was the rage of his indignation, that he mistook its
object. -- He wanted to quarrel with Mr Bramble; he said, he had
been dishonoured on his account, and he looked for reparation at
his hands. -- My uncle's back was up in a moment; and he desired
him to explain his pretensions. -- 'Either compel lord Oxmington to
give me satisfaction (cried he), or give it me in your own
person.' 'The latter part of the alternative is the most easy and
expeditious (replied the 'squire, starting up): if you are
disposed for a walk, I'll attend you this moment.'

Here they were interrupted by Mrs Tabby, who had overheard all
that passed. -- She now burst into the room, and running betwixt
them, in great agitation, 'Is this your regard for me (said she
to the lieutenant), to seek the life of my brother?' Lismahago,
who seemed to grow cool as my uncle grew hot, assured her he had
a very great respect for Mr Bramble, but he had still more for
his own honour, which had suffered pollution; but if that could
be once purified, he should have no further cause of
dissatisfaction. The 'squire said, he should have thought it
incumbent upon him to vindicate the lieutenant's honour; but, as
he had now carved for himself, he might swallow and digest it as
well as he could -- In a word, what betwixt the mediation of Mrs
Tabitha, the recollection of the captain, who perceived he had
gone too far, and the remonstrances of your humble servant, who
joined them at this juncture, those two originals were perfectly
reconciled; and then we proceeded to deliberate upon the means of
taking vengeance for the insults they had received from the
petulant peer; for, until that aim should be accomplished, Mr
Bramble swore, with great emphasis, that he would not leave the
inn where we now lodged, even if he should pass his Christmas on
the spot.

In consequence of our deliberations, we next day, in the
forenoon, proceeded in a body to his lordship's house, all of us,
with our servants, including the coachman, mounted a-horseback,
with our pistols loaded and ready primed. -- Thus prepared for
action, we paraded solemnly and slowly before his lordship's
gate, which we passed three times in such a manner, that he could
not but see us, and suspect the cause of our appearance. -- After
dinner we returned, and performed the same cavalcade, which was
again repeated the morning following; but we had no occasion to
persist in these manoeuvres. About noon, we were visited by the
gentleman, at whose house we had first seen lord Oxmington. -- He
now came to make apologies in the name of his lordship, who
declared he had no intention to give offence to my uncle, in
practising what had been always the custom of his house; and that
as for the indignities which had been put upon the officer, they
were offered without his Lordship's knowledge, at the instigation
of his valet de chambre. -- 'If that be the case (said my uncle, in
a peremptory tone), I shall be contented with lord Oxmington's
personal excuses; and I hope my friend will be satisfied with his
lordship's turning that insolent rascal out of his service.' --
'Sir (cried Lismahago), I must insist upon taking personal
vengeance for the personal injuries I have sustained.'

After some debate, the affair was adjusted in this manner. -- His
lordship, meeting us at our friend's house, declared he was sorry
for what had happened; and that he had no intention to give
umbrage. -- The valet de chambre asked pardon of the lieutenant
upon his knees, when Lismahago, to the astonishment of all
present, gave him a violent kick on the face, which laid him on
his back, exclaiming in a furious tone, 'Oui je te pardonne, gens
foutre.'

Such was the fortunate issue of this perilous adventure, which
threatened abundance of vexation to our family; for the 'squire
is one of those who will sacrifice both life and fortune, rather
than leave what they conceive to be the least speck or blemish
upon their honour and reputation. His lordship had no sooner
pronounced his apology, with a very bad grace, than he went away
in some disorder, and, I dare say, he will never invite another
Welchman to his table.

We forthwith quitted the field of this atchievement, in order to
prosecute our journey; but we follow no determinate course. We
make small deviations, to see the remarkable towns, villas, and
curiosities on each side of our route; so that we advance by slow
steps towards the borders of Monmouthshire: but in the midst of
these irregular motions, there is no abberration nor eccentricity
in that affection with which I am, dear Wat,


Yours always,
J. MELFORD
Sept. 28.



To Dr LEWIS.

DEAR DICK,

At what time of life may a man think himself exempted from the
necessity of sacrificing his repose to the punctilios of a
contemptible world? I have been engaged in a ridiculous
adventure, which I shall recount at meeting; and this, I hope,
will not be much longer delayed, as we have now performed almost
all our visits, and seen every thing that I think has any right
to retard us in our journey homewards -- A few days ago,
understanding by accident, that my old friend Baynard was in the
country, I would not pass so near his habitation without paying
him a visit, though our correspondence had been interrupted for a
long course of years.

I felt my self very sensibly affected by the idea of our past
intimacy, as we approached the place where we had spent so many
happy days together; but when we arrived at the house, I could
not recognize any one of those objects, which had been so deeply
impressed upon my remembrance -- The tall oaks that shaded the
avenue, had been cut down, and the iron gates at the end of it
removed, together with the high wall that surrounded the court
yard. The house itself, which was formerly a convent of
Cistercian monks, had a venerable appearance: and along the front
that looked into the garden, was a stone gallery, which afforded
me many an agreeable walk, when I was disposed to be
contemplative. Now the old front is covered with a screen of
modern architecture; so that all without is Grecian, and all
within Gothic. As for the garden, which was well stocked with the
best fruit which England could produce, there is not now the
least vestage remaining of trees, walls, or hedges -- Nothing
appears but a naked circus of loose sand, with a dry bason and a
leaden triton in the middle.

You must know, that Baynard, at his father's death, had a clear
estate of fifteen hundred pounds a-year, and was in other
respects extremely well qualified to make a respectable figure in
the commonwealth; but, what with some excesses of youth, and the
expence of a contested election, he in a few years found himself
encumbered with a debt of ten thousand pounds, which he resolved
to discharge by means of a prudent marriage. He accordingly
married a miss Thomson, whose fortune amounted to double the sum
that he owed -- She was the daughter of a citizen, who had failed
in trade; but her fortune came by an uncle, who died in the East-Indies
-- Her own parents being dead, she lived with a maiden aunt,
who had superintended her education; and, in all appearance, was
well enough qualified for the usual purposes of the married
state -- Her virtues, however, stood rather upon a negative, than a
positive foundation -- She was neither proud, insolent, nor
capricious, nor given to scandal, nor addicted to gaming, nor
inclined to gallantry. She could read, and write, and dance, and
sing, and play upon the harpsichord, and smatter French, and take
a hand at whist and ombre; but even these accomplishments she
possessed by halves -- She excelled in nothing. Her conversation
was flat, her stile mean, and her expression embarrassed -- In a
word, her character was totally insipid. Her person was not
disagreeable; but there was nothing graceful in her address, nor
engaging in her manners; and she was so ill qualified to do the
honours of the house, that when she sat at the head of the table,
one was always looking for the mistress of the family in some
other place.

Baynard had flattered himself, that it would be no difficult
matter to mould such a subject after his own fashion, and that
she would chearfully enter into his views, which were wholly
turned to domestic happiness. He proposed to reside always in the
country, of which he was fond to a degree of enthusiasm; to
cultivate his estate, which was very improvable; to enjoy the
exercise of rural diversions; to maintain an intimacy of
correspondence with some friends that were settled in his
neighbourhood; to keep a comfortable house, without suffering his
expence to exceed the limits of his income; and to find pleasure
and employ merit for his wife in the management and avocations
of her own family -- This, however, was a visionary scheme, which
he never was able to realize. His wife was as ignorant as a new-born
babe of everything that related to the conduct of a family;
and she had no idea of a country-life. Her understanding did not
reach so far as to comprehend the first principles of discretion;
and, indeed, if her capacity had been better than it was, her
natural indolence would not have permitted her to abandon a
certain routine, to which she had been habituated. She had not
taste enough to relish any rational enjoyment; but her ruling
passion was vanity, not that species which arises from self-conceit
of superior accomplishments, but that which is of a
bastard and idiot nature, excited by shew and ostentation, which
implies not even the least consciousness of any personal merit.

The nuptial peal of noise and nonsense being rung out in all the
usual changes, Mr Baynard thought it high time to make her
acquainted with the particulars of the plan which he had
projected -- He told her that his fortune, though sufficient to
afford all the comforts of life, was not ample enough to command
all the superfluities of pomp and pageantry, which, indeed, were
equally absurd and intolerable -- He therefore hoped she would have
no objection to their leaving London in the spring, when he would
take the opportunity to dismiss some unnecessary domestics, whom
he had hired for the occasion of their marriage -- She heard him in
silence, and after some pause, 'So (said she) I am to be buried
in the country!' He was so confounded at this reply, that he
could not speak for some minutes: at length he told her, he was
much mortified to find he had proposed anything that was
disagreeable to her ideas -- 'I am sure (added he) I meant nothing
more than to lay down a comfortable plan of living within the
bounds of our fortune, which is but moderate.' 'Sir (said she),
you are the best judge of your own affairs -- My fortune, I know,
does not exceed twenty thousand pounds -- Yet, even with that
pittance, I might have had a husband who would not have begrudged
me a house in London' -- 'Good God! my dear (cried poor Baynard, in
the utmost agitation), you don't think me so sordid -- I only
hinted what I thought -- But, I don't pretend to impose --' 'Yes,
sir (resumed the lady), it is your prerogative to command, and my
duty to obey'  So saying, she burst into tears and retired to her
chamber, where she was joined by her aunt -- He endeavoured to
recollect himself, and act with vigour of mind on this occasion;
but was betrayed by the tenderness of his nature, which was the
greatest defect of his constitution. He found the aunt in tears,
and the niece in a fit, which held her the best part of eight
hours, at the expiration of which, she began to talk incoherently
about death and her dear husband, who had sat by her all this
time, and now pressed her hand to his lips, in a transport of
grief and penitence for the offence he had given -- From thence
forward, he carefully avoided mentioning the country; and they
continued to be sucked deeper and deeper into the vortex of
extravagance and dissipation, leading what is called a
fashionable life in town -- About the latter end of July, however,
Mrs Baynard, in order to exhibit a proof of conjugal obedience,
desired of her own accord, that they might pay a visit to his
country house, as there was no company left in London. He would
have excused himself from this excursion which was no part of the
oeconomical plan he had proposed; but she insisted upon making
this sacrifice to his taste and prejudices, and away they went
with such an equipage as astonished the whole country. All that
remained of the season was engrossed by receiving and returning
visits in the neighbourhood; and, in this intercourse it was
discovered that sir John Chickwell had a house-steward and one
footman in livery more than the complement of Mr Baynard's
household. This remark was made by the aunt at table, and
assented to by the husband, who observed that sir John Chickwell
might very well afford to keep more servants than were found in
the family of a man who had not half his fortune. Mrs Baynard ate
no supper that evening; but was seized with a violent fit, which
completed her triumph over the spirit of her consort. The two
supernumerary servants were added -- The family plate was sold for
old silver, and a new service procured; fashionable furniture was
provided, and the whole house turned topsy turvy.

At their return to London in the beginning of winter, he, with a
heavy heart, communicated these particulars to me in confidence.
Before his marriage, he had introduced me to the lady as his
particular friend; and I now offered in that character, to lay
before her the necessity of reforming her oeconomy, if she had
any regard to the interest of her own family, or complaisance for
the inclinations of her husband -- But Baynard declined my offer,
on the supposition that his wife's nerves were too delicate to
bear expostulation; and that it would only serve to overwhelm her
with such distress as would make himself miserable.

Baynard is a man of spirit, and had she proved a termagant, he
would have known how to deal with her; but, either by accident or
instinct, she fastened upon the weak side of his soul, and held
it so fast, that he has been in subjection ever since -- I
afterwards advised him to carry her abroad to France or Italy,
where he might gratify her vanity for half the expence it cost
him in England: and this advice he followed accordingly. She was
agreeably flattered with the idea of seeing and knowing foreign
parts, and foreign fashions; of being presented to sovereigns,
and living familiarly with princes. She forthwith seized the
hint which I had thrown
out on purpose, and even pressed Mr Baynard to hasten his
departure; so that in a few weeks they crossed the sea to France,
with a moderate train, still including the aunt; who was her
bosom counsellor, and abetted her in all her oppositions to her
husband's will-- Since that period, I have had little or no
opportunity to renew our former correspondence -- All that I knew
of his transactions, amounted to no more than that after an
absence of two years, they returned so little improved in
oeconomy, that they launched out into new oceans of extravagance,
which at length obliged him to mortgage his estate -- By this time
she had bore him three children, of which the last only survives,
a puny boy of twelve or thirteen, who will be ruined in his
education by the indulgence of his mother.

As for Baynard, neither his own good sense, nor the dread of
indigence, nor the consideration of his children, has been of
force sufficient to stimulate him into the resolution of breaking
at once the shameful spell by which he seems enchanted -- With a
taste capable of the most refined enjoyment, a heart glowing with
all the warmth of friendship and humanity, and a disposition
strongly turned to the more rational pleasures of a retired and
country life, he is hurried about in a perpetual tumult, amidst a
mob of beings pleased with rattles, baubles, and gewgaws, so void
of sense and distinction, that even the most acute philosopher
would find it a very hard task to discover for what wise purpose
of providence they were created -- Friendship is not to be found;
nor can the amusements for which he sighs be enjoyed within the
rotation of absurdity, to which he is doomed for life. He has
long resigned all views of improving his fortune by management
and attention to the exercise of husbandry, in which he
delighted; and as to domestic happiness, not the least glimpse of
hope remains to amuse his imagination. Thus blasted in all his
prospects, he could not fail to be overwhelmed with melancholy
and chagrin, which have preyed upon his health and spirits in
such a manner, that he is now threatened with a consumption.

I have given you a sketch of the man, whom the other day I went
to visit -- At the gate we found a great number of powdered
lacquies, but no civility -- After we had sat a considerable time
in the coach, we were told, that Mr Baynard had rode out, and
that his lady was dressing; but we were introduced to a parlour,
so very fine and delicate, that in all appearance it was designed
to be seen only, not inhabited. The chairs and couches were
carved, gilt, and covered with rich damask, so smooth and slick,
that they looked as if they had never been sat upon. There was no
carpet upon the floor, but the boards were rubbed and waxed in
such a manner, that we could not walk, but were obliged to slide
along them; and as for the stove, it was too bright and polished
to be polluted with sea-coal, or stained by the smoke of any
gross material fire -- When we had remained above half an hour
sacrificing to the inhospitable powers in the temple of cold
reception, my friend Baynard arrived, and understanding we were
in the house, made his appearance, so meagre, yellow, and
dejected, that I really should not have known him, had I met with
him in any other place. Running up to me, with great eagerness, he
strained me in his embrace, and his heart was so full, that for
some minutes he could not speak. Having saluted us all round, he
perceived our uncomfortable situation, and conducting us into
another apartment, which had fire in the chimney, called for
chocolate -- Then, withdrawing, he returned with a compliment from
his wife, and, in the mean time, presented his son Harry, a
shambling, blear-eyed boy, in the habit of a hussar; very rude,
forward, and impertinent. His father would have sent him to a
boarding-school, but his mamma and aunt would not hear of his
lying out of the house; so that there was a clergyman engaged as
his tutor in the family.

As it was but just turned of twelve, and the whole house was in
commotion to prepare a formal entertainment, I foresaw it would
be late before we dined, and proposed a walk to Mr Baynard, that
we might converse together freely. In the course of this
perambulation, when I expressed some surprize that he had
returned so soon from Italy, he gave me to understand, that his
going abroad had not at all answered the purpose, for which he
left England; that although the expence of living was not so
great in Italy as at home, respect being had to the same rank of
life in both countries, it had been found necessary for him to
lift himself above his usual stile, that he might be on some
footing with the counts, marquises, and cavaliers, with whom he
kept company -- He was obliged to hire a great number of servants,
to take off a great variety of rich cloaths, and to keep a
sumptuous table for the fashionable scorocconi of the country;
who, without a consideration of this kind, would not have payed
any attention to an untitled foreigner, let his family or fortune
be ever so respectable -- Besides, Mrs Baynard was continually
surrounded by a train of expensive loungers, under the
denominations of language-masters, musicians, painters, and
ciceroni; and had actually fallen into the disease of buying
pictures and antiques upon her own judgment, which was far from
being infallible -- At length she met with an affront, which gave
her disgust to Italy, and drove her back to England with some
precipitation. By means of frequenting the dutchess of
B[edford]'s conversazione, while her grace was at Rome, Mrs
Baynard became acquainted with all the fashionable people of that
city, and was admitted to their assemblies without scruple -- Thus
favoured, she conceived too great an idea of her own importance,
and when the dutchess left Rome, resolved to have a conversazione
that should leave the Romans no room to regret her grace's
departure. She provided hands for a musical entertainment, and
sent biglietti of invitation to every person of distinction; but
not one Roman of the female sex appeared at her assembly -- She was
that night seized with a violent fit, and kept her bed three
days, at the expiration of which she declared that the air of
Italy would be the ruin of her constitution. In order to prevent
this catastrophe, she was speedily removed to Geneva, from whence
they returned to England by the way of Lyons and Paris. By the
time they arrived at Calais, she had purchased such a quantity of
silks, stuffs, and laces, that it was necessary to hire a vessel
to smuggle them over, and this vessel was taken by a custom-house
cutter; so that they lost the whole cargo, which had cost them
above eight hundred pounds.

It now appears, that her travels had produced no effect upon her,
but that of making her more expensive and fantastic than ever:
She affected to lead the fashion, not only in point of female
dress, but in every article of taste and connoisseurship. She
made a drawing of the new facade to the house in the country; she
pulled up the trees, and pulled down the walls of the garden, so
as to let in the easterly wind, which Mr Baynard's ancestors had
been at great pains to exclude. To shew her taste in laying out
ground, she seized into her own hand a farm of two hundred acres,
about a mile from the house, which she parcelled out into walks
and shrubberies, having a great bason in the middle, into which
she poured a whole stream that turned two mills, and afforded the
best trout in the country. The bottom of the bason, however, was
so ill secured, that it would not hold the water which strained
through the earth, and made a bog of the whole plantation: in a
word, the ground which formerly payed him one hundred and fifty
pounds a year, now cost him two hundred pounds a year to keep it
in tolerable order, over and above the first expence of trees,
shrubs, flowers, turf, and gravel. There was not an inch of
garden ground left about the house, nor a tree that produced
fruit of any kind; nor did he raise a truss of hay, or a bushel
of oats for his horses, nor had he a single cow to afford milk
for his tea; far less did he ever dream of feeding his own
mutton, pigs, and poultry: every article of housekeeping, even
the most inconsiderable, was brought from the next market town,
at the distance of five miles, and thither they sent a courier
every morning to fetch hot rolls for breakfast. In short, Baynard
fairly owned that he spent double his income, and that in a few
years he should be obliged to sell his estate for the payment of
his creditors. He said that his wife had such delicate nerves,
and such imbecility of spirit, that she could neither bear
remonstrance, be it ever so gentle, nor practise any scheme of
retrenchment, even if she perceived the necessity of such a
measure. He had therefore ceased struggling against the stream,
and endeavoured to reconcile himself to ruin, by reflecting that
his child at least would inherit his mother's fortune, which was
secured to him by the contract of marriage.

The detail which he gave me of his affairs, filled me at once
with grief and indignation. I inveighed bitterly against the
indiscretion of his wife, and reproached him with his unmanly
acquiescence under the absurd tyranny which she exerted. I
exhorted him to recollect his resolution, and make one effectual
effort to disengage himself from a thraldom, equally shameful and
pernicious. I offered him all the assistance in my power. I
undertook to regulate his affairs, and even to bring about a
reformation in his family, if he would only authorise me to
execute the plan I should form for his advantage. I was so
affected by the subject, that I could not help mingling tears
with my remonstrances, and Baynard was so penetrated with these
marks of my affection, that he lost all power of utterance. He
pressed me to his breast with great emotion, and wept in silence.
At length he exclaimed, 'Friendship is undoubtedly the most
precious balm of life! Your words, dear Bramble, have in a great
measure recalled me from an abyss of despondence, in which I have
been long overwhelmed. I will, upon honour, make you acquainted
with a distinct state of my affairs, and, as far as I am able to
go, will follow the course you prescribe. But there are certain
lengths which my nature -- The truth is, there are tender
connexions, of which a batchelor has no idea -- Shall I own my
weakness? I cannot bear the thoughts of making that woman
uneasy' -- 'And yet (cried I), she has seen you unhappy for a
series of years -- unhappy from her misconduct, without ever
shewing the least inclination to alleviate your distress' --
'Nevertheless (said he) I am persuaded she loves me with the most
warm affection; but these are incongruities in the composition of
the human mind which I hold to be inexplicable.'

I was shocked at his infatuation, and changed the subject, after
we had agreed to maintain a close correspondence for the future.
He then gave me to understand, that he had two neighbours, who,
like himself, were driven by their wives at full speed, in the
high road to bankruptcy and ruin. All the three husbands were of
dispositions very different from each other, and, according to
this variation, their consorts were admirably suited to the
purpose of keeping them all three in subjection. The views of the
ladies were exactly the same. They vied in grandeur, that is, in
ostentation, with the wife of Sir Charles Chickwell, who had four
times their fortune; and she again piqued herself upon making an
equal figure with a neighbouring peeress, whose revenue trebled
her own. Here then was the fable of the frog and the ox, realized
in four different instances within the same county: one large
fortune, and three moderate estates, in a fair way of being burst
by the inflation of female vanity; and in three of these
instances, three different forms of female tyranny were
exercised. Mr Baynard was subjugated by practising upon the
tenderness of his nature. Mr Milksan, being of a timorous
disposition, truckled to the insolence of a termagant. Mr
Sowerby, who was of a temper neither to be moved by fits, nor
driven by menaces, had the fortune to be fitted with a helpmate,
who assailed him with the weapons of irony and satire; sometimes
sneering in the way of compliment; sometimes throwing out
sarcastic comparisons, implying reproaches upon his want of
taste, spirit, and generosity: by which means she stimulated his
passions from one act of extravagance to another, just as the
circumstances of her vanity required.

All these three ladies have at this time the same number of
horses, carriages, and servants in and out of livery; the same
variety of dress; the same quantity of plate and china; the like
ornaments in furniture: and in their entertainments they
endeavour to exceed one another in the variety, delicacy, and
expence of their dishes. I believe it will be found upon enquiry,
that nineteen out of twenty, who are ruined by extravagance, fall
a sacrifice to the ridiculous pride and vanity of silly women,
whose parts are held in contempt by the very men whom they
pillage and enslave. Thank heaven, Dick, that among all the
follies and weaknesses of human nature, I have not yet fallen
into that of matrimony.

After Baynard and I had discussed all these matters at leisure,
we returned towards the house, and met Jery with our two women,
who had come forth to take the air, as the lady of the mansion
had not yet made her appearance. In short, Mrs Baynard did not
produce herself, till about a quarter of an hour before dinner
was upon the table. Then her husband brought her into the
parlour, accompanied by her aunt and son, and she received us
with a coldness of reserve sufficient to freeze the very soul of
hospitality. Though she knew I had been the intimate friend of
her husband, and had often seen me with him in London, she shewed
no marks of recognition or regard, when I addressed myself to her
in the most friendly terms of salutation. She did not even
express the common compliment of, I am glad to see you; or, I
hope you have enjoyed your health since we had the pleasure of
seeing you; or some such words of course: nor did she once open
her mouth in the way of welcome to my sister and my niece: but
sat in silence like a statue, with an aspect of insensibility.
Her aunt, the model upon which she had been formed, was indeed
the very essence of insipid formality but the boy was very pert
and impudent, and prated without ceasing.

At dinner, the lady maintained the same ungracious indifference,
never speaking but in whispers to her aunt; and as to the repast,
it was made up of a parcel of kickshaws, contrived by a French
cook, without one substantial article adapted to the satisfaction
of an English appetite. The pottage was little better than bread
soaked in dishwashings, lukewarm. The ragouts looked as if they
had been once eaten and half digested: the fricassees were
involved in a nasty yellow poultice: and the rotis were scorched
and stinking, for the honour of the fumet. The desert consisted
of faded fruit and iced froth, a good emblem of our landlady's
character; the table-beer was sour, the water foul, and the wine
vapid; but there was a parade of plate and china, and a  powdered
lacquey stood behind every chair, except those of the master and
mistress of the house, who were served by two valets dressed like
gentlemen. We dined in a large old Gothic parlour, which was
formerly the hall. It was now paved with marble, and,
notwithstanding the fire which had been kindled about an hour,
struck me with such a chill sensation, that when I entered it the
teeth chattered in my jaws -- In short, every thing was cold,
comfortless, and disgusting, except the looks of my friend
Baynard, which declared the warmth of his affection and humanity.

After dinner we withdrew into another apartment, where the boy
began to be impertinently troublesome to my niece Liddy. He
wanted a playfellow, forsooth; and would have romped with her,
had she encouraged his advances -- He was even so impudent as to
snatch a kiss, at which she changed countenance, and seemed
uneasy; and though his father checked him for the rudeness of his
behaviour, he became so outrageous as to thrust his hand in her
bosom: an insult to which she did not tamely submit, though one
of the mildest creatures upon earth. Her eyes sparkling with
resentment, she started up, and lent him such a box in the ear,
as sent him staggering to the other side of the room.

'Miss Melford (cried his father), you have treated him with the
utmost propriety -- I am only sorry that the impertinence of any
child of mine should have occasioned this exertion of your spirit,
which I cannot but applaud and admire.' His wife was so far
from assenting to the candour of his apology, that she rose from
the table, and, taking her son by the hand, 'Come, child (said
she), your father cannot abide you.' So saying, she retired with
this hopeful youth, and was followed by her gouvernante: but
neither the one nor the other deigned to take the least notice of
the company.

Baynard was exceedingly disconcerted; but I perceived his
uneasiness was tinctured with resentment, and derived a good omen
from this discovery. I ordered the horses to be put to the
carriage, and, though he made some efforts to detain us all
night, I insisted upon leaving the house immediately; but, before
I went away, I took an opportunity of speaking to him again in
private. I said every thing I could recollect, to animate his
endeavours in shaking off those shameful trammels. I made no
scruple to declare, that his wife was unworthy of that tender
complaisance which he had shewn for her foibles: that she was
dead to all the genuine sentiments of conjugal affection;
insensible of her own honour and interest, and seemingly
destitute of common sense and reflection. I conjured him to
remember what he owed to his father's house, to his own
reputation, and to his family, including even this unreasonable
woman herself, who was driving on blindly to her own destruction.
I advised him to form a plan for retrenching superfluous expence,
and try to convince the aunt of the necessity for such a
reformation, that she might gradually prepare her niece for its
execution; and I exhorted him to turn that disagreeable piece of
formality out of the house, if he should find her averse to his
proposal.

Here he interrupted me with a sigh, observing that such a step
would undoubtedly be fatal to Mrs Baynard -- 'I shall lose all
patience (cried I), to hear you talk so weakly -- Mrs Baynard's
fits will never hurt her constitution. I believe in my conscience
they are all affected: I am sure she has no feeling for your
distresses; and, when you are ruined, she will appear to have no
feeling for her own.' Finally, I took his word and honour that he
would make an effort, such as I had advised; that he would form a
plan of oeconomy, and, if he found it impracticable without my
assistance, he would come to Bath in the winter, where I promised
to give him the meeting, and contribute all in my power to the
retrieval of his affairs -- With this mutual engagement we parted;
and I shall think myself supremely happy, if, by my means, a
worthy man, whom I love and esteem, can be saved from misery,
disgrace, and despair.

I have only one friend more to visit in this part of the country,
but he is of a complexion very different from that of Baynard.
You have heard me mention Sir Thomas Bullford, whom I knew in
Italy. He is now become a country gentleman; but, being disabled
by the gout from enjoying any amusement abroad, he entertains
himself within doors, by keeping open house for all corners, and
playing upon the oddities and humours of his company: but he
himself is generally the greatest original at his table. He is
very good-humoured, talks much, and laughs without ceasing. I am
told that all the use he makes of his understanding at present,
is to excite mirth, by exhibiting his guests in ludicrous
attitudes. I know not how far we may furnish him with
entertainment of this kind, but I am resolved to beat up his
quarters, partly with a view to laugh with the knight himself,
and partly to pay my respects to his lady, a good-natured
sensible woman, with whom he lives upon very easy terms, although
she has not had the good fortune to bring him an heir to his
estate.

And now, dear Dick, I must tell you for your comfort, that you
are the only man upon earth to whom I would presume to send such
a longwinded epistle, which I could not find in my heart to
curtail, because the subject interested the warmest passions of
my heart; neither will I make any other apology to a
correspondent who has been so long accustomed to the impertinence
of

MATT. BRAMBLE
Sept. 30.




To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. at Oxon.

DEAR KNIGHT,

I believe there is something mischievous in my disposition, for
nothing diverts me so much as to see certain characters tormented
with false terrors. -- We last night lodged at the house of Sir
Thomas Bullford, an old friend of my uncle, a jolly fellow, of
moderate intellects, who, in spite of the gout, which hath lamed
him, is resolved to be merry to the last; and mirth he has a
particular knack in extracting from his guests, let their humour
be ever so caustic or refractory. -- Besides our company, there was
in the house a fat-headed justice of the peace, called Frogmore,
and a country practitioner in surgery, who seemed to be our
landlord's chief companion and confidant. -- We found the knight
sitting on a couch, with his crutches by his side, and his feet
supported on cushions; but he received us with a hearty welcome,
and seemed greatly rejoiced at our arrival. -- After tea, we were
entertained with a sonata on the harpsichord by lady Bullford,
who sung and played to admiration; but Sir Thomas seemed to be a
little asinine in the article of ears, though he affected to be
in raptures, and begged his wife to favour us with an arietta of
her own composing. -- This arietta, however, she no sooner began to
perform, than he and the justice fell asleep; but the moment she
ceased playing, the knight waked snorting, and exclaimed, 'O
cara! what d'ye think, gentlemen? Will you talk any more of your
Pargolesi and your Corelli?' -- At the same time, he thrust his
tongue in one cheek, and leered with one eye at the doctor and
me, who sat on his left hand. He concluded the pantomime with a
loud laugh, which he could command at all times extempore. --
Notwithstanding his disorder, he did not do penance at supper,
nor did he ever refuse his glass when the toast went round, but
rather encouraged a quick circulation, both by precept and
example.

I soon perceived the doctor had made himself very necessary to
the baronet. -- He was the whetstone of his wit, the butt of his
satire, and his operator in certain experiments of humour, which
were occasionally tried upon strangers. -- Justice Frogmore was an
excellent subject for this species of philosophy; sleek and
corpulent, solemn, and shallow, he had studied Burn with
uncommon application, but he studied nothing so much as the art
of living (that is, eating) well -- This fat buck had often
afforded good sport to our landlord; and he was frequently
started with tolerable success, in the course of this evening;
but the baronet's appetite for ridicule seemed to be chiefly
excited by the appearance, address, and conversation of
Lismahago, whom he attempted in all different modes of
exposition; but he put me in mind of a contest that I once saw
betwixt a young hound and an old hedge-hog -- The dog turned him
over and over, and bounced and barked, and mumbled; but as often
as he attempted to bite, he felt a prickle in his jaws, and
recoiled in manifest confusion; -- The captain, when left to
himself, will not fail to turn his ludicrous side to the company,
but if any man attempts to force him into that attitude, he
becomes stubborn as a mule, and unmanageable as an elephant
unbroke.

Divers tolerable jokes were cracked upon the justice, who eat a
most unconscionable supper, and, among other things, a large
plate of broiled mushrooms, which he had no sooner swallowed than
the doctor observed, with great gravity, that they were of the
kind called champignons, which in some constitutions has a
poisonous effect. -- Mr Frogmore startled at this remark, asked, in
some confusion, why he had not been so kind as to give him that
notice sooner. -- He answered, that he took it for granted, by his
eating them so heartily, that he was used to the dish; but as he
seemed to be under some apprehension, he prescribed a bumper of
plague water, which the justice drank off immediately, and
retired to rest, not without marks of terror and disquiet.

At midnight we were shewn to our different chambers, and in half
an hour, I was fast asleep in bed; but about three o'clock in the
morning I was waked with a dismal cry of Fire! and starting up,
ran to the window in my shirt. -- The night was dark and stormy;
and a number of people half-dressed ran backwards and forwards
thro' the court-yard, with links and lanthorns, seemingly in the
utmost hurry and trepidation. -- Slipping on my cloaths in a
twinkling, I ran down stairs, and, upon enquiry, found the fire
was confined to a back-stair, which led to a detached apartment
where Lismahago lay. -- By this time, the lieutenant was alarmed by
bawling at his window, which was in the second story, but he
could not find his cloaths in the dark, and his room-door was
locked on the outside. -- The servants called to him, that the
house had been robbed; that, without all doubt, the villains had
taken away his cloaths, fastened the door, and set the house on
fire, for the stair-case was in flames. -- In this dilemma the poor
lieutenant ran about the room naked like a squirrel in a cage,
popping out his bead at the window between whiles, and imploring
assistance. -- At length, the knight in person was brought out in
his chair, attended by my uncle and all the family, including our
aunt Tabitha, who screamed, and cried, and tore her hair, as if
she had been distracted -- Sir Thomas had already ordered his
people to bring a long ladder which was applied to the captain's,
window, and now he exhorted him earnestly to descend. -- There was
no need of much rhetoric to persuade Lismahago, who forthwith
made his exit by the window, roaring all the time to the people
below to hold fast the ladder.

Notwithstanding the gravity of the occasion, it was impossible to
behold this scene without being seized with an inclination to
laugh. The rueful aspect of the lieutenant in his shirt, with a
quilted night-cap fastened under his chin, and his long lank
limbs and posteriors exposed to the wind, made a very picturesque
appearance, when illumined by the links and torches which the
servants held up to light him in his descent. -- All the company
stood round the ladder, except the knight, who sat in his chair,
exclaiming from time to time, 'Lord, have mercy upon us! -- save
the gentleman's life! -- mind your footing, dear captain! softly! --
stand fast! -- clasp the ladder with both hands! -- there! -- well
done, my dear boy! -- O bravo! -- an old soldier for ever! -- bring a
blanket bring a warm blanket to comfort his poor carcase -- warm
the bed in the green room -- give me your hand, dear captain -- I'm
rejoiced to see thee safe and sound with all my heart.' Lismahago
was received at the foot of the ladder by his inamorata, who
snatching a blanket from one of the maids, wrapped it about his
body; two men-servants took him under the arms, and a female
conducted him to the green room, still accompanied by Mrs
Tabitha, who saw him fairly put to bed. -- During this whole
transaction he spoke not a syllable, but looked exceeding grim,
sometimes at one, sometimes at another of the spectators, who now
adjourned in a body to the parlour where we had supped, every one
surveying another with marks of astonishment and curiosity.

The knight being seated in an easy chair, seized my uncle by the
hand, and bursting into a long and loud laugh, 'Matt (cried he),
crown me with oak, or ivy, or laurel, or parsely, or what you
will, and acknowledge this to be a coup de maitre in the way of
waggery -- ha, ha, ha! -- Such a camisciata, scagliata, beffata! O,
che roba! O, what a subject! -- O, what caricatura! -- O, for a Rosa,
a Rembrandt, a Schalken! -- Zooks, I'll give a hundred guineas to
have it painted! -- what a fine descent from the cross, or ascent
to the gallows! what lights and shadows! -- what a groupe below!
what expression above! -- what an aspect! -- did you mind the aspect?
ha, ha, ha! -- and the limbs, and the muscles every toe denoted
terror! ha, ha, ha! -- then the blanket! O, what costume! St
Andrew! St Lazarus! St Barrabas! -- ha, ha, ha!' 'After all then
(cried Mr Bramble very gravely), this was no more than a false
alarm. -- We have been frightened out of our beds, and almost out
of our senses, for the joke's sake.' 'Ay, and such a joke! (cried
our landlord) such a farce! such a denouement! such a
catastrophe!'

'Have a little patience (replied our 'squire); we are not yet
come to the catastrophe; and pray God it may not turn out a
tragedy instead of a farce. -- The captain is one of those
saturnine subjects, who have no idea of humour. -- He never laughs
in his own person; nor can he bear that other people should laugh
at his expence. Besides, if the subject had been properly chosen,
the joke was too severe in all conscience.' ''Sdeath! (cried the
knight) I could not have bated him an ace had he been my own
father; and as for the subject, such another does not present
itself once in half a century.' Here Mrs Tabitha interposing, and
bridling up, declared, she did not see that Mr Lismahago was a
fitter subject for ridicule than the knight himself; and that she
was very much afraid, he would very soon find he had mistaken his
man. -- The baronet was a good deal disconcerted by his intimation,
saying, that he must be a Goth and a barbarian, if he did not
enter into the spirit of such a happy and humourous contrivance. --
He begged, however, that Mr Bramble and his sister would bring
him to reason; and this request was reinforced by lady Bullford,
who did not fail to read the baronet a lecture upon his
indiscretion, which lecture he received with submission on one
side of his face, and a leer upon the other.

We now went to bed for the second time; and before I got up, my
uncle had visited Lismahago in the green room, and used such
arguments with him, that when we met in the parlour he seemed to
be quite appeased. He received the knight's apology with good
grace, and even professed himself pleased at finding he had
contributed to the diversion of the company. -- Sir Thomas shook
him by the hand, laughing heartily; and then desired a pinch of
snuff, in token of perfect reconciliation -- The lieutenant,
putting his hand in his waistcoat pocket, pulled out, instead of
his own Scotch mull, a very fine gold snuff-box, which he no
sooner perceived than he said, 'Here is a small mistake.' 'No
mistake at all (cried the baronet): a fair exchange is no
robbery. -- Oblige me so far, captain, as to let me keep your mull
as a memorial.' 'Sir (said the lieutenant), the mull is much at
your service; but this machine I can by no means retain. -- It
looks like compounding a sort of felony in the code of honour.
Besides, I don't know but there may be another joke in this
conveyance; and I don't find myself disposed to be brought upon
the stage again. -- I won't presume to make free with your pockets,
but I beg you will put it up again with your own hand.' So
saying, with a certain austerity of aspect, he presented the
snuffbox to the knight, who received it in some confusion, and
restored the mull, which he would by no means keep except on the
terms of exchange.

This transaction was like to give a grave cast to the
conversation, when my uncle took notice that Mr Justice Frogmore
had not made his appearance either at the night-alarm, or now at
the general rendezvous. The baronet hearing Frogmore mentioned,
'Odso! (cried he) I had forgot the justice. -- Pr'ythee, doctor, go
and bring him out of his kennel.' Then laughing till his sides
were well shaken, he said he would shew the captain, that he was
not the only person of the drama exhibited for the entertainment
of the company. As to the night-scene, it could not affect the
justice, who had been purposely lodged in the farther end of the
house, remote from the noise, and lulled with a dose of opium
into the bargain. In a few minutes, Mr Justice was led into the
parlour in his nightcap and loose morning-gown, rolling his head
from side to side, and groaning piteously all the way. -- 'Jesu!
neighbour Frogmore (exclaimed the baronet), what is the matter? --
you look as if you was not a man for this world. -- Set him down
softly on the couch -- poor gentlemen! -- Lord have mercy upon us! --
What makes him so pale, and yellow, and bloated?' 'Oh, Sir
Thomas! (cried the justice) I doubt 'tis all over with me --
Those mushrooms I eat at your table have done my business -- ah!
oh! hey!' 'Now the Lord forbid! (said the other) -- what! man, have
a good heart -- How does thy stomach feel? -- hall?'

To this interrogation he made no reply; but throwing aside his
nightgown, discovered that his waist-coat would not meet upon his
belly by five good inches at least. 'Heaven protect us all!
(cried Sir Thomas) what a melancholy spectacle! -- never did I see
a man so suddenly swelled, but when he was either just dead, or
just dying. -- Doctor, can'st thou do nothing for this poor
object?' 'I don't think the case is quite desperate (said the
surgeon), but I would advise Mr Frogmore to settle his affairs
with all expedition; the parson may come and pray by him, while I
prepare a glyster and an emetic draught.' The justice, rolling
his languid eyes, ejaculated with great fervency, 'Lord, have
mercy upon us! Christ, have mercy upon us!' -- Then he begged the
surgeon, in the name of God, to dispatch -- 'As for my worldly
affairs (said he), they are all settled but one mortgage, which
must be left to my heirs -- but my poor soul! my poor soul! what
will become of my poor soul? miserable sinner that I am!' 'Nay,
pr'ythee, my dear boy, compose thyself (resumed the knight);
consider the mercy of heaven is infinite; thou can'st not have
any sins of a very deep dye on thy conscience, or the devil's
in't.' 'Name not the devil (exclaimed the terrified Frogmore), I
have more sins to answer for than the world dreams of. -- Ah!
friend, I have been sly -- sly damn'd sly! -- Send for the parson
without loss of time, and put me to bed, for I am posting to
eternity.' -- He was accordingly raised from the couch, and
supported by two servants, who led him back to his room; but
before he quitted the parlour, he intreated the good company to
assist him with their prayers. -- He added, 'Take warning by me,
who am suddenly cut off in my prime, like a flower of the field;
and God forgive you, Sir Thomas, for suffering such poisonous
trash to be eaten at your table.'

He was no sooner removed out of hearing, than the baronet
abandoned himself to a violent fit of laughing, in which he was
joined by the greatest part of the company; but we could hardly
prevent the good lady from going to undeceive the patient, by
discovering, that while he slept his waistcoat had been
straitened by the contrivance of the surgeon; and that the
disorder in his stomach and bowels was occasioned by some
antimonial wine, which he had taken over night, under the
denomination of plague-water. She seemed to think that his
apprehension might put an end to his life: the knight swore he
was no such chicken, but a tough old rogue, that would live long
enough to plague all his neighbours. -- Upon enquiry, we found his
character did not intitle him to much compassion or respect, and
therefore we let our landlord's humour take its course. -- A
glyster was actually administered by an old woman of the family,
who had been Sir Thomas's nurse, and the patient took a draught
made with oxymel of squills to forward the operation of the
antimonial wine, which had been retarded by the opiate of the
preceding night. He was visited by the vicar, who read prayers,
and began to take an account of the state of his soul, when those
medicines produced their effect; so that the parson was obliged
to hold his nose while he poured forth spiritual consolation from
his mouth. The same expedient was used by the knight and me, who,
with the doctor, entered the chamber at this juncture, and found
Frogmore enthroned on an easing-chair, under the pressure of a
double evacuation. The short intervals betwixt every heave he
employed in crying for mercy, confessing his sins, or asking the
vicar's opinion of his case; and the vicar answered, in a solemn
snuffling tone, that heightened the ridicule of the scene. The
emetic having done its office, the doctor interfered, and ordered
the patient to be put in bed again. When he examined the egesta,
and felt his pulse, he declared that much of the virus was
discharged, and, giving him a composing draught, assured him he
had good hopes of his recovery. -- This welcome hint he received
with the tears of joy in his eyes, protesting, that if he should
recover, he would always think himself indebted for his life to
the great skill and tenderness of his doctor, whose hand he
squeezed with great fervour; and thus he was left to his repose.

We were pressed to stay dinner, that we might be witnesses of his
resuscitation; but my uncle insisted upon our departing before
noon, that we might reach this town before it should be dark. -- In
the mean-time, lady Bullford conducted us into the garden to see
a fishpond just finished, which Mr Bramble censured as being too
near the parlour, where the knight now sat by himself, dozing in
an elbow-chair after the fatigues of his morning atchievement. --
In this situation he reclined, with his feet wrapped in flannel,
and supported in a line with his body, when the door flying open
with a violent shock, lieutenant Lismahago rushed into the room
with horror in his looks, exclaiming, 'A mad dog! a mad dog!' and
throwing up the window sash, leaped into the garden -- Sir Thomas,
waked by this tremendous exclamation, started up, and forgetting
his gout, followed the lieutenant's example by a kind of
instinctive impulse. He not only bolted thro' the window like an
arrow from a bow, but ran up to his middle in the pond before he
gave the least sign of recollection. Then the captain began to
bawl, 'Lord have mercy upon us! -- pray, take care of the
gentleman! -- for God's sake, mind your footing, my dear boy! -- get
warm blankets -- comfort his poor carcase -- warm the bed in the
green room.'

Lady Bullford was thunder-struck at this phaenomenon, and the
rest of the company gazed in silent astonishment, while the
servants hastened to assist their master, who suffered himself to
be carried back into the parlour without speaking a word. -- Being
instantly accommodated with dry clothes and flannels, comforted
with a cordial, and replaced in statu quo, one of the maids was
ordered to chafe his lower extremities, an operation in
consequence of which his senses seemed to return and his good
humour to revive. -- As we had followed him into the room, he
looked at every individual in his turn, with a certain ludicrous
expression in his countenance, but fixed his eyes in particular
upon Lismahago, who presented him with a pinch of snuff, and when
he took it in silence, 'Sir Thomas Bullford (said he), I am much
obliged to you for all your favours, and some of them I have
endeavoured to repay in your own coin.' 'Give me thy hand (cried
the baronet); thou hast indeed payed me Scot and lot; and even
left a balance in my hands, for which, in presence of this
company, I promise to be accountable.' -- So saying, he laughed
very heartily, and even seemed to enjoy the retaliation which had
been exacted at his own expence; but lady Bullford looked very
grave; and in all probability thought the lieutenant had carried
his resentment too far, considering that her husband was
valetudinary -- but, according to the proverb, he that will play
at bowls must expect to meet with rubbers. I have seen a tame
bear, very diverting when properly managed, become a very
dangerous wild beast when teized for the entertainment of the
spectators. -- As for Lismahago, he seemed to think the fright and
the cold bath would have a good effect upon his patient's
constitution: but the doctor hinted some apprehension that the
gouty matter might, by such a sudden shock, be repelled from the
extremities and thrown upon some of the more vital parts of the
machine. -- I should be very sorry to see this prognostic verified
upon our facetious landlord, who told Mrs Tabitha at parting,
that he hoped she would remember him in the distribution of the
bride's favours, as he had taken so much pains to put the
captain's parts and mettle to the proof. -- After all, I am afraid
our squire will appear to be the greatest sufferer by the
baronet's wit; for his constitution is by no means calculated for
night-alarms. He has yawned and shivered all day, and gone to bed
without supper; so that, as we have got into good quarters, I
imagine we shall make a halt to-morrow; in which case, you will
have at least one day's respite from the persecution of

J. MELFORD
Oct. 3.




To Mrs MARY JONES, at Brambleton-hall.

DEAR MARY JONES,

Miss Liddy is so good as to unclose me in a kiver as fur as
Gloster, and the carrier will bring it to hand -- God send us all
safe to Monmouthshire, for I'm quite jaded with rambling -- 'Tis a
true saying, live and learn -- 0 woman, what chuckling and changing
have I seen! -- Well, there's nothing sartain in this world -- Who
would have thought that mistriss, after all the pains taken for
the good of her prusias sole, would go for to throw away her poor
body? that she would cast the heys of infection upon such a
carrying-crow as Lashmihago! as old as Mathewsullin, as dry as a
red herring, and as poor as a starved veezel -- 0, Molly, hadst
thou seen him come down the ladder, in a shurt so scanty, that it
could not kiver his nakedness! -- The young 'squire called him
Dunquickset; but he looked for all the world like Cradoc-ap-Morgan,
the ould tinker, that suffered at Abergany for steeling
of kettle -- Then he's a profane scuffle, and, as Mr Clinker says,
no better than an impfiddle, continually playing upon the pyebill
and the new-burth -- I doubt he has as little manners as money; for
he can't say a civil word, much more make me a present of a pair
of gloves for goodwill; but he looks as if he wanted to be very
forewood and familiar O! that ever a gentlewoman of years and
discretion should tare her air, and cry and disporridge herself
for such a nubjack! as the song goes

I vow she would fain have a burd
That bids such a price for an owl.

but, for sartain, he must have dealt with some Scotch musician to
bring her to this pass -- As for me, I put my trust in the Lord;
and I have got a slice of witch elm sowed in the gathers of my
under petticoat; and Mr Clinker assures me, that by the new light
of grease, I may deify the devil and all his works -- But I nose
what I nose -- If mistress should take up with Lashmyhago, this is
no sarvice for me -- Thank God, there's no want of places; and if
it wan't for wan thing, I would -- but, no matter Madam Baynar's
woman has twenty good pounds a-year and parquisites; and dresses
like a parson of distinkson -- I dined with her and the valley de
shambles, with bags and golden jackets; but there was nothing
kimfittable to eat, being as how they lived upon board, and
having nothing but a piss of could cuddling tart and some
blamangey, I was tuck with the cullick, and a murcey it was that
mistress had her viol of assings in the cox.

But, as I was saying, I think for sartain this match will go
forewood; for things are come to a creesus; and I have seen with
my own bays, such smuggling -- But I scorn for to exclose the
secrets of the family; and if it wance comes to marrying, who
nose but the frolick may go round -- I believes as how, Miss Liddy
would have no reversion if her swan would appear; and you would
be surprised, Molly, to receive a bride's fever from your humble
sarvant -- but this is all suppository, dear girl; and I have
sullenly promised to Mr Clinker, that neither man, woman, nor
child shall no that arrow said a civil thing to me in the way of
infection. I hope to drink your health at Brambleton-hall, in a
horn of October, before the month be out -- Pray let my bed be
turned once a-day, and the windore opened, while the weather is
dry; and burn a few billets with some brush in the footman's
garret, and see their mattrash be dry as a bone: for both our
gentlemen have got a sad could by lying in damp shits at sir
Tummas Ballfart's. No more at present, but my sarvice to Saul and
the rest of our fellow-sarvents,
being,

Dear Mary Jones,
Always yours,
WIN. JENKINS
Oct. 4.




To Miss LAETITIA WILLIS, at Gloucester.

MY DEAR LETTY,

This method of writing to you from time to time, without any
hopes of an answer, affords me, I own, some ease and satisfaction
in the 'midst of my disquiet, as it in some degree lightens the
burthen of affliction: but it is at best a very imperfect
enjoyment of friendship, because it admits of no return of
confidence and good counsel -- I would give the whole world to have
your company for a single day -- I am heartily tired of this
itinerant way of life. I am quite dizzy with a perpetual
succession of objects -- Besides it is impossible to travel such a
length of way, without being exposed to inconveniencies, dangers,
and disagreeable accidents, which prove very grievous to a poor
creature of weak nerves like me, and make me pay very dear for
the gratification of my curiosity.

Nature never intended me for the busy world -- I long for repose
and solitude, where I can enjoy that disinterested friendship
which is not to be found among crouds, and indulge those pleasing
reveries that shun the hurry and tumult of fashionable society --
Unexperienced as I am in the commerce of life, I have seen enough
to give me a disgust to the generality of those who carry it on --
There is such malice, treachery, and dissimulation, even among
professed friends and intimate companions, as cannot fail to
strike a virtuous mind with horror; and when Vice quits the stage
for a moment, her place is immediately occupied by Folly, which
is often too serious to excite any thing but compassion. Perhaps I
ought to be silent on the foibles of my poor aunt; but with you,
my dear Willis, I have no secrets; and, truly, her weaknesses are
such as cannot be concealed. Since the first moment we arrived at
Bath, she has been employed constantly in spreading nets for the
other sex; and, at length, she has caught a superannuated
lieutenant, who is in a fair way to make her change her name -- My
uncle and my brother seem to have no objection to this
extraordinary match, which, I make no doubt, will afford
abundance of matter for conversation and mirth; for my part, I am
too sensible of my own weaknesses, to be diverted with those of
other people -- At present, I have something at heart that employs
my whole attention, and keeps my mind in the utmost terror and
suspence.

Yesterday in the forenoon, as I stood with my brother at the
parlour window of an inn, where we had lodged, a person passed a
horseback, whom (gracious Heaven!) I instantly discovered to be
Wilson! He wore a white riding-coat, with the cape buttoned up to
his chin; looking remarkably pale, and passed at a round trot,
without seeming to observe us -- Indeed, he could not see us; for
there was a blind that concealed us from the view. You may guess
how I was affected at this apparition. The light forsook my eyes;
and I was seized with such a palpitation and trembling, that I
could not stand. I sat down upon a couch, and strove to compose
myself, that my brother might not perceive my agitation; but it
was impossible to escape his prying eyes -- He had observed the
object that alarmed me; and, doubtless, knew him at the first
glance -- He now looked at me with a stern countenance; then he ran
out into the street, to see what road the unfortunate horseman
had taken -- He afterwards dispatched his man for further
intelligence, and seemed to meditate some violent design. My
uncle, being out of order, we remained another night at the inn;
and all day long Jery acted the part of an indefatigable spy upon
my conduct -- He watched my very looks with such eagerness of
attention, as if he would have penetrated into the utmost
recesses of my heart -- This may be owing to his regard for my
honour, if it is not the effect of his own pride; but he is so
hot, and violent, and unrelenting, that the sight of him alone
throws me into a flutter; and really it will not be in my power
to afford him any share of my affection, if he persists in
persecuting me at this rate. I am afraid he has formed some
scheme of vengeance, which will make me completely wretched! I am
afraid he suspects some collusion from this appearance of
Wilson. -- Good God! did he really appear?
or was it only a phantom, a pale spectre to apprise me of his
death.

O Letty, what shall I do? -- where shall I turn for advice and
consolation? shall I implore the protection of my uncle, who has
been always kind and compassionate. -- This must be my last
resource. -- I dread the thoughts of making him uneasy; and would
rather suffer a thousand deaths than live the cause of dissension
in the family. -- I cannot conceive the meaning of Wilson's coming
hither: -- perhaps, it was in quest of us, in order to disclose his
real name and situation: -- but wherefore pass without staying to
make the least enquiry? -- My dear Willis, I am lost in conjecture.
I have not closed an eye since I saw him. -- All night long have I
been tossed about from one imagination to another. The reflection
finds no resting place. -- I have prayed, and sighed, and wept
plentifully. -- If this terrible suspence continues much longer, I
shall have another fit of illness, and then the whole family will
be in confusion -- If it was consistent with the wise purposes of
Providence, would I were in my grave -- But it is my duty to be
resigned. -- My dearest Letty, excuse my weakness -- excuse these
blots -- my tears fall so fast that I cannot keep the paper dry --
yet I ought to consider that I have as yet no cause to despair
but I am such a faint-hearted timorous creature!

Thank God, my uncle is much better than he was yesterday. He is
resolved to pursue our journey strait to Wales. -- I hope we shall
take Gloucester in our way -- that hope chears my poor heart I
shall once more embrace my best beloved Willis, and pour all my
griefs into her friendly bosom. -- 0 heaven! is it possible that
such happiness is reserved for

The dejected and forlorn
LYDIA MELFORD
Oct. 4.



To Sir WATKIN PHILLIPS, Bart. of Jesus college, Oxon.

DEAR WATKIN,
