
                                   1739


130 Letter 9
                       To Richard West, Esq.
Paris, April 21, N. S. 1739. (157)

Dear West,
You figure us in a set of pleasures, which, believe me, we do not
find; cards and eating are so universal, that they absorb all
variation of pleasures.  The operas, indeed, are much frequented
three times a week; but to me they would be a greater penance
than eating maigre: their music resembles a gooseberry tart as
much as it does harmony.  We have not yet been at the Italian
playhouse; scarce any one goes there.  Their best amusement, and
which in some parts, beats ours, is the comedy three or four of
the actors excel any we have: but then to this nobody goes, if it
is not one of the fashionable nights; and then they go, be the
play good or bad-except on
Moli`ere's nights, whose pieces they are quite weary of.  Gray
and I have been at the Avare to-night; I cannot at all commend
their performance of it.  Last night I was in the Place de Louis
le Grand (a regular octagon, uniform, and the houses handsome,
though not so large as Golden Square), to see what they reckoned
one of the finest burials that ever was in France.  It was the
Duke de Tresmes, governor of Paris and marshal of France.  It
began on foot from his palace to his parish-church, and from
thence in coaches to the opposite end of Paris, to b interred in
the church of the Celestins, where is his family-vault.  About a
week ago we happened to see the grave digging, as we went to see
the church, which is old and small., but fuller of fine ancient
monuments than any, except St. Denis, which we saw
on the road, and excels Westminster; for the windows are all '
painted in mosaic, and the tombs as fresh and well preserved as
if they were of yesterday.  In the Celestins' church
is a votive column to Francis II., which says, that it is one
assurance of his being immortalised, to have had the martyr Mary
Stuart for his wife.  After this long digression, I return to the
burial, which was a most vile thing. A long procession of
flambeaux and friars; no plumes, trophies, banners,
led horses, scutcheons, or open chariots; nothing but friars,
white, black, and grey, with all their trumpery.  This goodly
ceremony began at nine at night, and did not finish till three
this morning; for, each church they passed, they stopped
for a hymn and holy water.  By the bye, some of these choice
monks, who watched the body while it lay in state, fell asleep
one night, and let the tapers catch fire of the rich velvet
mantle lined with ermine and powdered with gold
flower-de-luces, which melted the lead coffin, and burnt off the
feet of the deceased before it awakened them.  The French love
show; but there is a meanness runs through it all.  At the house
where I stood to see this procession, the room was hung with
crimson damask and gold, and the windows were mended in ten or a
dozen places with paper.  At dinner they give you three courses;
but a third of the dishes is patched up with sallads, butter,
puff-paste, or some such miscarriage of a dish.  None, but
Germans, wear fine clothes; but their coaches are tawdry enough
for the wedding of Cupid and Psyche. You would-laugh extremely at
their signs: some live at
the Y grec, some at Venus's toilette, and some at the sucking
cat.  YOU would not easily guess their notions of honour: I'll
tell you one: it is very dishonourable for any gentleman not to
be 'in @he army, or in the king's service as they
call it, and it is no dishonour to keep public gaming-houses:
there are at least an hundred and fifty people of the first
quality in Paris who live by it.  You may go into their houses at
all hours of the night, And find hazard, pharaoh, etc.  The men
who keep the hazard tables at the duke de Gesvres' pay him twelve
guineas each night for the privilege.  Even the princesses of the
blood are dirty enough to have shares in the banks kept at their
houses. We have seen two or three of them; but they are not
young, nor remarkable but for wearing their red of a deeper dye
than other women, though all use it extravagantly.

The weather is still so bad, that we have not made any
excursions to see Versailles and the environs, not even walked in
the Tuileries; but we have seen almost every thing else that is
worth seeing in Paris, though that is very
considerable.  They beat us vastly in buildings, both in number
and magnificence.  The tombs of Richelieu and Mazarin at the
Sorbonne and the College de Quatre Nations are wonderfully fine,
especially the former. We have seen very little of the people
themselves, who are not inclined to be propitious to strangers,
especially if they do not play and speak the language readily.
There are many English here: Lord Holderness, Conway(158) and
Clinton, (159) and Lord George Bentinck; (160) Mr. Brand,(161)
Offley, Frederic, Frampton, Bonfoy, etc.  Sir John
Cotton's son and a Mr. Vernon of Cambridge passed through Paris
last week.  We shall stay here about a fortnight longer,
and then go to Rheims with Mr. Conway for two or three months.
When you have nothing else to do, we shall be glad to hear from
you; and any news.  If we did not remember there was such a place
as England, we should know nothing of it: the French never
mention it, unless it happens to be in one of their proverbs!
Adieu!  Yours ever.

To-morrow we go to the Cid.  They have no farces but  petites
pieces like our "Devil to Pay."

(157) Mr. Walpole left Cambridge towards the end of the year
1738, and in March, 1739, began his travels by going to Paris,
accompanied by Mr. Gray.

(158) Francis, second Lord Conway, in 1750, created Viscount
Beauchamp and Earl of Hertford, and in 1793, Earl of Yarmouth and
Marquis of Hertford.  He was the elder brother of General Conway,
and grandfather of the present Marquis.

(159) Hugh Fortescue, in whose favour the abeyance into
which the barony of Clinton had fallen on the death of
Edward, thirteenth Baron Clinton, was terminated by writ of
summons, in 1721.  He was created, in 1746, Lord Fortescue and
Earl
of Clinton; and died unmarried, in 1751.-E.

(160) Son of Henry, second Earl and first Duke of Portland; he
died in 1759.-E.

(161) Mr. Brand of the Hoo, in Hertfordshire, who afterwards
married Lady Caroline Pierrepoint, daughter of the Duke of
Kingston by his second wife,
and half-sister of Lady Mary Wortley.-E.



132 Letter 10
To Richard West, Esq.
>From Paris, 1739.

Dear West,
I should think myself to blame not to try to divert you, when you
tell me I can.  From the air of your letter you seem to want
amusement, that is, you want spirits.  I
would recommend to you certain little employments that I know of,
and that belong to you, but that I imagine bodily exercise is
more suitable to your complaint.  If you would promise me to read
them in the Temple garden, I would send you a little packet of
plays and pamphlets that we have made up, and intend to dispatch
to 'Dick's' the first opportunity.-Stand by, clear the way, make
room for the pompous appearance of Versailles le Grand!--But no:
it fell so short of my idea of it, mine, that I have resigned to
Gray the office of writing its panegyric.(162)  He likes it.
They say I am to like it better next Sunday; when the sun is to
shine., the king is to be fine, the water-works are to play, and
the new knights of the Holy Ghost are to be
installed!  Ever since Wednesday, the day we were there, we have
done nothing but dispute about it.  They say, we did not see it
to advantage, that we ran through the apartments, saw the garden
en passant, and slubbered over Trianon.  I say, we saw nothing.
However, we had time to see that the great front is a lumber of
littleness, composed of black brick, stuck full of bad old busts,
and fringed with gold rails.  The rooms
are all small, except the great gallery, which is noble,
but totally wainscoted with looking-glass.  The garden is
littered with statues and fountains, each of which has its
tutelary deity.  In particular, the elementary god of fire
solaces himself in one.  In another, Enceladus, in lieu of a
mountain, is overwhelmed with many waters.  There are avenues of
water-pots, who disport themselves much in squirting up
cascadelins.  In short, 'tis a garden for a great child.  Such
was Louis Quatorze, who is here seen in his proper colours, 
where he commanded in person, unassisted by his armies
and his generals, left to the pursuit of his own puerile ideas of
glory.

We saw last week a place of another kind, and which has more the
air of what it would be, than anything I have yet met with: it
was the convent of the Chartreux.  All the conveniences, or
rather (if there was such a word) all the adaptments are
assembled here, that melancholy, meditation, selfish devotion,
and despair would require.  But yet 'tis pleasing.  Soften the
terms, and mellow the uncouth horror that reigns here, but a
little, and 'tis a charming solitude.  It stands on a large space
of ground, is old and irregular.  The chapel is gloomy: behind
it, through some dark passages, you pass into a large obscure
hall, which looks like a combination-chamber for some hellish
council.  The large cloister surrounds their buryingground.  The
cloisters are very narrow and very long, and let into the cells,
which are built like little huts detached from each other.  We
were carried into one, where lived a middle-aged man not long
initiated into the order.  He was extremely civil, and called
himself Dom Victor.  We have promised to visit him often.  Their
habit is all white: but besides this he was infinitely clean in
his person; and his apartment and garden, which he keeps and
cultivates without any assistance, was neat to a degree.  He has
four little rooms, furnished in the prettiest manner, and hung
with good prints.  One of them is a library, and another a
gallery.  He has several canary-birds disposed in a pretty manner
in breeding-cages. in his garden was a bed of good tulips in
bloom, flowers and
fruit-trees, and all neatly kept.  They are permitted at certain
hours to talk to strangers, but never to one another, or to go
out of their convent.  But what we chiefly went to see was the
small  cloister, with the history of St. Bruno their founder,
painted by Le Sceur.  It consists of twenty-two pictures, the
figures a good deal less than life.  But sure they are amazing! I
don't know what Raphael may be in Rome, but these pictures excel
all I have seen in Paris and England.  The figure of the dead man
who spoke at his burial, contains all the strongest and horridest
ideas of ghastliness, hypocrisy discovered, and the height of
damnation, pain and cursing.  A Benedictine monk, who was there
at the same time, said to me of this picture C'est une fable,
mais on la croyoit autrefois.  Another, who
showed me relics in one of their churches, expressed as much
ridicule for them.  The pictures I have been speaking of
are ill preserved, and some of the finest heads defaced,
which was done at first by a rival of Le Soeur's.  Adieu! dear
West, take care of your health; and some time or other we will
talk over all these things with more pleasure than I have had in
seeing them.

Yours ever.

(162) For Gray's description of Versailles, which he
styles " a huge heap of littleness," see his letter to West of
the 22nd of May, 1739. (Works, by Mitford, vol. ii.
P. 46).edited by the Rev.  John Mitford.-E.



134 Letter 11
To Richard West, Esq.
Rheims, (163) June 18, 1739, N. S.

Dear West,
How I am to fill up this letter is not easy to divine.  I have
consented that Gray shall give an account of our situation and
proceedings; (164) and have left myself at the mercy of my own'
invention--a most terrible resource, and which I shall avoid
applying to if I can possibly help it.  I had prepared the
ingredients for a description of a ball, and was just ready to
serve it up to you, but he has plucked it from me.  However, I
was resolved to give you an account of a particular song and
dance in it, and was determined to write the words and Sing the
tune just as I folded up my letter: but as it would, ten to one,
be opened before it gets to you, I am forced to lay aside this
thought, though an admirable one.  Well, but now I have put it
into your head, I suppose you won't rest without it.  For that
individual one, believe me 'tis nothing without the tune and the
dance; but to stay your
stomach, I -will send you one of their vaudevilles or Ballads,
(165) which they sing at the comedy after their
petites pi`eces.

You must not wonder if all my letters resemble dictionaries, with
French on one side and English on t'other; I deal in nothing else
at present, and talk a couple of words of each language
alternately, from morning till night.  This has put my mouth a
little out of tune at present but I am trying to recover the use
of it by reading the newspapers aloud at breakfast, and by
shewing the title-pages of all my English books.  Besides this, I
have paraphrased half of the first act of your new GustavUS (166)
which was sent us to Paris: a most dainty performance, and just
what you say of it.  Good night, I am sure you must be tired: if
you are not, I am.  yours ever.

(163) Mr. Walpole, with his cousin Henry Seymour Conway and Mr.
Gray, resided three months at Rheims, principally to
acquire the French language.

(164) Gray's letter to West has not been preserved; but one
addressed to his mother, on the 21 st of June, containing an
account of Rheims and the society, is printed in his Works, vol.
ii. p. 50.-E.

(165) This ballad does not appear.

(166) The tragedy of "Gustavus Vasa," by Henry Brooke, author of
"The Fool of Quality."  It was rehearsed at Drury Lane; but, as
it was supposed to satirize Sir Robert Walpole, it was prohibited
to be acted.  This, however, did Brooke no injury, as he was
encouraged to publish the play by subscription.-E.



134 Letter 12
To Richard  West, Esq.
Rheims, July 20, 1739.

Gray says, Indeed you ought to write to West.-Lord, child, so I
would, if I knew what to write about.  If I were in London and he
at Rheims, I would send him volumes about peace and war,
Spaniards, camps, and conventions; but d'ye think he
cares sixpence to know who is gone to Compiegne, and when they
come back, or who won and lost four livres at quadrille last
night at Mr. Cockbert's?--No, but you may tell him what you have
heard of Compiegne; that they have balls twice a week after the
play, and that the Count d'Eu gave the king a most flaring
entertainment in the camp, where the Polygone was
represented in flowering shrubs.  Dear West, these are the things
I must tell you; I don't know how to make 'em look
significant, unless you will be a Rhemois for a little
moment.(167)  I wonder you can stay out of the city so long, when
we are going to have all manner of diversions.  The comedians
return hither from Compiegne in eight days, for example; and in a
very little of time one attends the regiment of the king, three
battalions and an hundred of officers; all men of a
certain fashion, very amiable, and who know their world.  Our
women grow more gay, more lively, from day to day, in
expecting them; Mademoiselle la Reine is brewing a wash of a
finer dye, and brushing up her eyes for their arrival.  La Barone
already counts upon fifteen of them: and Madame Lelu, finding her
linen robe conceals too many beauties, has bespoke one of gauze.

I won't plague you any longer with people you don't know, I mean
French ones; for you must absolutely hear of an
Englishman that lately appeared at Rheims.  About two days ago,
about four o'clock in the afternoon, and about an hour after
dinner,-from all which you may conclude we dine at two
o'clock,-as we were picking our teeth round a littered table and
in a crumby room, Gray in an undress, Mr. Conway in a
morning gray coat, and I in a trim white night-gown and
slippers, very much out of order, with a very little cold, a
message discomposed us all of a sudden, with a service to Mr.
Walpole from Mr. More, and that, if he pleased, he would wait on
him.  We scuttled upstairs in great confusion, but with no other
damage than the flinging down two or three glasses and the
dropping a slipper by the way.  Having ordered the room to be
cleaned out, and sent a very civil response to Mr. More, we began
to consider who Mr. More should be.  Is it Mr. More of Paris!
No.  Oh, 'tis Mr. More, my Lady Teynham's husband?  No, it can't
be he.  A Mr. More, then, that lives in the
Halifax family?  No. In short, after thinking of ten thousand
more Mr. Mores, we concluded it could never be a one of 'em.  By
this time Mr.  More arrives; but such a Mr. More!  a young
gentleman out of the wilds of Ireland, who has never been in
England, but has got all the ordinary language of that
kingdom; has been two years at Paris, where he dined at an
ordinary with the refugee Irish, and learnt fortification-,,
which he does not understand at all, and which yet is the only
thing he knows.  In short, he is a young swain of very uncouth
phrase, inarticulate speech, and no ideas. This hopeful child is
riding post into Lorrain, or any where else, he is not
certain; for if there is a war he shall go home again: for we
must give the Spaniards another drubbing, you know; and if the
Dutch do but join us, we shall blow up all the ports in
Europe; for our ships are our bastions, and our ravelines, and
our hornworks; and there's a devilish wide ditch for 'em to pass,
which they can't fill up with things-Here Mr. Conway helped him
to fascines.  By this time I imagine you have
laughed at him as much, and were as tired of him as we were; but
he's gone.  This is the day that Gray and I intended for the
first of a southern circuit; but as Mr. Selwyn and George Montagu
design us a visit here, we have put off our journey for some
weeks.  When we get a little farther, I hope our
memories will brighten: at present they are but dull, dull as
Your humble servant ever.

P. S. I thank you ten thousand times for your last letter: when I
have as much wit and as much poetry in me, I'll send you as good
an one.  Good night, child!

(167) The three following paragraphs are a literal translation of
French expressions to the same imports.



136 Letter 13
To Richard West, Esq.
>From a Hamlet among the Mountains of Savoy,
Sept. 28, 1739, N. S.

Precipices, mountains, torrents, wolves, rumblings, Salvator
Rosa-the pomp of our park and the meekness of our palace!  Here
we are, the lonely lords of glorious, desolate prospects.  I have
kept a sort of resolution which I made, of not writing to you as
long as I staid in France: I am now a quarter of an hour out of
it, and write to you.  Mind, 'tis three months since we heard
from you.  I begin this letter -among the clouds; where I shall
finish, my neighbour Heaven probably knows: 'tis an odd wish in a
mortal letter, to hope not to finish it on this side the
atmosphere.  You will have a billet tumble to you from the stars
hen you least think of it; and that I should write it too!  Lord,
how potent that sounds! But I am to undergo many
transmigrations before I come to "yours ever." Yesterday I was a
shepherd of Dauphin`e; to-day an Alpine savage; to-morrow a
Carthusian monk; and Friday a Swiss Calvinist.  I have one
quality which I find remains with me in all worlds and in all
aethers; I brought it with me from your world, and am admired for
it in this-'tis my esteem for you: this is a common thought among
you, and you will laugh at it, but it is new here: as new to
remember one's friends in the world one has left, as for you to
remember those you have lost.

Aix in Savoy, Sept. 30th.

We are this minute come in here, and here's an awkward abb`e this
minute come in to us.  I asked him if he would sit down.  Oui,
oui, oui.  He has ordered us a radish soup for supper, and has
brought a chess-board to play with Mr. Conway.  I have left 'em
in the act, and am set down to write to you.  Did you ever see
any thing like the prospect we saw yesterday? I never did.  We
rode three leagues to see the Grande Chartreuse; (168)
expected bad roads and the finest convent in the kingdom.  We
were disappointed pro and con.  The building is large and plain,
and has nothing remarkable but its primitive simplicity; they
entertained us in the neatest manner, with eggs, pickled salmon,
dried fish, conserves, cheese, butter, grapes, and figs, and
pressed us mightily to lie there.  We tumbled into the hands of a
lay-brother, who, unluckily having the charge of the meal and
bran, showed us little besides.  They desired us to set down our
names in the list of strangers, where, among others, we found two
mottos of our countrymen, for whose stupidity and brutality we
blushed.  The first was of Sir j * * * D * * *, who had wrote
down the first stanza of justum et tenacem, altering the last
line to Mente quatit Carthusiana.  The second was of one D * *,
Coelum ipsum petimus stultitia; et hic ventri indico bellum.  The
Goth!-But the road, West, the road!  winding round a prodigious
mountain, and surrounded with others, all shagged with hanging
woods, obscured with pines, or lost in clouds!  Below, a torrent
breaking through cliffs, and tumbling through fragments of rocks!
Sheets of @cascades forcing their silver speed down channelled
precipices, and hasting into the roughened river at the bottom!
Now and then an old foot-bridge, with a broken rail, a leaning
cross, a cottage, or the ruin of an hermitage!  This sounds too
bombast and too romantic to one that has not seen it, too cold
for one that has.  If I could send you my letter post between two
lovely tempests that echoed each other's wrath you might have
some idea of this noble roaring scene, as you were reading it.
Almost on the summit, upon a fine verdure, but without any
prospect, stands the Chartreuse.  We staid there two hours, rode
back through this charming picture, wished for a painter, wished
to be poets! Need I tell you we wished for you? Good night!

Geneva, Oct. 2.

By beginning a new date, I should begin a new letter; but I have
seen nothing yet, and the Post is going Out: 'tis a strange
tumbled dab, and dirty too, I am sending you; but what can I do?
There is no possibility of writing such a long history over
again.  I find there are many English in the town; Lord Brook,
(169) Lord Mansel, (170) Lord Hervey's eldest son,(171) and a son
of-of Mars and Venus, or of Antony and Cleopatra, or, in short,
of-.  This is the boy, in the bow of whose hat Mr. Hedges pinned
a pretty epigram.  I don't know if you ever heard it; I'll
suppose you never did, because it will fill up my letter:

"Give but Cupid's dart to me,
Another Cupid I shall be:
No more distinguish'd from the other,
Than Venus would be from my mother."

Scandal says, Hedges thought the two last very like; and it says
too, that she was not his enemy for thinking so.

Adieu! Gray and I return to Lyons in three days.  Harry stays
here.  Perhaps at our return we may find a letter from you: it
ought to be very full of excuses, for you have been a lazy
creature: I hope you have, for I would not owe your silence to
any other reason.
Yours ever.

(168) It was on revisiting it, when returning to England after
his unfortunate quarrel with Walpole, that Gray inscribed his
beautiful "Alcaic Ode" in the album of the fathers of this
monastery.  Gray's account of this grand scene, where "not a
precipice, not a torrent, not a cliff, but is pregnant with
religion and poetry," will be found in his letter to West, dated
Turin, Nov. 16, N. S. 1739. Works, vol. ii. p. 69.-E.

(169) Francis Lord Brooke, advanced to the dignity of Earl Brooke
in 1746.-E.

(170) Thomas Lord Mansell, who died in 1743, without issue.  He
was succeeded in the title by his uncles Christopher and Bussy;
and, On the death of the latter in 1744, it became extinct.-E.

(171) George William Hervey, who succeeded his grandfather as
Earl of Bristol in 1751, and died Unmarried in 1775.-E.




138 Letter 14
To Richard West, Esq.
Turin, Nov. 11, 1739, N. S.

So, as the song says, we are in fair Italy! I wonder we are; for
on the very highest precipice of Mount Cenis, the devil of
discord, in the similitude of sour wine, had got amongst our
Alpine savages, and set them a-fighting with Gray and me in the
chairs: they rushed him by me on a crag, where there was scarce
room for a cloven foot.  The least slip had tumbled us into such
a fog, and such an eternity, as we should never have found our
way out of again.  We were eight days in coming hither from
Lyons; the four last in crossing the Alps.  Such uncouth rocks,
and such uncomely inhabitants!  My dear West, I hope I shall
never see them again!  At the foot of Mount Cenis we were obliged
to quit our chaise, which was taken all to pieces and loaded on
mules; and we were carried in low arm-chairs on poles, swathed in
beaver bonnets, beaver gloves, beaver stockings, muffs, and
bear-skins.  When we came to the top, behold the snows fallen!
and such quantities, and conducted by such heavy clouds that hung
glouting, that I thought we could never have waded through them.
The descent is two leagues, but steep and rough as O * * * *
father's face, over which,
you know, the devil walked with hobnails in his shoes.  But the
dexterity and nimbleness of the mountaineers are
inconceivable: they run with you down steeps and frozen
precipices, where no man, as men are now, could possibly walk.
We had twelve men and nine mules to carry us, our servants, and
baggage, and were above five hours in this agreeable jaunt The
day before, I had a cruel accident, and so extraordinary an one,
that it seems to touch upon the traveller.  I had brought with me
a little black spaniel of King Charles's breed; but the
prettiest, fattest, dearest creature!  I had let it out of the
chaise for the air, and it was waddling along close to the head
of the horses, on the top of the highest Alps, by the side of a
wood of firs. There darted out a young wolf, seized poor dear
Tory (172) by the throat, and, before we could possibly prevent
it, sprung up the side of the rock and carried him off.  The
postilion jumped off and struck at him with his whip, but in
vain.  I saw it and screamed, but in vain; for the road was so
narrow, that the servants that were behind could not get by the
chaise to shoot him.  What is the extraordinary part is, that it
was but two o'clock, and broad sunshine.  It was shocking to see
anything one loved run away with to so
horrid a death.  .... .

Just coming out of Camber, which is a little nasty old hole, I
copied an inscription set up at the end of a great road, which
was practised through an immense solid rock by bursting it
asunder with gunpowder.  The Latin is pretty enough, and so I
send it
you:

"Carolus Emanuel II.  Sab. dux, Pedem. princeps, Cypri
rex,public`a felicitate part`a, singulorum commodis intentus,
breviorem securioremque viam regiam, natur`a occlusam, Romanis
intentatam, mteris desperatam, dejectis scopulorum repagulus,
aquata montiuminiquitate, quae cervicibus imminebant precipitia
pedibus substernens, aeternis populorum commerciis patefecit.
 A.D. 1670."

We passed the Pas de Suze, where is a strong fortress on a rock,
between two very neighbouring mountains; and then, through a fine
avenue of three leagues, we at last discovered Tturin:--

"E l'un k l'altro mostra, ed in tanto oblia
La noia, e'l mal 'delta passata via."'

'Tis really by far one of the prettiest cities I have seen; not
one of your large straggling ones that can afford to have twenty
dirty suburbs, but, clean and compact, very new and very regular.
The king's palace is not of the proudest without, but of the
richest within; painted, gilt, looking-glassed, very costly, but
very tawdry; in short, a very popular palace.  We were last night
at the Italian comedy-the devil of a house and the devil of
actors! Besides this, there is a sort of an heroic tragedy,
called "La rapprentatione dell' Anima Damnata."(173)  A woman, a
sinner, comes in and makes a solemn prayer to the Trinity: enter
Jesus Christ and the Virgin: he scolds, and exit: she tells the
woman her son is very angry, but she don't know, she will see
what she can do.  After the play we were introduced to the
assembly, which they call the conversazione: there were many
people playing at ombre, pharaoh, and a game called taroc, with
cards so high, (174) to the number of seventy-eight.  There are
three or four English here Lord Lincoln,(175) with Spence,(176)
your professor of poetry; a Mr. B*** and a Mr. C*** a man that
never utters a syllable.  We have tried all stratagems to make
him speak.  Yesterday he did at last open his mouth, and said
Bec.  all laughed so at the novelty of the thing that he shut it
again, and will never speak more.  I think you can't complain now
of my not writing to you.  What a volume of trifles!  I wrote
just the fellow to it from Geneva; had it you?  Farewell! Thine.

(172) This incident is described also by Gray in one of his
letters to his mother. "If the dog," he adds, "had not been
there, and the creature had thought fit to lay hold of one of the
horses, chaise and we, and all, must inevitably have tumbled
above fifty fathoms perpendicularly down the precipice."-E.

(173) This representation is also mentioned by Spence, in a
letter to his mother:-"In spite of the excellence," he says, "of
the actors, the greatest part of the entertainment to me was the
countenances of the people in the pit and boxes.  When the devils
were like to carry off the Damned Soul, every body was in the
utmost consternation and when St. John spoke so obligingly to
her, they were ready to cry out for joy.  When the Virgin
appeared on the stage, every body looked respectful; and, on
several words spoke by the actors, they pulled off, their hats,
and crossed themselves.  What can you think of a people, where
their very farces are religious, and where they are so
religiously received?  It was from such a play as this (called
Adam and Eve) that Milton when he was in Italy, is said to have
taken the first hint for his divine poem of "Paradise Lost."
What small beginnings are there sometimes to the greatest
things!-E.

(174) In the manuscript the writing of this word is extraordinary
tall.

(175) Henry ninth Earl of Lincoln, who having, in 1744, married
Catherine, eldest daughter and heiress of the Right Honourable
Henry Pelham, inherited, in 1768, the dukedom of
Newcastle-under-Line at the demise of the countess's uncle,
Thomas Pelham Holles, who, in 1756, had been created Duke of
Newcastle-under-Line, with special remainder to the Earl of
Lincoln.-E.

(176) The Rev.  Joseph Spence, the author of one of the best
collections of ana the English language possesses-the well-known
"Anecdotes, Observations, and Characters of Books and Men," of
which the best edition is that edited by Singer.-E.




140 Letter 15
To Richard West, Esq.
>From Bologna, 1739.

I don't know why I told Ashton I would send you an account of
what I saw: don't believe it, I don't intend it.  Only think what
a vile employment 'tis, making
catalogues!  And then one should have that odious Curl (177) get
at one's letters, and publish them like Whitfield's
Journal, or for a supplement to the Traveller's Pocket
Companion.  Dear West, I protest against having seen any thing
but what all the world has seen; nay, I have not seen half that,
not-some of the most common things; not so much as a miracle.
Well, but you don't expect it, do you?  Except
pictures.  and statues, we are not very fond of sights; don't go
a-staring after crooked towers and conundrum staircases.  Don't
you hate, too, a jingling epitaph (178) of one Procul and one
Proculus that is here?  Now and then we drop in at a procession,
or a high-mass, hear the music, enjoy a strange attire, and hate
the foul monkhood.  Last week, was the feast of the Immaculate
Conception.  On the eve we went to the
Franciscans' church to hear the academical exercises.  There were
moult and moult clergy, about two dozen dames, that
treated one another with illustrissima and brown kisses, the
vice-legate, the gonfalonier, and some senate.  The
vice-legate, whose conception was not quite so immaculate, is a
young personable person, of about twenty, and had on a
mighty pretty cardinal-kind of habit; 'twould make a
delightful masquerade dress.  We asked his name: Spinola.  What,
a nephew of the cardinal-legate?  Signor, no: ma credo che gli
sia qualche cosa.  He sat on the right hand with the gonfalonier
in two purple fauteuils.  Opposite was a throne of crimson
damask, with the device of the Academy, the Gelati; and trimmings
of gold.  Here sat at a table, in black, the head of' the
academy, between the orator and the first poet At two
semicircular tables on either hand sat three poets and three;
silent among many candles.  The chief made a little introduction,
the orator a long Italian vile harangue.  Then the chief, the
poet, and the poets,-who were a Franciscan, an Olivetan, an old
abb`e, and three lay,-read their
compositions; and to-day they are pasted up in all parts of the
town.  As we came out of the church, we found all the
convent and neighbouring houses lighted all over with
lanthorns of red and yellow paper, and two bonfires.  But you are
sick of this foolish ceremony; I'll carry you to no more -. I
will only mention, that we found the Dominicans' church here in
mourning for the inquisitor: 'twas all hung with black cloth,
furbelowed and festooned with yellow gauze.  We have seen a
furniture here in a much prettier taste; a gallery of Count
Caprara's: in the panels between the windows are pendent trophies
of various arms taken by one of his ancestors from the Turks.
They are whimsical, romantic, and have a pretty effect.  I looked
about, but could not perceive the portrait of the lady at whose
feet they were indisputably offered. In coming out of Genoa we
were more lucky; found the very spot where Horatio and Lothario
were to have fought, "west of the town, a mile among the rocks."

My dear West, in return for your epigrams of Prior, I will
transcribe some old verses too, but which I fancy I can show you
in a sort of a new light.  They are no newer than Virgil, and
what is more odd, are in the second Georgic.  'Tis, that I have
observed that he not only excels when he is like himself, but
even when he is very like inferior poets: you will say that they
rather excel by being like him: but mind, they are all near one
another:

"Si non ingenter oribus domus alta superbis
Mane sa@atame totis vomit Eedibus uridam:"

And the four next lines; are they not just like Martial? In the
following he is as much Claudian"

"Illum non populi fasces, non purpura regum
Flexit, et infidos agitans discordia fratres;
Aut conjurato descendens Dacus ab Istro."

Then who are these like?

"nec ferrea jura, insanumque forum,
aut populi tabularia vidit.
Sollicitant alii remis freta ceca, ruuntque
In ferrum, penetrant aulas et limina regum.
Hic petit excidiis urbem miseresque Penates,
Ut gemma, bibat, et Sarrano indormiat ostro."

Don't they seem to be Juvenal's?-There are some more, which to me
resemble, Horace; but perhaps I think so from his having some on
a parallel subject.  Tell me if I am mistaken; these are they:

"Interea dulces pendent eircum oscula nati:
Casta pudicitiam servat domus-"

inclusively to the end of these:


"Hanc olim veteres vitam colti`ere Sabini
Hanc Remus et frater: sic fortis Etruria crevit,
Scilicet et retum facta est pulcherrima Roma."

If the imagination is whimsical; well at least, 'tis like me to
have imagined it.  Adieu, child! We leave Bologna
to-morrow.  You know 'tis the third city in Italy for
pictures: knowing that, you know all.  We shall be three days
crossing the Apennine to Florence: would it were over!

My dear West, I am yours from St. Peter's to St. Paul's!

(177) Edmund Curll, the well-known bookseller.  The letters
between Pope and many of his friends falling into Curll's hands,
they were by him  printed and sold.  As the volume contained some
letters from noblemen,  Pope incited a prosecution against him in
the House of Lords for breach of privilege; but, when the orders
of the House were examined, none of them appeared to have been
infringed: Curll went away triumphant, and Pope was left to seek
some other remedy.-E.

(178) The Epitaph on the outside of the wall of the church of St.
Proculo-

Si procul `a Proculo Proculi campana fuisset, Jam procul `a
Proculo Proculus ipse foret.  A.D. 1392.



142 Letter 16
To Richard West, Esq.
Florence, Jan. 24, 1740, N. S.

Dear West,
I don't know what volumes I may send you from Rome; from
Florence I have little inclination to send you any.  I see
several things that please me calmly, but `a force d'en avoir vu
I have left off screaming Lord! this! and Lord! that!  To speak
sincerely, Calais surprised me more than any thing I have seen
since.  I recollect the joy I used to propose if I could but once
see the great duke's gallery; I walk into it now with as little
emotion as I should into St. Paul's.  The statues are a
congregation of good sort of people, that I have a great deal of
unruffled regard for.  The farther I travel the less I wonder at
any thing: a few days reconcile one to a new spot, or an unseen
custom; and men are
so much the same every where, that one scarce perceives any
change of situation.  The same weaknesses, the same passions that
in England plunge men into elections, drinking, whoring, exist
here, and show themselves in the shapes of Jesuits,
Cicisbeos, and Corydon ardebat Alexins.  The most remarkable
thing I have observed since I came abroad, is, that there are no
people so obviously mad as the English.  The French, the
Italians, have great follies, great faults; but then they are so
national, they cease to be striking.  In England, tempers vary so
excessively, that almost every one's faults are
peculiar to himself.  I take this diversity to proceed partly
from our climate, partly from our government: the first is
changeable, and makes us queer; the latter permits our
queernesses to operate as they please.  If one
could avoid contracting this queerness, it must certainly be the
most entertaining to live in England, where such a variety of
incidents continually amuse.  The incidents of a week in London
would furnish all Italy with news for a twelvemonth.  The only
two circumstances of moment in the life of an
Italian, that ever give occasion to their being mentioned, are,
being married, and in a year after taking a cicisbeo.  Ask the
name, the husband, the wife, or the cicisbeo, of any person, et
voila qui est fini.
Thus, child, 'tis dull dealing here! Methinks your Spanish war is
little more livel By the gravity of the proceedings, one would
think both nations were Spaniard.  Adieu! Do you
remember my maxim, that you used to laugh at? Every body does
every thing, and nothing comes on't.  I am more convinced of it
now than ever.  I don't know whether S***w,'s was not still
better, Well, gad, there is nothing in nothing.  You see how I
distil all my speculations and improvements, that they may lie in
a small compass.  Do you remember the story of the prince, that,
after travelling three years, brought home nothing but a nut?
They cracked it: in it was wrapped up a piece of silk, painted
with all the kings, queens, kingdoms. and every thing in the
world: after many unfoldings, out stepped a little dog, shook his
ears, and fell to dancing a saraband.  There is a fairy tale for
you.  If I had any thing as good as your old song, I would send
it too; but I can only thank you for it, and bid you good night.
Yours ever.

P. S. Upon reading my letter, I perceive still plainer the
sameness that reigns here; for I find I have said the same thing
ten times over.  I don't care, I have made out a letter, and that
was all my affair.



143 Letter 17
To Richard West, Esq.
Florence, February 27, 1740, N. S.

Well, West, I have found a little unmasqued moment to Write to
you; but for this week past I have been so muffled up in my
domino, that I have not had the command of my elbows.  But what
have you been doing all the mornings?  Could you not
write then?-No, then I was masqued too; I have done nothing but
slip out of my domino into bed, and out of bed into my domino.
The end of the Carnival is frantic, bacchanalian; all the morn
one makes parties in masque to the shops and
coffee-houses, and all the evening to the operas and balls.  Then
I have danced, good gods! how have I danced!  The
Italians are fond to a degree of our country dances: Cold and
raw-they only know by the tune; Blowzybella is almost Italian,
and Buttered peas is Pizelli ag buro.  There are but three days
more; but the two last are to have balls all the morning at the
fine unfinished palace of the Strozzi; and the Tuesday night a
masquerade after supper: they sup first, to eat gras, and not
encroach upon Ash-Wednesday.  What makes masquerading more
agreeable here than in England, is
the great deference that is showed to the disguised.  Here they
do not catch at those little dirty opportunities of
saying any ill-natured thing they know of you, do not abuse you
because they may, or talk gross bawdy to a woman of
quality.  I found the other day, by a play of Etheridge's, that
we have had a sort of Carnival even since the
Reformation; Ytis in "She would if She could," they talk of going
a-mumming in Shrove-tide.(179)-After talking so much of
diversions, I fear you will attribute
to them the fondness I own I contract for Florence; but it has so
many other charms, that I shall not want excuses for
my taste.  The freedom of the Carnival has given me
opportunities to make several acquaintances.; and if I have no
found them refined, learned, polished, like some other cities,
yet they are civil, good-natured, and fond of the English-.
Their little partiality for themselves, opposed to the
violent vanity of the French, makes them very amiable in my eyes.
I can give you a comical instance of their great
prejudice about nobility; it happened yesterday.  While we were
at dinner at Mr. Mann'S. (180) word was brought by his secretary,
that a cavalier demanded audience of him upon an affair of
honour.  Gray and I flew behind the curtain of the door.  An
elderly gentleman, whose attire was not certainly correspondent
to the greatness of his birth, entered, and
informed the British minister, that one Martin. an English
painter, had left a challenge for him at his house, for having
said Martin was no gentleman.  He would by no means have spoke of
the duel before the transaction of it, but that his honour, his
blood, his etc. would never permit him to fight with one who was
no cavalier; which was what he came to inquire of his excellency.
We laughed loud laughs, but unheard: his fright or his nobility
had closed his ears.  But mark the sequel: the instant he was
gone, my very English curiosity hurried me out of the gate St.
Gallo; 'twas
the place and hour appointed.  We had not been driving about
above ten minutes, but out popped a little figure, pale but
cross, with beard unshaved and hair uncombed, a slouched hat, and
a considerable red cloak, in which was wrapped, under his arm,
the fatal sword that was to revenge the highly injured Mr.
Martin, painter and defendant.  I darted my head out of the
coach, just ready to say, " Your servant, Mr. Martin," and talk
about the architecture of the triumphal arch that was building
there; but he would not know me, and walked off.  We left him to
wait for an hour, to grow very cold and very
valiant the more it grew past the hour of appointment.  We were
figuring all the poor creature's huddle of thoughts, and confused
hopes of victory or fame, of his unfinished pictures, or his
situation upon bouncing into the next world.  You will think us
strange creatures; but 'twas a pleasant sight, as we knew the
poor painter was safe.  I have thought of it since, and am
inclined to believe that nothing but two English could have been
capable of such a jaunt.  I remember, 'twas reported in London,
that the plague was at a house in the city, and all the town went
to see it.

I have this instant received your letter.  Lord!  I am glad I
thought of those parallel passages, since it made you
translate them.  'Tis excessively near the original; and yet, I
don't know, 'tis very easy too.-It snows here a little
to-night, but
it never lies but on the mountains.  Adieu!  Yours ever.

P.S. What is the history of the theatres this winter?

(179) Sir Charles Etheridge.  "She would if She could," was
brought out at the Duke of York's theatre in February, 1668:
Pepys, who was present, calls it "a silly, dull thing; the design
and end being mighty insipid."-E.

(180) Sir Horace Mann, created a baronet in 1755. He was
appointed minister plenipotentiary from England to the court of
Florence in 1740, and continued so until his death, on the 6th
November 1786.-E.



145 Letter 18
To The Hon. Henry Seymour Conway, (181)
Florence, March 6, 1740, N. S.


Harry, my dear, one would tell you what a monster you are, if one
were not sure your conscience tells you so every time you think
of me.  At Genoa, in the year of our Lord one
thousand seven hundred and thirty-nine, I received the last
letter from you; by your not writing to me since, I imagine you
propose to make this a leap year.  I should have sent many a
scold after you in this long interval, had I known where to have
scolded; but you told me you should leave Geneva
immediately.  I have despatched sundry inquiries into England
after you, all fruitless.  At last drops in a chance letter to
Lady Sophy Farmor, (182) from a girl at Paris, that tells her for
news, Mr. Henry Conway is here.  Is he, indeed? and why was I to
know it only by this scrambling way? Well, I hate you for this
neglect, but I find I love you well enough to tell you so.  But,
dear now, don't let one fall into a train of excuses and
reproaches; if the god of indolence is a
mightier deity with you than the god of caring for one, tell me,
and I won't dun you; but will drop your correspondence as
silently as if I owed you money.

If my private consistency was of no weight with you, yet, is a
man nothing who is within three days' journey of a conclave?
Nay, for what you knew, I might have been in Rome.  Harry, art
thou so indifferent, as to have a cousin at the election of a
pope (183) without courting him for news? I'll tell you, were I
any where else, and even Dick Hammond were at Rome, I think
verily I should have wrote to him.  Popes, cardinals,
adorations, coronations, St. Peter's!  oh, what costly sounds!
and don't you write to one yet?  I shall set out in about a
fortnight, and pray then think me of consequence.

I have crept on upon time from day to day here; fond of
Florence to a degree: 'tis infinitely the most agreeable of all
the places I have seen since London: that you know one loves,
right or wrong, as one does one's nurse.  Our little Arno is not
bloated and swelling like the Thames, but 'tis vastly pretty,
and, I don't know how, being Italian, has
something visionary and poetical in its stream.  Then one's
unwilling to leave the gallery, and-but-in short, one's
unwilling to get into a postchaise.  I am surfeited with
mountains and inns, as if I had eat them.  I have many to pass
before I see England again, and no Tory to entertain me on the
road?  Well, this thought makes me dull, and that makes me
finish.  Adieu!
Yours ever.

P. S. Direct to me, (for to be sure you will not be so
outrageous as to leave me quite off), recornmand4 i Mons.
Mann, Ministre de sa Majest`e Britannique @ Florence.

(181) Second Son of Francis first Lord Conway. by Charlotte
Shorter, his third wife.  He was afterwards secretary in
Ireland during the vice-royalty of William fourth Duke of
Devonshire; groom of the bedchamber to George II. and George
III.; secretary of state in 1765; lieutenant-general of the
ordnance in 1770; commander in chief in 1782; and a field-
marshal in 1793.  This correspondence commences when Mr.
Walpole was twenty-three years old, and Mr. Conway two years
younger.  They had gone abroad together, with Mr. Gray, in the
year 1739, had spent three months together at Rheims, and
afterwards separated at Geneva.

(182) Daughter of the first Earl of Pomfret, and married,, in
1744, to John second Lord Carteret and first Earl of
Granville.-E.

(183) As successor of Clement XII., who died in the
eighty-eighth year of his age, and the tenth of his
pontificate, on the 6th Feb. 1740.  The cardinals being
uncertain whom to choose, Prosper Lamberteri, the learned and
tolerant Archbishop of Ancona, said, with his accustomed
good-humour, "If you want a saint, choose Gotti; if a
politician, Aldrosandi: but if a good man, take me."  His
advice was followed, and he ascended the papal throne as
Benedict XIV.-E.



146 Letter 19
To Richard West, Esq.
Siena, March 22, 1740, N. S.

Dear West, Probably now you will hear something of the
Conclave: we have
left Florence, and are got hither on the way to a pope.  In three
hours' time we have seen all the good contents of this city: 'tis
old, and very snug, with very few inhabitants.  You must not
believe Mr. Addison about the wonderful Gothic nicety of the
dome: the materials are richer, but the workmanship and taste not
near so good as in several I have seen.  We saw a college of the
Jesuits, where there are taught to draw above fifty boys: they
are disposed in long chambers in the manner of Eton, but
cleaner.
N. B. We were not bolstered; (184) so we wished you with us.  Our
Cicerone, who has less classic knowledge, and more
superstition than a colleger, upon showing
147 us the she-wolf, the arms of Siena, told us that Romolus and
Remus were nursed by a wolf, per la volonta di Dio, si pu`o dire;
and that one might see by the arms, that the same founders built
Rome and Siena.  Another dab of Romish superstition, not
unworthy
of Presbyterian divinity, we met with in a book of drawings:
'twas the Virgin standing on a tripod composed of Adam, Eve, and
the Devil, to express her immaculate conception.

You can't imagine how pretty the country is between this and
Florence; millions of little hills planted with trees, and tipped
with villas or convents.  We left unseen the great Duke's
villas
and several palaces in Florence, till our return from Rome: the
weather has been so cold, how could one go to them?  In Italy
they seem to have found out how hot their climate is, but not how
cold; for there are scarce any chimneys, and most of the
apartments painted in fresco so that one has the additional
horror of freezing with imaginary marble.  The men hang little
earthen pans of coals upon their wrists, and the women have
portable stoves under their petticoats to warm their
nakedness,
and carry silver shovels in their pockets, with which their
Cicisbeos stir them-Hush! by them, I mean their stoves.  I have
nothing more to tell you; I'll carry my letter to Rome and finish
it there.

R`e di Coffano, March 23, where lived one of the three kings.
The King of Coffano carried presents of myrrh, gold, and
frankincense, I don't know where the devil he found them; for in
all his dominions we have not seen the value of a shrub.  We have
the honour of lodging under his roof to-night.  lord! such a
place, such an extent of ugliness! A lone inn upon a black
mountain, by the side of an old fortress!  no curtains or
windows, only shutters! no testers to the beds! no earthly thing
to eat but some eggs and a few little fishes! This lovely
spot
is now known by the name of Radi-cofani.  Coming down a steep
hill with two miserable hackneys, one fell under the chaise; and
while we were disengaging him, a chaise came by with a person in
a red cloak, a white handkerchief on its head, and a black hat:
we thought it a fat old woman; but it spoke in a shrill little
pipe, and proved itself to be Senesini. (185) I forgot to tell
you an inscription I copied from the portal of the dome of Siena:

Annus centenus Roma seraper est jubilenus:
Crimina laxantur si penitet ista dortantur; Sic ordinavit
Bonifacius et roboravit.

Rome, March 26

We are this instant arrived, tired and hungry! O! the charming
city-I believe it is-for I have not seen a syllable yet, only the
Pons Milvius and an obelisk.  The Cassian and Flaminian ways were
terrible disappointments; not one Rome tomb left; their very
ruins ruined.  The English are numberless.  My dear West, I know
at Rome you will not have a grain of pity for one; but indeed
'tis dreadful, dealing with schoolboys just broke loose, or old
fools that are come abroad at forty to see the world, like Sir
Wilful Witwould.

I don't know whether you will receive this, or any other I write;
but though I shall write often, you and Ashton must not wonder if
none come to you; for though I am harmless in my nature, my name
has some mystery in it.(186)  Good night! I have no more time or
paper.  Ashton, child, I'll write to you next post.  Write us no
treasons, be sure!

(184) An Eton phrase.

(185) Francesco Bernardi, better known by the name of
Senesino, a celebrated singer, who, having been engaged for the
opera company formed by Handel in 17@20, remained here as
principal singer until 1726, when the state of his health
compelled him to return to Italy.  In 1730 he revisited England,
where he remained until about 1734.  He was the contemporary, if
not the rival of Farinelli; and Mr. Hogarth, in his "Memoirs of
the Musical Drama," (i. 431,) tells us, that when Senesino and
Farinelli were in England together, they had not for some time
the opportunity of hearing each other, in consequence of their
engagements at different theatres.  At last, however, they were
both engaged to sing on the same stage.  Senesino had the part of
a furious tyrant, and Farinelli the part of an unfortunate hero
in chains; but, in the course of the first act, the captive so
softened the heart of the tyrant, that Senesino, forgetting his
stage character, ran to Farinelli, and embraced him in his
own.-E.

(186) He means the name of Walpole at Rome, where the
Pretender and many of his adherents then resided.




148 letter 20
To                     Richard West, Esq.
Rome, April 16th, 1740, N. S.

I'll tell you, West, because one is amongst new things, you think
one can always write new things.  When I first came
abroad, every thing struck me, and I wrote its history: but now I
am grown so used to be surprised, that I don't perceive any
flutter in myself when I meet with any novelties;
curiosity and astonishment wear off, and the next thing is, to
fancy that other people nnow as much of places as One's Self; or,
at least, one does not remember that they do not.  It
appears to me as odd to write to you of St.
Peter's, as it would do to you to write of Westminster Abbey.
Besides, as one looks at churches, etc. with a book of travels in
one's hand, and sees every thing particularized there, it would
appear transcribing, to write upon the same subjects.  I know you
will hate me for this declaration; I remember how ill I used to
take it when any body served me so that was
travelling.  Well, I will tell you something, if you will love
me: You have seen prints of the ruins of the temple of Minerva
Medica; you shall only hear its situation, and then figure what a
villa might be laid out there. 'Tis in the middle of a garden: at
a little distance are two subterraneous grottos, which were the
burial-places of the liberti of Augustus.
There are all the niches and covers of the urns and the
inscriptions remaining; and in one, very considerable remains of
an ancient stucco Ceiling with paintings in grotesque.  Some of
the walks would terminate upon the Castellum Aquae Martioe, St.
John Lateran, and St. Maria Maggiore, besides other churches; the
walls of the garden would be two
aqueducts. and the entrance through one of the old gates of Rome.
This glorious spot is neglected, and only serves for a small
vineyard and kitchen-garden.

I am very glad that I see Rome while it yet exists: before a
great number of years are elapsed, I question whether it will be
worth seeing.  Between the ignorance and poverty of the present
Romans, every thing is neglected and falling to decay; the villas
are entirely out of repair, and the palaces so ill kept, that
half the pictures are spoiled by damp.  At the
villa Ludovisi is a large oracular head of red marble,
colossal, and with vast foramina for the eyes and mouth: the man
that showed the palace said it was un ritratto della
famiglia?  The Cardinal Corsini has
so thoroughly pushed on the misery of Rome by impoverishing it,
that there is no money but paper to be seen.  He is
reckoned to have amassed three millions of crowns.  You may judge
of' the affluence the nobility live in, when I assure you, that
what the chief princes allow for their own eating is a testoon a
day; eighteen pence: there are some extend their expense to five
pauls, or half a crown: Cardinal Albani is called extravagant for
laying out ten pauls for his dinner and supper.  You may imagine
they never have any entertainments: so far from it, they never
have any company.  The princesses and duchesses particularly lead
the dismallest of lives.
Being the posterity of popes, though of worse families than the
ancient nobility, they expect greater
respect than my ladies the countesses and marquises will pay
them; consequently they consort not, but mope in a vast palace
with two mniserable tapers, and two or three monsignori, whom
they are forced to court and humour, that they may not be
entirely deserted.  Sundays they do issue forth in a most
unwieldy coach to the Corso.

In short 'child, after sunset one passes one's time here very
ill; and if I did not wish for you in the mornings, it would be
no compliment to tell you that I do in the evening.  Lord! how
many English I could change for you, and yet buy you
wondrous cheap! And, then French and Germans I could fling into
the bargain by dozens.  Nations swarm here.  You will have a
great fat French cardinal garnished with thirty abb`es roll into
the area of St. Peter's, gape, turn short, and talk of the chapel
of Versailles.  I heard one of them say t'other day, he had been
at the Capitale.  One asked of course how he liked it-.Oh! il y a
assez de belles choses.

Tell Ashton I have received his letter, and will write next post
but I am in a violent hurry and have no more time; so Gray
finishes this delicately.

NOT so delicate; nor indeed would his conscience suffer him to
write to you, till he received de vos nouvelles, if he had not
the tail of another person's letter to use by way of evasion.  I
sha'n't describe, as being in the only place in the world that
deserves it which may seem an odd reason-but they say as how it's
fulsome, and every body does it (and I suppose every body says
the same thing); else I should tell'you a vast deal about the
Coliseum, and the Conclave, and the Capitol, and these matters.
A-propos du Colis`ee, if you don't know what it is, the Prince
Borghese will be very capable of giving you some account of it,
who told an Englishman that asked what it was built for: "They
say 'twas for Christians to fight with tigers in."  We are just
come from adoring a great piece of the true cross, St. Longinus's
spear, and St. Veronica's handkerchief; all of which have been
this evening exposed to view in St. Peter's.  In the same place,
and on the same occasion last night, Walpole saw a poor
creature naked to the waist discipline himself with a scourge
filled with iron prickles, till he made hii-nself a raw
doublet, that he took for red satin torn, and showing the skin
through.  I should tell you, that he fainted away three times at
the sight, and I twice
and a half at the repetition of it.  All this is performed by the
light of a vast fiery cross, composed of hundreds of
little crystal latmps, which appears through the great altar
under the grand tribuna, as if hanging by itself in the air.  All
the confraternities of the city resort thither in solemn
procession, habited in linen frocks, girt with a cord, and their
heads covered with a cowl all over, that has only two holes
before to see through.  Some of these are all black, others
parti-coloured and white: and with these masqueraders that vast
church is filled, who are seen thumping their
breasts, and kissing the pavement with extreme devotion.  But
methinks I am describing:-'tis an ill habit; but this, like every
thing else will wear off We have sent you our compliments by a
friend of yours, and correspondent in a corner, who seems a very
agreeable man; one Mr. Williams; I am sorry he staid so little a
while in Rome.  I forget Porto-Bello (187)  all this while; pray
let us know where it is, and whether you or Ashton had any hand
in the taking of'it.  Duty to the admiral.  Adieu! Ever yours,

T. GRAY.

(187) Porto-Bello, taken from the Spaniards by Admiral Vernon,
with six ships only, On the 21st Nov. 1740.  By the articles of
the capitulation, the town was not to be plundered, nor the
inhabitants molested in the smallest degree; and the governor and
inhabitants expressed themselves in the highest terms, when
speaking of the humanity and generosity with which they had been
treated by the admiral and the officers of the
squadron under his command.-E.



150 Letter 21
To The Hon. H. S. Conway.
Rome, April, 23, 1740, N. S.

As I have wrote you two such long letters lately, my dear Hal, I
did not hurry myself to answer your last; but choose to write to
poor SelWyn (188) Upon his illness.  I pity you excessively upon
finding him in such a situation- what a shock it must have been
to you!  He deserves so much love from all that know him, and you
owe him so much friendship, that I can scarce conceive a greater
shock.  I am very glad you did not write to me till he was out of
danger; for this great distance would have added to my pain, as I
must have waited so long for another letter.  I charge you, don't
let him relapse into balls: he does not love them, and, if you
please, your example may keep him out of them.  You are extremely
pretty people to be dancing and trading with French poulterers
and pastry cooks, when a hard frost is starving half the nation,
and the Spanish war ought to be employing the other half.  We are
much more public spirited here; we live upon the public news, and
triumph abundantly upon the taking Porto-Bello.  If you are not
entirely debauched with your balls, you must be pleased with an
answer of Lord Harrington's (189) to the governor of
Rome.  He asked him what they had determined about the
vessel that the Spaniards took under the canon of Civita
Vecchia, whether they had restored it to the English?  The
governor said, they had done justice.  My lord replied, "If you
had not, we should have' done it ourselves."  Pray
reverence our spirit, Lieutenant Hal.

Sir, MoscovitEO (190) is not a pretty woman, and she does
sing ill; that's all.

My dear Harry, I must now tell you a little about myself,
and answer your questions.  How I like the inanimate part of Rome
you will soon perceive at my arrival in England; I am far gone in
medals, lamps, idols, prints, etc." and all the small commodities
to the purchase of which I can attain; I would buy the Coliseum
if I could: Judge.  My mornings are spent in the most agreeable
manner; my evenings ill enough.  Roman conversations are dreadful
things! such untoward
mawkins as the princesses! and the princes are worse.  Then the
whole city is littered with French and German abb`es,
who make up a dismal contrast with the inhabitants.  The
conclave is far from enlivening us; its secrets don't
transpire.  I could give you names of this cardinal and
that, that are talked of, but each is contradicted the next hour.
I was there t'other day to visit one of them, and one of the most
agreeable, Alexander Albani.  I had the
opportunity of two cardinals making their entry: upon that
occasion the gate is unlocked, and their eminences come to talk
to their acquaintance over the threshold.  I have
received great civilities from him I named to you, and I
wish he were out, that I might receive greater: a friend of his
does the honours of Rome for him; but you know that it is
unpleasant to visit by proxy.  Cardinal Delei, the object of the
Corsini faction, is dying; the hot weather will probably despatch
half a dozen more. Not that it is hot yet; I am now writing to
you by my fireside.

Harry, you saw Lord Deskfoord (191) at Geneva; don't you
like him?  He is a mighty sensible man.  There are few young
people have so good understandings.  He is mighty grave, and so
are you; but you can both be pleasant when you have a
mind.  Indeed, one can make you pleasant, but his solemn
Scotchery is a little formidable: before you 1 can play the fool
from morning to night, courageously.  Good night.  I
have other letters to write, and must finish this.
Yours ever.

(188) John Selwyn, elder brother of George Augustus Selwyn.  He
died about 1750.

(189)William Marquis of Hartington.  He succeeded his father as
fourth Duke of Devonshire in 1755.-E.

(190) Notwithstanding she laboured under such
disadvantages-and want of beauty and want of talent are
serious ones to a cantatrice,-it will be seen from Walpole's
letter to Mann, 5th Nov. 1741, that the Moscovita, on her
arrival here, received six hundred guineas for the season,
instead of four hundred, the salary previously given to the ,
second woman;" and became, moreover, the mistress of Lord
Middlesex, the director of the opera.-E.

(191) Son of the Earl of Findlater and Seafield, who
succeeded his father in 1764, and died in 1770.-E.




152 Letter 22
To Richard West, Esq.
Rome, May 7, 1740, N. S.

Dear West,
'Twould be quite rude and unpardonable in one not to wish you joy
upon the great conquests that you are all committing all over the
world.  We heard the news last night from Naples, that Admiral
Haddock (192) had met the Spanish convoy going to Majorca, and
taken it all, all; three thousand men, three
colonels, and a Spanish grandee.  We conclude it is true, for the
Neapolitan Majesty mentioned it at dinner.  We are going thither
in about a week, to wish him joy of it too.  'Tis with some
apprehensions we go too, of having a pope chosen in the interim:
that would be cruel, you know.  But, thank our stars, there is no
great probability of it.  ' Feuds and contentions run high among
the eminences.  A notable one happened this week.  Cardinal
Zinzendorff and two more had given their votes for the general of
the Capucins: he is of the Barberini
family, not a cardinal, but a worthy man.  Not effecting any
thing, Zinzendorff voted for Coscia, and declared it publicly.
Cardinal Petra reproved him; but the German replied, he
thought Coscia as fit to be pope as any of them.  It seems, his
pique to the whole body is, their having denied a daily admission
of a pig into the conclave for
his eminence's use who, being much troubled with the gout, was
ordered by his mother to bathe his leg in pig's blood every
morning.

Who should have a vote t other day but the Cardinalino of
Toledo!  Were he older, the Queen of Spain might possibly
procure more than one for him, though scarcely enough.

Well, but we won't talk Politics: shall we talk antiquities?
Gray and I discovered a considerable curiosity lately.  In an
unfrequented quarter of the Colonna garden lie two immense
fragments of marble, formerly part of a frieze to some building;
'tis not known of what.  They are of Parian marble: which may
give one some idea of the magnificence of the rest of the
building for these pieces were at the very top.  Upon inquiry, we
were told they had been measured by an architect, who declared
they were larger than any member of St. Peter's.  The length of
one of the pieces is above sixteen feet.  They were formerly sold
to a stonecutter for five thousand crowns, but Clement XI. would
not permit them to be sawed, annulled the bargain, and laid a
penalty of twelve thousand crowns upon the family if they parted
with them.  I think it was a right judged thing.  Is it not
amazing, that so vast a structure should not be known of, or that
it should be so entirely destroyed?  But indeed at Rome this is a
common surprise; for, by the remains one sees of the Roman
grandeur in their structures, 'tis evident that there must have
been more pains taken to destroy those piles than to raise them.
They are more demolished than any time or chance could have
effected.  I am persuaded that in an hundred years Rome will not
be worth seeing; 'tis less so now than one would believe.  All
the public pictures are decayed or decaying; the few ruins cannot
last long; and the statues and private collections must be sold,
from the great poverty of the families.  There are now selling no
less than three of the principal collections, the Barberini, the
Sacchetti, and Ottoboni: the latter
belonged to the cardinal who died in the conclave.  I must give
you an instance of his generosity, or rather ostentation.  When
Lord Carlisle was here last year, who is a great
virtuoso, he asked leave to see the cardinal's collection of
cameos and intaglios.  Ottoboni gave leave, and ordered the
person who showed them to observe which my lord admired most.  My
lord admired many: they were all sent him the next morning. He
sent the cardinal back a fine gold repeater; who returned him an
acate snuff box, and more cameoes of ten
times the value.  Voila qui est fini!  Had my lord produced more
golden repeaters, it would have been begging more cameos.
Adieu, my dear West! You see I write often and much, as you
desired it.  Do answer one now and then, with any little job that
is done in England.  Good night.  Yours ever.

(192) This report, which proved unfounded, was grounded on the
fact, that on the 18th of April his Majesty's ships Lenox, Kent,
and Orford, commanded by Captains Mayne, Durell, and Lord
Augustus Fitzroy, part of Admiral Balchen's squadron
being on a cruise about forty leagues to the westward of Cape
Finisterre, fell in with the Princessa, esteemed the finest ship
of war in the Spanish navy, and captured her, after an engagement
of five hours.-E.

(193) Henry fourth Earl of Carlisle, grandfather of the
present Earl.  In 1742, he married Isabella, the daughter of
William fourth Lord Byron, and died in 1758.-E.

(194) Cardinal Ottoboni, Dean of the Sacred College, who died in
1740: he had been made a cardinal in 1689.-E.




153 Letter 23
To Richard West, Esq.
Naples, June 14, 1740, N. S.


Dear West,
One hates writing descriptions that are to be found in every book
of travels; but we have seen something to-day that I am sure you
never read of, and perhaps never heard of.  Have
you ever heard of a subterraneous town? a whole Roman town, with
all its edifices, remaining under ground? Don't fancy the
inhabitants buried it there to save it from the Goths: they were
buried with it themselves; which is a caution we are not told
that they ever took.  You remember in Titus's time there  were
several cities destroyed by an eruption of Vesuvius,
attended with an earthquake.  Well, this was one of them, not
very considerable, and then called Herculaneum. (195)  Above it
has since been built Portici, about three miles from
Naples, where the King has a villa.  This under-ground city is
perhaps one of the noblest curiosities that ever has been
discovered.  It was found out by chance, about a year and half
ago.  They began digging, they found statues; they dug,
further, they found more.  Since that they have made a
very considerable progress, and find continually.  You may walk
the compass of a mile; but by the misfortune of the
modern town being overhead, they are obliged to proceed with
great caution, lest they destroy both one and t'other.  By this
occasion the path is very narrow, just wide enough and high
enough for one man to walk upright.  They have hollowed, as they
found it easiest to work, and have carried their
streets not exactly where were the ancient ones, but sometimes
before houses, sometimes through them.  You would imagine that
all the fabrics were crushed together; on the contrary.,
except some columns, they have found all the edifices standing
upright in their proper ' situation.  There is one inside of a
temple quite perfect, with the middle arch, two columns, and two
pilasters.  It is built of brick plastered over, and
painted with architecture almost all the insides of the houses
are in the same manner; and, what is very particular the
general ground of all the painting is red.  Besides this
temple, they make out very plainly an amphitheatre: the
stairs, of white marble and the seats are very perfect; the
inside was painted in the same colour with the private houses,
and great part cased with white marble.  They have found among
other things some fine statues, some human bones, some rice,
medals, and a few paintings
extremely fine.  These latter are preferred to all the ancient
paintings that have ever been discovered.  We have not seen them
yet, as they are kept in the King's apartment, whither all these
curiosities are transplanted; and 'tis difficult to see them-but
we shall.  I forgot to tell you, that in several places the beams
of the houses remain, but burnt to charcoal; so little damaged
that they retain visibly the grain of the wood, but upon touching
crumble to ashes.  What is remarkable, there are no other marks
or appearance of fire, but what are visible on these beams.

There might certainly be collected great light from this
reservoir of antiquities, if a man of learning had the
inspection of it; if he directed the working, and would make a
journal of the discoveries.  But I believe there is no
judicious choice made of directors.  There is nothing of the kind
known in the world; I mean a Roman city entire of that age, and
that has not been corrupted with modern repairs.
(196) Besides scrutinising this very carefully, I should be
inclined to search for the remains of the other towns that were
partners with this in the general ruin.  'Tis certainly an
advantage to the learned  world, that this has been laid up so
long.  Most of the discoveries in Rome were made in a
barbarous age, where they only ransacked the ruins in quest of
treasure, and had no regard to the form and being of the
building; or to any circumstances that might give light to its
use and history.  I shall finish this long account with a
passage which Gray has observed in Statius, and which
correctly pictures out this latent city:-

Haec ego Chalcidicis ad te, Marcelle, sonabam
Littoribus, fractas ubi Vestius egerit iras,
Emula Trinacriis volvens incendia flammis.
Mira fides! credetne viram ventura propago,
Cum segetes iterum, cum jam haec deserta virebunt,
Infra urbes populosque premi?
SyLv. lib. iv. epist. 4.

Adieu, my dear West! and believe me yours ever.

(195) Some excavations were made at Herculaneum in 1709
by the Prince d'Elbeuf; but, thirty years elapsed after the
prince had been forbidden to dig further, before any more
notice was taken of them.  In December 1738 the King of the two
Sicilies was at Portici, and gave orders for the
prosecution of these subterranean labours.  There had been an
excavation in the time of the Romans;
and another so lately as 1689.  In a letter from Gray
to his mother, he describes their visits to Herculaneum;
but, not mentioning it by name, Mason supposed it had not then
been discovered to be that city.  It is evident, from this
observation of Walpole, that Mason's opinion was unfounded.-E.

  (196) Pompei a was not then discovered.



155 Letter 24
To The Hon.  H. S. Conway.
R`e di Cofano, vulg.  Radicofani, July 5, 1740, N. S.

You will wonder, my dear Hal, to find me on the road from
Rome: why, intend I did to stay for a new popedom, but the old
eminences are cross and obstinate, and will not choose one the
Holy Ghost does not know when.  There is a horrid thing called
the mallaria, that comes to Rome, every summer, and kills one,
and I did not care for being killed so far from Christian burial.
We have been jolted to death; my servants let us
come without springs to the chaise, and we are wore
threadbare: to add to our disasters, I have sprained my ancle,
and have brought it along, laid upon a little box of baubles that
I have bought for presents in England.  Perhaps I may pick you
out some little trifle there, but don't depend upon it; you are a
disagreeable creature and may be I shall not care for you.
Though I am so tired in this devil of a place, yet I have taken
it into my head, that it is like Hamilton's Bawn, (197) and I
must write to you.  'Tis the top of a black barren mountain, a
vile little town at the foot of an old citadel: yet this, know
you, was the residence of one of the three kings that went to
Christ's birth-day; his name was Alabaster, Abarasser, or some
such thing; the other two were kings, one of the East, the other
of Cologn.  'Tis this of Cofano, who was represented in an
ancient painting found in the Palatine Mount, now in the
possession of Dr. Mead; he was crowned by Augustus.  Well, but
about writing-what do you think I write with? Nay, with a pen;
there was never a one to be found in the whole
circumference but one, and that was in the possession of the
governor, and had been used time out of mind to write
the parole with : I was forced to send to borrow it. It was sent
me under the conduct of a sergeant and two Swiss, with  desire to
return it when I should have done with it.  'Tis a curiosity, and
worthy to be laid up with the relics
which we have just been seeing- in a small hovel of
Capucins, on the side of the hill, and which were all brought by
his Majesty from Jerusalem.  Among other things of great sanctity
there is a set of gnashing of teeth, the grinders very entire; a
bit of the worm that never dies, preserved in spirits; a crow of
St. Peter's cock, very useful against
Easter; the crisping and curling, frizzling and frowncing of Mary
Magdalen, which she cut off on growing devout.  The good man that
showed us all these commodities was got into such a train of
calling them the blessed this, and blessed that, that at last he
showed us a bit of the blessed fig-tree that Christ cursed.

Florence, July 9.

My dear Harry,
We are come hither, and I have received another letter from you
with Hosier's Ghost.  Your last put me in pain for you, when you
talked of going to Ireland; but now I find your
brother and sister go with you, I am not much concerned.
Should I be?  You have but to say, for my feelings are
extremely at your service to dispose as you please.  Let us see:
you are to come back to stand for some
place; that will be about April.  'Tis a sort of thing I
should do, too; and then we should see one another, and that
would be charming; but it is a sort of thing I have no mind to
do; and then we shall not see one another, unless you
would come hither-but that you cannot do: nay, I would not have
you, for then I shall be gone.  So! there are many @
that just signify nothing at all.  Return I must sooner than I
shall like.  I am happy here to a degree.  I'll tell you my
situation.  I am lodged with Mr. Mann, (198) the best of
creatures.  I have a terreno all to myself, with an open
gallery on the Arno, where I am now writing to you.  Over
against me is the famous Gallery; and, on either hand, two fair
bridges.  Is not this charming and cool?  The air is so serene,
and so secure, that one sleeps with all the windows and doors
thrown open to the river, and only covered with a slight gauze to
keep away the gnats.  Lady Pomfret
(199) has a charming conversation once a week.  She has
taken a vast palace and a vast garden, which is vastly
commode, especially to the cicisbeo-part of mankind, who have
free indulgence to wander in pairs about the arbours.  You know
her daughters : Lady Sophia (200) is still, nay she must be, the
beauty she was: Lady Charlotte, (201) is much improved, and is
the cleverest girl in the world; speaks the purest Tuscan, like
any Florentine.  The
Princess Craon (202) has a constant pharaoh and supper every
night, where one is quite at one's ease.  I am going into the
country with her and the prince for a little while, to a villa of
the Great Duke's.  The people are good-humoured here and easy;
and what makes me pleased with them, they are pleased with me.
One loves to find people care for one, when they can have no view
in it.

You see how glad I am to have reasons for not returning; I wish I
had no better.

As to Hosier's Ghost, (203) I think it very easy, and
consequently pretty; but, from the ease, should never have
guessed it Glover's.  I delight in your, "the patriots cry it up,
and the courtiers cry it down, and the hawkers cry it up and
down," and your laconic history of the King and Sir
Robert, on going to Hanover, and turning out the Duke of
Argyle.  The epigram, too, you sent me
on the same occasion is charming.

Unless I sent you back news that you and others send me, I can
send you none.  I have left the conclave, which is the only
stirring thing in this part of the world, except the child that
the Queen of Naples is to be delivered of in August.  There is no
likelihood the conclave will end, unless the messages take effect
which 'tis said the Imperial and
French ministers have sent to their respective courts for
leave to quit the Corsini for the Albani faction: otherwise there
will never be a pope.  Corsini has
lost the only one he could have ventured to make pope, and him he
designed; 'twas Cenci, a relation of the Corsini's
mistress.  The last morning Corsini made him rise, stuffed a dish
of chocolate down his throat, and would carry him to
the scrutiny.  The poor old creature went, came back, and
died.  I am sorry to have lost the sight of the pope's
coronation, but I might have stayed for seeing it till I had been
old enough to be pope myself.

Harry, what luck the chancellor has! first, indeed, to be in
himself so great a man; but then in accidents: he is
made chief justice and peer, when Talbot is made chancellor and
peer: (204) Talbot dies in a twelvemonth, and leaves him the
seals at an age when others are scarce made solicitors:
(205)-then marries his son into one of the first families of
Britain, (206) obtains a patent for a marquisate and eight
thousand pounds a year after the Duke of Kent's death: the duke
dies in a fortnightt, and leaves them all! People talk of
Fortune's wheel, that is always rolling: my Lord Hardwicke has
overtaken her wheel, and rolled with it.  I perceive Miss Jenny
(207) would not venture to Ireland, nor stray so far from London;
I am glad I shall always know where to find her within threescore
miles.  I must say a word to my lord, which, Harry, be sure you
don't read. ["My dear lord, I don't love troubling you with
letters, because I know you don't love the trouble of answering
them; not that I should insist on that ceremony, but I hate to
burthen any one's conscience.  Your brother tells me he is to
stand member of parliament: without telling me so, I am sure he
owes it to you.  I am sure you will not repent setting him up;
nor will he be ungrateful to a brother who deserves so much, and
whose least merit is not the knowing how to employ so great a
fortune."]

There, Harry,-I have done.  Don't suspect me: I have said no ill
of you behind your back.  Make my
best compliments to Miss Conway. (208)

I thoght I had done, and lo, I had forgot to tell you, that who
d'ye think is here?-Even Mr. More! our Rheims Mr.
More!  the fortification, hornwork, ravelin, bastion Mr.
More! which is very pleasant sure.  At the end of the eighth
side, I think I need make no excuse for leaving off; but I am
going to write to Selwyn, and to the lady of the mountain; from
whom I have had a very kind letter.  She has at last
received the Chantilly brass. Good night: write to me from one
end of the world to t'other.  Yours ever.

(197) A large old house, two miles from the seat of Sir
Arthur Acheson, near Market-hill, and the scene of Swift's
humorous poem, "The Grand Question debated, whether
Hamilton's Bawn should be turned into a barrack or a malt-
house."-E.

(198) Afterwards Sir Horace Mann.  He was at this time
resident at Florence from George II.

(199) Henrietta Louisa, wife of Thomas Earl of Pomfret. [She was
the daughter of John Lord Jefferies, Baron of Wem.  Lady Pomfret,
who was the friend and correspondent of Frances
Duchess of Somerset, retired from the court upon the death of
Queen Caroline in 1737.]

(200) Afterwards married to John Lord Carteret, who became Earl
of Granville on the death of his mother in the year 1744.

(201) Lady Charlotte Fermor married, in August 1746, William
Finch, brother of Daniel seventh Earl of Winchelsea, by whom she
had issue a son, George, who, on the death of his uncle, in 1769,
succeeded to the earldom.  Her ladyship was governess to the
children of George III., and highly esteemcd by him and his royal
consort.-E.

(202) The Princess Craon was the favourite mistress of
Leopold the last Duke of Lorrain, who married her to M. de
Beauveau, and prevailed on the Emperor to make him a prince of
the empire.  They at this time resided at Florence, where Prince
Craon was at the head of the council of regency.

(203) This was a party ballad (written by Glover, though by some
at the time ascribed to Lord Bath,) on the taking of
Porto-Bello by Admiral Vernon.  "The case of Hosier," says
Bishop Percy, in his admirable Reliques, vol. ii. p. 382,
where the song is preserved, "The case of Hosier, which is here
so pathetically represented, was briefly this.  In
April 1726, that commander was sent with a strong fleet into the
Spanish West Indies to block up the galleons in the port of that
country, or, should they presume to come out, to
seize and carry them to England: he accordingly arrived at
Bastimentos, near Porto-Bello; but, being employed rather to
overawe than attack the Spaniards, with whom it was probably not
our interest to go to war, he continued long inactive on this
station.  He afterwards removed to Carthagena, and
remained crusing in those seas, till the greater part of his men
perished deplorably by the diseases of that unhealthy
Climate.  This brave man, seeing his best officers and men thus
daily swept away, his ships exposed to inevitable
destruction, and himself made the sport of the enemy, is
said to have died of a broken heart.-E.

(204) Philip Yorke Lord Hardwicke was the son of an attorney at
Dover, and was introduced by the Duke of Newcastle to Sir Robert
Walpole.  He was attorney-general, and when Talbot, the
solicitor-general, was preferred to him in the contest for the
chancellorship, Sir Robert made him chief justice
for life, with an increased salary.  He was an object of
aversion to Horace Walpole, who, in his Memoirs, tells us, "in
the House of Lords, he was laughed at, in the cabinet
despised." Upon which it is very properly observed by the
noble editor of those memoirs, Lord Hollan,-"Yet, in the
course of the work, Walpole laments Lord Hardwicke's
influence in the cabinet, where he would have us believe
that he was despised, and acknowledges that he exercised a
dominion nearly absolute over that house of Parliament
which, he would persuade his readers, laughed at him.  The truth
is, that, wherever this great magistrate is mentioned, Lord
Orford's resentments blind his judgment and disfigure his
narrative."-E.


(205) charles Talbot baron Talbot was, on the 29th Nov.
1733, made lord high chancellor and created a baron; and,
dying in Feb. 1737, was succeeded by Lord Hardwicke.  There is a
story current, that Sir Robert Walpole, finding it
difficult to prevail on Yorke to quit a place for life, for the
higher but more precarious dignity of chancellor, worked upon his
jealousy, and said that if he persisted in refusing the seals, he
must offer them to Fazakerly. "Fazakerly!"
exclaimed Yorke, "impossible! he is certainly a Tory,
perhaps a Jacobite."  "It's all very true," replied Sir
Robert, taking out his watch; " but if by one o'clock you do not
accept my offer, Fazakerly by two becomes lord keeper of the
great seal, and one of the staunchest Whigs in all
England!" Yorke took the seals and the peerage.-E.

(206) That of Grey, Duke of Kent, see avove.-E.

(207) Miss Jane Conway, half-sister to Henry Seymour Conway.  She
died unmarried in 1749.

(208) Afterwirds married to John Harris, Esq. of
Hayne in Devonshire.



159 Letter 25
To Richard West, Esq.
Florence, July 31, 1740, N. S.

Dear West,
I have advised with the most notable antiquarians of this city on
the meaning of Thur gut Luetis.  I can get no satisfactory
interpretation.  In my own opinion 'tis Welsh.  I don't love
offering conjectures on a language in which I have hitherto made
little proficiency, but I will trust you with my
explication.  You know the famous Aglaughlan, mother of
Cadwalladhor, was renowned for her conjugal virtues, and grief on
the death of her royal spouse.  I conclude this medal was struck
in her regency, by her express order, to the memory of her lord,
and that the inscription Thur gut Luetis means no more than her
dear Llewis or Llewellin.

In return for your coins I send you two or three of different
kinds.  The first is a money of one of the kings of Naples; the
device, a horse; the motto, Equitas regni.  This curious pun is
on a coin in the Great Duke's collection, and by great chance I
have met with a second.  Another is, a satirical
medal struck on Lewis XIV.; 'tis a bomb, covered with
flower-de-luces, bursting; the motto, Se ipsissimo.  The last,
and almost the only one I ever saw with a text well applied, is a
German medal with a Rebellious town besieged and blocked up; the
inscription, This kind is not expelled but by fasting.
Now I mention medals, have they yet struck the intended one on
the taking of Porto-Bello?  Admiral Vernon will shine in our
medallic history.  We have just received the news of the
bombarding Carthagena, and the taking Chagre. (209)  We are in
great expectation of some important victory obtained by the
squadron under Sir John Norris.  we are told the Duke is to be of
the expedition; is it true? (210)  All the letters, too, talk of
France suddenly declaring war; I hope they will defer it for a
season, or one shall be obliged to return through Germany.

The conclave still subsists, and the divisions still increase; it
was very near separating last week, but by breaking into two
popes; they were on the dawn of a schism.  Aldovrandi had
thirty-three voices for three days, but could not procure the
requisite two more; the Camerlingo having engaged his faction to
sign a protestation against him and each party were
inclined to elect.  I don't know whether one should wish for a
schism or not; it might probably rekindle the zeal for the church
in the powers of Europe which has been so far decaying.
On Wednesday we expect a third she-meteor.  Those learned
luminaries the Ladies Pomfret and Walpole are to be joined by the
Lady Mary Wortley Montague.  You have not been witness to the
rhapsody of mystic nonsense which these two fair ones
debate incessantly, and consequently cannot figure what must be
the issue of this triple alliance: we have some idea of it.  Only
figure the coalition of prudery, debauchery, sentiment, history,
Greek, Latin, French, Italian, and metaphysics; all, except the
second, understood by halves, by quarters, or not at all.  You
shall have the journals of this notable academy.  Adieu, my dear
West! Yours ever,

Hor. Walpole.

Though far unworthy to enter into so learned and political a
correspondence, I am employed pour barbouiller une page
de 7 pounces et demie en hauteur, et `a en largeur; and to inform
you that we are at Florence, a city of Italy, and the capital of
Tuscany: the latitude I cannot justly tell, but it is governed by
a prince called Great Duke; an excellent place to employ all
one's animal sensations in, but utterly contrary to one's
rational powers.  I have struck a medal upon myself: the device
is thus 0, and the motto Nihilissimo, which I take in the most
concise manner to contain a full account of my person,
sentiments, occupations, and late glorious successes.  If you
choose to be annihilated too, you cannot do better than undertake
this journey.  Here you shall get up at twelve
o'clock, breakfast till three, dine till five, sleep till six,
drink cooling liquors till eight, go to the bridge till ten, sup
till two, and so sleep till twelve again.

Lahore fessi venimus ad larem nostrum,
Desideratoque acquiescimus lecto;
Hoc est, quod unum est, pro laborious tantis.
O quid solutis est beatius curis?

We shall never come home again; a universal war is just upon the
point of breaking out; all outlets will be
shut up.  I shall be secure in my nothingness, while you, that
will be so absurd as to exist, will envy me.  You don't tell me
what proficiency you make in the noble science of defence.  Don't
you start still at the sound of a gun? Have you learned to say
ha! ha! and is your neck clothed with thunder?  Are your whiskers
of a tolerable length? And have you got drunk yet with brandy and
gunpowders?  Adieu, noble captain!
T. GRAY.

(209) On the 24th March, 1740, the Spaniards hung out a white
flag, and the place was surrendered by capitulation to Admiral
Vernon.-E.

(210) The Duke of Cumberland had resolved to accompany Sir John
Norris as a volunteer, and sailed with him from St.
Helens on the 10th June; but on the 17th a gale arising drove
them into Torbay, Where Sir John continued until the 29th, when
he again put to sea; but the wind once more becoming
contrary, and blowing very hard, he was constrained to return to
Spithead, and on the following day his royal highness
returned to London.-E.



161 Letter 26
To The Hon. H. S. Conway.
Florence, September 25, 1740, N. S.

My dear Hal,
I begin to answer your letter the moment I have read it,
because you bid me; but I grow so unfit for a correspondence with
any body in England, that I have almost left it off.  'Tis so
long since I was there, and I am so utterly a stranger to every
thing that passes there, that I must talk vastly in the dark to
those I write: and having in a manner settled
myself here, where there can be no news, I am void of all
matter for filling up a letter.  As, by the absence of the Great
Duke, Florence is become in a manner a country town, YOU may
imagine that we are not without dem`el`es; but for a
country town I believe there never were a set of people so
peaceable, and such strangers to scandal.  'Tis the family of
love, where every body is paired, and go as constantly
together as paroquets.  Here nobody hangs or drowns
themselves; they are not ready to cut one another's throats about
elections or parties; don't think that wit consists in saying
bold truths, or humour in getting
drunk.  But I shall give you no more of their characters,
because I am so unfortunate as to think that their encomium
consists in being the reverse of the English, who in general are
either mad, or enough to make other people so.  After
telling you so fairly my sentiments, you may believe, my dear
Harry, that I had rather see you here than in England.  'Tis an
evil wish for you, who should not be lost in so obscure a place
as this.  I will not make you compliments, or else here is a
charming opportunity for saying what I think of you.  As I am
convinced you love me, and as I am conscious you have One strong
reason for it, I will own to you, that for my own peace you
should wish me to remain here.  I am so well within and without,
that you would scarce know me: I am younger than ever, think of
nothing but diverting myself, and live in a round of pleasures.
We have operas, concerts, and balls,
mornings and evenings.  I dare not tell you all One's
idleness: you would look so grave and senatorial at hearing that
one rises at eleven in the morning, goes to the opera at nine at
night, to supper at one, and to bed at three! But
literally here the evenings and nights are so charming and so
warm, one can't avoid 'em.

Did I tell you Lady Mary Wortley is here? She laughs at my Lady
Walpole, scolds my Lady Pomfret, and is laughed at by the whole
town. (211)  Her dress, her avarice, and her impudence must amaze
any one that never heard her name.  She wears a foul mob, that
does not cover her greasy black locks, that hang loose, never
combed or curled; an old mazarine blue
wrapper, that gapes open and discovers a canvass petticoat.  Her
face swelled violently on one side with the remains of a-, partly
covered with a plaster, and partlv with white paint, which for
cheapness she has bought so coarse, that you would not use it to
wash a chimney.-In three words I will give you her picture (212)
as we drew it in the Sortes Virgilianae-
Insanam vatem aepicies.

I give you my honour, we did not choose it; but Mr. Gray, Mr.
Cooke, (213) Sir Francis Dashwood, (214) and I, and several
others, drew it fairly amongst a thousand for different
people, most of which did not hit as you may imagine: those that
did I will tell you.

For our most religious and gracious-
-Dii, talem terris avertite pestem.

For one that would be our most religious and gracious.
Purpureus veluti cum flos succisus aratro
Languescit moriens, lassove papavera collo
Demis`ere caput, pluvia cum fort`e gravantur.

For his son.
Regis Romani: primus qui legibus urbem Fundabit, Curibus
parvis et paupere terra, Missus in imperium magnum.

For Sir Robert.
Res dura et regni novitas me talia cogunt Moliri, et late
fines custode tueri.

I will show you the rest when I see you.

(211) In a letter from Florence, written by Lady Mary to Mr.
Wortley, on the 11th of August, she says, "Lord and Lady
Pomfret take pains to make the place agreeable to me, and I have
been visited by the greatest part of the people of
quality."  See the edition of her works, edited by Lord
Wharncliffe, vol. ii. p. 325.-E.

(212) The following favourable picture" of Lady Mary is by
Spence, who met her at Rome, in the ensuing January:-" She is one
of the most shining characters in the world, but shines like a
comet; she is all irregularity, and always wandering; the most
wise, most imprudent; loveliest, most disagreeable; best-natured,
cruellest woman in the world; 'all things by turns, and nothing
long.'"-E.

(213) George Cooke, Esq. afterwards member for Tregony, and chief
prothonotary in the Court of Common Pleas.  On Mr.
Pitt's return to office in 1766 he was appointed joint
paymaster-general, and died in 1768.  See Chatham
Correspondence, vol. ii. p. 338.-E.

(214) Sir Francis Dashwood, who, on the death of John Earl of
Westmoreland, succeeded to the barony of Le Despencer, as
being the only son of Mary, eldest sister of the said Earl, and
which was confirmed to him 19th April'1763.-E.



163 Letter 27
To Sir Richard West, Esq.
Florence, Oct. 2, 1740, N. S.

Dear West,
T'other night as we (you know who we are) were walking on
the charming bridge, just before going to a wedding assembly, we
said, Lord, I wish, just as we are got into the room, they would
call us out, and say, West is arrived!  We would make him dress
instantly, and carry him back to the entertainment.  How he would
stare and wonder at a thousand things, that no longer strike us
as odd!" Would not you? One agreed that you should come directly
by sea from Dover, and be set down at Leghorn, without setting
foot in any other foreign town, and so land at Us, in all your
first full amaze; for you are to know, that astonishment rubs off
violently; we did not cry out Lord! half so much at Rome as at
Calais, which to this hour I look upon as one of the most
surprising cities in the
universe.  My dear child, what if you were to take this little
sea-jaunt?  One would recommend Sir John Norris's convoy to you,
but one should be laughed at now for supposing that he is ever to
sail beyond Torbay.(215)  The Italians take Torbay for an English
town in the hands of the Spaniards, after the
fashion of Gibraltar, and imagine 'tis a wonderful strong
place, by our fleet's having retired from before it so often, and
so often returned.  We went to this wedding that I told you of;
'twas a charming feast: a large palace finely
illuminated; there were all the beauties, all the jewels, and all
the sugarplums of Florence.  Servants loaded with great chargers
full of comfits heap the tables with them, the women fall on with
both hands, and stuff their pockets and every creek and corner
about them.  You would be as much amazed at us as at any thing
you saw: instead of being deep in the arts, and being in the
Gallery every morning, as I thought
of course to be sure I would be, we are in all the idleness and
amusements of the town.  For me, I am grown so lazy, and so
tired-of seeing sights, that, though I have been at
Florence six months, I have not seen Leghorn, Pisa, Lucca, or
Pistoia; nay, not so much as one of the Great Duke's
villas.  I have contracted so great an aversion to
postchaises, and have so absolutely lost all curiosity, that,
except the towns in the straight road to Great Britain, I
shall scarce see a jot more of a foreign land; and trust me, when
I returt), I will not visit the Welsh mountains, like Mr.
Williams.  After Mount Cenis, the Boccheto, the Giogo,
Radicofani, and the Appian Way, one has mighty little hunger
after travelling.  I shall be mighty apt to set up my staff at
Hyde Park corner: the alehouseman there at Hercules's
Pillars(216) was certainly returned from his travels into
foreign parts.

Now I'll answer your questions.

I have made no discoveries in ancient or modern arts.  Mr.
Addison travelled through the poets, and not through Italy; for
all his ideas are borrowed from the descriptions, and not from
the reality.  He saw places as they were, not as they are.  I am
very well acquainted with Dr. Cocchi; (217) he is a good sort of
man, rather than a great man; he is a plain
honest creature, with quiet knowledge, but I dare say all the
English have told you, he has a very particular understanding: I
really don't believe they meant to impose on you, for they
thought so.  As to Bondelmonti, he is much less; he is a low
mimic; the brightest cast of his parts attains to the
composition of a sonnet: he talks irreligion with- English boys,
sentiment with my sister, (218) and bad French with any one that
will hear him.  I will transcribe you a little song that he made
t'other day; 'tis pretty enough; Gray turned it into Latin, and I
into English; you will honour him highly by putting it into
French, and Asheton into Greek.  Here 'tis.
Spesso Amor sotto la forma
D'amista ride, e s'asconde;
Poi si mischia, e si confonde
Con lo sdegno e col rancor.

In pietade ei si trasforma,
Pas trastullo e par dispetto;
ma nel suo diverso aspetto,
Sempre egli `a l'istesso Amor.

Risit amicitiae interd`um velatus amictu,
Et ben`e composit`a veste fefellit Amor:
Mox irae assumpsit cultus faciemque minantem,
Inque odium versus, versus et in lacrymas:
Ludentem fuge, nec lacrymanti aut furenti;
Idem est dissimili semper in ore Deus.

Love often in the comely mien
Of friendship fancies to be seen;
Soon again he shifts his dress,
And wears disdain and rancour's face.

To gentle pity then he changes-
Thro' wantonness, thro' piques he ranges;

But in whatever shape he moves,
He's still himself, and still is Love.

See how we trifle! but one can't pass one's youth too
amusingly for one must grow old, and that in England; two
most serious circumstances, either of which makes people
gray in the twinkling of a bedstaff; for know you there is not a
country upon earth where there are so many old fools and so few
young ones.

Now I proceed in my answers.

I made but small collections, and have only bought some
bronzes and medals, a few busts, and two or three pictures: one
of my busts is to be mentioned; 'tis the famous
vespasian in touchstone, reckoned the best in Rome, except the
Caracalia of the Farnese- I gave but twenty-two POUDds for it at
Cardinal Ottoboni's sale.  One of my medals is as great a
curiosity; 'tis of Alexander Severus, with the
amphitheatre in brass; this reverse is extant on medals of his,
but mine is a medagliuncino, or small medallion, and
The Only one with this reverse known in the world: 'twas
found by a peasant while I was in Rome, and sold by him for
sixpence to an antiquarian, to whom I paid for it seven
guineas and a half: but to virtuosi 'tis worth any SUM.

As to Tartini's (219) musical compositions, ask Gray; I know but
little in music.

But for the Academy, I am not of it, but frequently in
company with it: 'tis all disjointed.  Madame * * *, who,
though a learned lady, has not lost her modesty and
character, is extremely scandalized with the other two
dames, especially Moll Worthless, who knows no bounds.  She is at
rivalry with Lady W. for a certain Mr. * * *, whom
perhaps you knew at Oxford.  If you did not, I'll tell you: he is
a grave young man by temper, and a rich one by
constitution; a shallow creature by nature, but a wit by the
grace of our women here, whom he deals with as of old with the
Oxford toasts.  He fell into sentiments with my Lady W. and was
happy to catch her at Platonic love; but as she
seldom stops there, the poor man will be frightened out of his
senses when she shall break the matter to him; for he
never dreamt that her purposes were so naught.  Lady Mary is so
far gone, that to get him from the mouth of her
antagonist she literally took him out to dance country
dances last night at a formal ball, where there was no
measure kept in laughing at her old, foul, tawdry, painted,
plastered personage.  She played at pharaoh two or three
times at Princess Craon's, where she cheats horse and foot.  She
is really entertaining: I have been reading her works, which she
lends out in manuscript, but they are too
womanish: I like few of her performances.  I forgot to tell you a
good answer of Lady Pomfret to mr. W. *** who asked
her if she did not approve Platonic love. "Lord, sir," says she,
, "I am sure any one that knows me never heard that I had any
love but one, and there sit two proofs of it,"
pointing to her two daughters.

So I have given you a sketch of our employments, and
answered your questions, and will with pleasure as many more as
you have about you.  Adieu! Was ever such a lon@ letter? But 'tis
nothing to what I shall have to say to you.  I
shaft scold you for never telling us any news, public or
private, no deaths, riiarriages, or mishaps; no account of new
books: Oh, you are abominable! I could find it in my
heart to hate You if I did not love you so well; but we will
quarrel now, that we may be the better friends when we meet:
there is no danger of that, is there? Good night, whether
friend or foe! I am most sincerely Yours.

(215) Though brave, skilful, and enterprising Sir John
failed to acquire renown, in consequence of mere
accidents.  On the breaking out of the Spanish war, he was
ordered to cruise in the Bay of Biscay; but, owing to
tempestuous weather, was compelled to put into port for the
winter.  The following lines were addressed to him upon this
occasion:

"Homeward, oh! bend thy course; the seas are rough;
To the Land's End who sails has sailed enough." E.


(216) Walpole calls the Hercules' Pillars an
alehouse.  Whatever it might have been at the period he
wrote, it is very certain that, after the peace of 1762, it was a
respectable tavern, where the Marquis of Granby, and other
persons of rank, particularly military men, had
frequent dinner parties, which were then fashionable.  It
was also an inn of great repute among the west-country
gentlemen, coming to London for a few weeks, who thought
themselves fortunate if they could secure accommodations for
their families at the Hercules' Pillars.  The spot where it once
stood, is now occupied by the noble mansion of the Duke of
Wellington.-E.

(217) Dr. Antonio Cocchi, a learned physician, resident at
Florence, who published a collection of Greek writers upon
medicine.  He figures conspicuously in Spence's
Anecdotes.-E.

(218) Margaret Rolle, wife of Robert Walpole, eldest son of Sir
Robert Walpole, created Lord Walpole during the lifetime of his
father.

(219) Giuseppe Tartini of Padua, whom Viotti pronounced the last
great improver of the practice of the violin.  Several of
Tartini's compositions are particularized in that amusing little
volume, "The Violin and its Professors," by Mr.
Dubourg, who has recorded in quaint verse the well-known
story of the "Devil's Sonata," a piece of diablerie, the
result of which is that to this day, Tartini's
tale hath made all fiddlers say, A hard sonata is the devil to
play!-E.



166 Letter 28
To Richard West, Esq.
>From Florence, Nov. 1740.

Child, I am going to let you see your shocking proceedings with
us. On my conscience, I believe 'tis three months since you wrote
to either Gray or me.  If you had been ill, Ashton would have
said so; and if you had been dead the gazettes
would have said it.  If you had been angry,-but that's
impossible; how can one quarrel with folks three thousand
miles off? We are neither divines nor commentators, and
consequently have not hated you on paper.  'Tis to show that my
charity for you cannot be interrupted at this distance
that I write to you, though I have nothing to say, for 'tis a bad
time for small news; and when emperors and czarinas
are dying all up and down Europe, one can't pretend to tell you
of any thing that happens within our sphere.  Not but
that we have our accidents too. if you have had a great wind in
England, we have had a great water at Florence.  We have been
trying to set out every day, and pop upon you (220) * * * * * It
is fortunate that we stayed, for I don't know what had become of
us!  Yesterday, with violent rains, there came flouncing down
from the mountains such a flood that it
floated the whole city. The jewellers on the Old Bridge
removed their commodities, -and in two hours after the
bridge was cracked.  The torrent broke down the quays and
drowned several coach-horses, which are kept here in stables
under ground.  We were moated into our house all day, which is
near the Arno, and had the miserable spectacles of the
ruins that were washed along with the hurricane.  There was a
cart with two oxen not quite dead, and four men in it
drowned: but what was ridiculous, there came tiding along a fat
haycock, with a hen and her eggs, and a cat.  The
torrent is considerably abated; but we expect terrible news from
the country, especially from Pisa, which stands so much lower,
and nearer the sea.  There is a stone here, which,
when the water overflows, Pisa is entirely flooded.  The
water rose two ells yesterday above that stone.  Judge!

For this last month we have passed our time but dully; all
diversions silenced on the emperor's death, (221) and
everybody out of town.  I have seen nothing but cards and
dull pairs of cicisbeos.  I have literally seen so much love and
pharaoh since being here, that I believe I shall never love
either again SO long as I live.  Then I am got in a
horrid lazy way of a morning.  I don't believe I should know
seven o'clock in the morning again if I was to see it.  But I am
returning to England, and shall grow very solemn and
wise! Are you wise'( Dear West, have pity on one who have
done nothing of gravity for these two years, and do laugh
sometimes.  We do nothing else, and have contracted such
formidable ideas of the good people of England that we are
already nourishing great black eyebrows and great black
beards, and teasing our countenances into wrinkles.  Then
for the common talk of the times, we are quite at a loss,
and for the dress.  You would oblige us exceedingly by
forwarding to us the votes of the houses, the king's speech, and
the magazines; or if you had any such thing as a little book
called the Foreigner's Guide through the city of London and the
liberties of Westminster; or a letter to a
Freeholder; or the Political Companion: then 'twoulg be an
infinite obligation if you would neatly band-box up a baby
dressed after the newest Temple fashion now in use at both
play-houses.  Alack-a-day!  We shall just arrive in the
tempest of elections!

As our departure depends entirely upon the weather, we
cannot tell you to a day when we shall say Dear
West, how glad I am to see you! and all the many questions and
answers that we shall give and take.  Would the day were come! Do
but figure to yourself the journey we are to pass through first!
But you can't conceive Alps, Apennines,
Italian inns, and postchaises.  I tremble at the thoughts.  They
were just sufferable while new and unknown, and as we met them by
the way in coming to Florence, Rome, and Naples; but they are
passed, and the mountains remain! Well, write to one in the
interim; direct to me addressed to Monsieur
Selwyn, chez Monsieur.Ilexandre, Rue St. Apolline, a Paris.  If
Mr. Alexandre is not there, the street is, and I believe that
will be sufficient.  Adieu, my dear child! Yours ever.

(220) A line of the manuscript is here torn away.

(221) Charles the Sixth, Emperor of Germany, upon whose
death, on the 9th of October, his eldest daughter,
Maria-Theresa, in virtue of the Pragmatic Sanction,
instantly succeeded to the whole Austrian inheritance.-E.



168 Letter 29
To The Rev. Joseph Spence. (222)
Florence, Feb. 21, 1741, N. S.

Sir,
Not having time last post, I begged Mr. Mann to thank you for the
obliging paragraph for me in your letter to him.  But as I desire
a nearer correspondence with you than by third hands, I assure
you in my own proper person that I shall have great pleasure, on
our meeting in England, to renew an acquaintance that 'I began
with so much pleasure in Italy. (223)  I Will not reckon you
among my modern friends, but in the first article of virtu: you
have given me so many new lights into a science that but a warmth
and freedom that will flow from my friendship, and which will not
be contained within the circle of a severe awe. As I shall always
be attentive to give you any satisfaction that lies in my power,
I take the first opportunity of sending you two little poems,
both by a hand that I know you esteem the most; if you have not
seen them, you will thank me for lilies of Mr. Pope: if you have,
why I did not know it.

I don't know whether Lord Lincoln has received any orders to
return home: I had a letter from one of my brothers last
post to tell me from Sir Robert that he would have me leave Italy
as soon as possible, lest I should be shut up unawares by the
arrival of the Spanish troops; and that I might pass some time in
France if I had amind.  I own I don't conceive how it is possible
these troops should arrive without its being known some time
before.  And as to the Great Duke's dominions, one can always be
out of them in ten hours or less.  If Lord Lincoln has not
received the same orders.. I shall believe what I now think, that
I am wanted for some other reason.  I beg my kind love to Lord
Lincoln, and that Mr. Spence will believe me, his sincere humble
servant HOR. WALPOLE.

(222) The well-known friend of Pope and author of the
Polymetis, who was then travelling on the Continent with
Henry, Earl of Lincoln, afterwards Duke of Newcastle.  See ante
p. 140, (Letter 14, and footnote 175).-E.

(223) This acquaintance proved of infinite service to
Walpole, shortly after the date of this letter, when he was laid
up with a quinsy at Reggio.  Spence thus describes the
circumstance: "About three or four in the morning I was
surprised with a message, saying that Mr. Walpole was very much
worse, and desired to see me; I went, and found him
scarce able to speak.  I soon learned from his servants that he
had been all the while without a physician, and had
doctored himself; so I immediately sent for the best aid the
place would afford, and despatched a messenger to the
minister at Florence, desiring him to send my friend Dr. Cocchi.
In about twenty-four hours I had the satisfaction to find Mr.
Walpole better: we left him in a fair way of recovery, and we
hope to see him next week at Venice.  I had obtained leave of
Lord Lincoln to stay behind some days if he had been worse.  You
see what luck one has sometimes in going out of one's way.  If
Lord Lincoln had not wandered to
Reggio, Mr. Walpole (who is one of the best-natured and most
sensible young gentlemen England affords) would have, in all
probability, fallen a sacrifice to his disorder."-E.



169 Letter 30
To The Hon. H. S. Conway.
Florence, March 25th, 1741, N. S.

Dear Hal,
You must judge by what you feel yourself of what I feel for
Selwyn's recovery, with the addition of what I have suffered from
post to post.  But as I find the whole town have had the same
sentiments about him, (though I am sure few so strong as myself,)
I will not repeat what you have heard so much.  I shall write to
him to-night, though he knows without my
telling him how very much I love him.  To you, my dear Harry, I
am infinitely obliged for the three successive letters you wrote
me about him, which gave me double pleasure, as they showed your
attention for me at a time that you know I must be so unhappy;
and your friendship for him.  Your account of Sir Robert's
victory (224) was so extremely well told, that I made Gray
translate it into French, and have showed it to all that could
taste It, or were inquisitive on the occasion.  I have received a
print by this post that diverts me extremely; 'the Motion.' (225)
Tell me, dear, now, who made the design, and who took the
likenesses; they are admirable: the lines are as good as one sees
on such occasions.  I wrote last post to Sir Robert, to wish him
joy; I hope he received my letter.

I was to have set out last Tuesday, but on Sunday came the news
of the Queen of Hungary being brought to bed of a son; (226) on
which occasion here will be great triumphs, operas and
masquerades, which detain me for a short time.

I won't make you any excuse for sending you the follOWing
lines; you have prejudice enough for me to read with patience any
Of My idlenesses. (227)

My dear Harry, you enrage me with talking of another journey to
Ireland; it will shock me if I don't find you at my return: pray
take care and be in England.

I wait with some patience to see Dr. Middleton's Tully, as I read
the greatest part of it in manuscript; though indeed 'tis rather
a reason for my being impatient to read the rest.  If Tully can
receive any additional honour, Dr. Middleton is most capable of
conferring it. (228)

I receivc with great pleasure any remembrances of my lord and
your sisters; I long to see all of you.  Patapan is so
handsome that he has been named the silver fleece; and there is a
new order of knighthood to be erected to his honour, in
opposition to the golden.  Precedents are searching, and plans
drawing up for that purpose.  I hear that the natives pretend to
be companions, upon the authority of their dogskin
waistcoats; but a council that has been held on purpose has
declared their pretensions impertinent.  Patapan has lately taken
wife unto him, as ugly as he is genteel, but of a very great
family, being the direct heiress of Canis Scaliger, Lord of
Verona: which principality we design to seize `a la
Prussienne; that is, as soon as ever we shall have persuaded the
republic of Venice that we are the best friends they have in the
world.  Adieu, dear child!
Yours ever.

P. S. I left my subscriptions for Middleton's Tully with Mr.
Selwyn; I won't trouble him, but I wish you would take care and
get the books, if Mr. S. has kept the list.

(224) On the event of Mr. Sandys' motion in the House of
commons to remove Sir Robert Walpole from the King's presence and
councils for ever. [The motion was negatived by 290
against 106: an unusual majority, which proceeded from the schism
between the Tories and the Whigs, and the secession of Shippen
and his friends.  The same motion was made by
Lord-Carteret in the House of Lords, and negatived by 108
against 59.-E.)

(225) The print alluded to exhibits an interesting view of
Whitehall, the Treasury, and adjoining buildings, as they
stood at the time.  The Earl of Chesterfield, as postilion of a
coach which is going full speed towards the Treasury, drives over
all in his way.  The Duke of Argyle is coachman,
flourishing a sword instead of a whip; while Doddington is
represented as a spaniel, sitting between his legs.  Lord
Carteret, perceiving the coach about to be overturned, is
calling to the coachman,"Let me get out!"  Lord Cobbam, as the
footman, is holding fast on by the straps; while Lord
Lyttleton is ambling by the side on a rosinante as thin as
himself. Smallbrook, Bishop of Lichfield, is bowing
obsequiously as they pass; while Sandys, letting fall the
place-bill, exclaims, ,I thought what would come of putting him
on the box." In the foreground is Pulteney, leading
several figures by strings from their noses, and wheeling a
barrow filled with the Craftsman's Letters, Champion, State of
the Nation, and Common Sense, exclaiming, "Zounds, they are
over!"  This caricature, and another, entitled " The Political
Libertines, or Motion upon Motion," had been provoked by one put
forth by Sir Robert Walpole's opponents, entitled "The Grounds
for the Motion;" and were followed up by another from the
supporters of Sandys' motion, entitled "The Motive or
Reason for his Triumph," which the caricaturist attributes
entirely to bribery.-E.

(226) Afterwards Joseph the Second, emperor of Germany.-E.

(227) Here follows the Inscription for the neglected column in
the place of St. Mark, at Florence, afterwards printed in the
Fugitive Pieces.

(228) Dr. Middleton's "History of the Life of Cicero" was
published in the early part of this year, by subscription, and
dedicated to Pope's enemy, Lord Hervey.  This laboured
encomium on his lordship obtained for the doctor a niche in the
Dunciad:-

Narcissus, praised with all a Parson's power,
Look'd a white lily sunk beneath a shower."-E.



170 Letter 31
To Richard West, Esq.
Reggio, May 1 1741, N. S.

Dear West,
I have received the end of your first act, (229) and now will
tell you sincerely what I think of it.  If I was not so
pleased with the beginning as I usually am with your
compositions, believe me the part of Pausanias has charmed me.
There is all imaginable art joined with all requisite
simplicity: and a simplicity, I think, much preferable to that in
the scenes of Cleodora and Argilius.  Forgive me, if I say they
do not talk laconic but low English in her, who is
Persian too, there would admit more heroic.  But for the whole
part of Pausanias, 'tis great and well worried up, and the art
that is seen seems to proceed from his head, not from the
author's.  As I am very desirous you should continue, so I own I
wish you would improve or change the beginning: those who know
you not so well as I do, would not wait with so much
patience for the entrance of Pausanias.  You see I am frank; and
if I tell you I do not approve of the first part, you may believe
me as sincere when I tell you I admire the latter
extremely.

My letter has an odd date.  You would not expect I should be
writing in such a dirty place as Reggio: but the fair is
charming; and here come all the nobility of Lombardy, and all the
broken dialects of Genoa, Milan, Venice, Bologna, etc.  You never
heard such a ridiculous confusion of tongues.  All the morning
one goes to the fair undressed, as to the walks of Tunbridge:
'tis Just in that manner, with lotteries, raffles, etc.  After
dinner all the company return in their coaches, and make a kind
of corso, with the ducal family, who go to shops, where you talk
to 'em, from thence to the opera, in mask if you will, and
afterwards to the ridotto.  This five nights in the week, Fridays
there are masquerades, and
Tuesdays balls at the Rivalta, a villa of the Duke's.  In
short, one diverts oneself.  I pass most part of the opera in the
Duchess's box, who is extremely civil to me and extremely
agreeable.  A daughter of the Regent's, (230) that could
please him, must be so.  She is not young, though still
handsome, but fat; but has given up her gallantries
cheerfully, and in time, and lives easily with a dull husband,
two dull sisters of his, and a dull court.  These two
princesses are wofully ugly, old maids and rich.  They might have
been married often; but the old Duke was whimsical and proud, and
never would consent to any match for them, but left them much
money, and pensions of three thousand pounds a year apiece.
There was a design to have given the eldest to this King of
Spain, and the Duke was to have had the Parmesan
princess; so that now he would have had Parma and Placentia,
Joined to Modena, Reggio, Mirandola, and Massa.  But there being
a Prince of Asturias, the old Duke Rinaldo broke off the match,
and said his daughter's children should not be younger brothers:
and so they mope old virgins.

I am goin@ from hence to Venice, in a fright
lest there be a war with France, and then I must drag myself
through Germany.  We have had an imperfect account of a
sea-fight in America . but we are so out of the way, that one
can't be sure of it.  Which way soever I return, I shall be soon
in England, and there you 'will find me again.

As much as ever yours.

(229) of a tragedy called Pausanias, The first act, and
probably all that was ever written by Mr. West. [In the
preceding month West had forwarded to Gray the sketch of this
tragedy, which he appears to have criticised with
much freedom; but Mr. Mason did not find among Gray's papers
either the sketch itself, or the free critique upon it.]

(230) Philip Duke of Orleans.



172 Letter 32
To Sir Horace Mann. (231)
Calais, and Friday, and here I have been these two days, 1741.

Is the wind laid? Shall I Dever get aboard? I came here on
Wednesday night, but found a tempest that has never ceased since.
At Boulogne I left Lord Shrewsbury and his mother, and brothers
and sisters, waiting too: Bulstrode (232) passes his winter at
the court of Boulogne, and then is to travel with two young
Shrewsburys.  I was overtaken by Amorevoli and Monticelli, (233)
who are here with me and the Viscontina, and Barberina, and
Abbate Vanneschi (234)-what
a coxcomb!  I would have talked to him about the opera, but he
preferred politics.  I have wearied Amorevoli with
questions about you.  If he was not just come from you, and could
talk to me about you, I should hate him; for, to
flatter me, he told me that I talked Italian better than
you.  He did not know how little I think it a compliment to have
any thing preferred to you-besides, you know the
consistence of my Italian!  They are all frightened out of their
senses about going on the sea, and are not a little
afraid of the English.  They went on board the William and Mary
yacht yesterday, which waits here for Lady Cardigan from Spa.
The captain clapped the door, and swore in broad English that the
Viscontina should not stir till she gave him a song, he did not
care whether it was a catch or a moving ballad; but she would not
submit.  I wonder he did!  When she came home and told me, I
begged her not to judge of all the English from this specimen;
but, by the way, she will find many
sea-captains that grow on dry land.

Sittinburn, Sept. 13, O. S.

Saturday morning, or yesterday, we did set out, and after a good
passage of four hours and a half, landed at Dover.  I begin to
count my comforts, for I find their contraries
thicken on my apprehension.  I have, at least, done for a
while with postchaises.  My trunks were a little opened at
Calais, and they would have stopped my medals, but with much ado
and much three louis's they let them pass.  At Dover I found the
benefit of the motions (235) having miscarried last year, for
they respected Sir Robert's son even in the person of his trunks.
I came over in a yacht with East India
captains' widows, a Catholic girl, coming from a convent to be
married, with an Irish priest to guard her, who says he
studied medicines for two years, and after that he studied
learning for two years more.  I have not brought over a word of
French or Italian for common use; I have so taken pains to avoid
affectation in this point, that I have failed Only now and then
in a chi`a l`a! to the servants, who I
can scarce persuade myself yet are English.  The
COUntry-town (and you will believe me, who, you know, am not
prejudiced) delights me; the populousness, the ease, the
gaiety, and well-dressed every body amaze me.  Canterbury, which
on my setting out I thought deplorable, is a paradise, (236) to
Modena, Reggio, Parma, etc.  I had before discovered that there
was nowhere but in England the distinction of
middling people; I perceive now, that there is peculiar to us
middling houses: how snug they are!  I write to-night
because I have time; to-morrow I get to London just as the post
goes.  Sir Robert is at Houghton.  Good night till
another post.  You are quite well I
trust, but tell me so always.  My loves to the Chutes (237)  and
all the etc.'s.

Oh! a story of Mr. Pope and the prince:-"Mr. Pope, you don't love
princes."  "Sir, I beg your pardon."  "Well, you don't love
kings, then!""Sir, I own I love the lion best
before his claws are grown."  Was it possible to make a
better answer to such simple questions?  Adieu! my dearest child!
Yours, ten thousand times over.

P. S. Patapan does not seem to regret his own country.

(231) This is the first of the series of letters
addressed by Walpole to Sir Horace Man, British envoy at
the court of Tuscany.  The following prefatory note,
entitled "Advertisement by the Author," explains the views which
led Walpole to preserve them for publication:-

"The following Collection of Letters, written
very carelessly by a young man, had been preserved by the
person to whom they were addressed.  The author, some years after
the date of the first, borrowed them, on account of
some anecdotes interspersed.  On the perusal, among many
trifling relations and stories, which were only of
consequence or amusing to the two persons concerned in the
correspondence, he found some facts, characters, and news, which,
though below the dignity of history, might prove
entertaining to many other people: and knoing how much
pleasure, not only himself, but many other persons have
found in a series of private and familiar letters, he
thought it worth his while to preserve these, as they
contain something of the customs, fashions, politics,
diversions, and private history of several
years; which, if worthy of any existence, can be properly
transmitted to posterity only in this manner.

"The reader will find a few pieces of intelligence which did not
prove true; but which are retained here as the author
heard and related them, lest correction should spoil the
simple air of the narrative.* When the letters
were written, they were never intended for public
inspection; and now they are far from being thought correct,  or
more authentic than the general turn of epistolary
correspondence admits.  The author would sooner have burnt them
than have taken the trouble to correct such errant
trifles, which are here presented to the reader, with scarce any
variation or omissions, but what private friendships and private
history, or the great haste with which the letters were written,
made indispensably necessary, as will plainly appear, not only by
the unavoidable chasms, where the
originals were worn out or torn away,
but by many idle relations and injudicious remarks and
prejudices of a young man; for which @the only excuse the
author can pretend to make, is, that as some future reader may
possibly be as young as he was when he first wrote, he hopes they
may be amused with what graver people (if into such hands they
should fall) will very justly despise.  Who ever has patience to
peruse the series, will find, perhaps, that as the author grew
older, some of his faults became less striking."
* They are marked in the notes.

(232) Tutor to the young Earl of Shrewsbury.  [.Charles
Talbot, fifteenth Earl of Shrewsbury, born December 1719.  He
married, in 1753, Elizabeth, daughter of the Hon.  John Dormer,
afterwards Lord Dormer, and died in
1787, without issue.]

(233) Italian singers.  [Angelo Maria Monticelli, a celebrated
singer of the same class as Veluti, was born at Milan in 1715,
and first attained the celebrity which he enjoyed by singing with
Mingotti at the Royal Opera at Naples in 1746.  After visiting
most of the cities of the Continent, he was induced by the favour
with which he was received at Dresden to make that city his
residence, until his death in 1764.  Is the name of Amorevoli,
borne by one of the first singers of that
day, an assumed one, or an instance of name fatality?
Certain it is,that Amorevole is a technical term in music
somewhat analogous in its signification with Amabile and
Amoroso.]

(234) An Italian abb`e, who directed and wrote the
operas under the protection of Lord Middlesex.

(235) The motion in both houses of Parliament,
1740, for removing Sir Robert Walpole from the King's
councils. [See ante, p. 169 (Letter 30).)

(236) ("On! On! through meadows, managed like a garden,
A paradise of hops and high production;
For, after years of travel by a bard in
Countries of greater heat, but lesser suction,
A green field is a sight which makes him pardon
The absence of that more sublime construction,
Which mixes up vines, olives, precipices,
Glaciers, volcanos, oranges, and ices."-Byron, 1823.)

(237) John Chute and Francis Whithed, Esqrs.
two great friendls of Mr. W.'s, whom he had left at Florence,
where he had been himself thirteen months, in the house of Mr.
Mann, his relation and particular friend.



174 Letter 33
To Sir Horace Mann.
[The beginning of this letter is lost.)

****I had written and sealed my letter, but have since
received another from you, dated Sept. 24. I read Sir Robert your
account of Corsica; he seems to like hearing any account sent
this way-indeed, they seem to have more superficial
relations in general than I could have believed! You will
oblige me, too, with any farther account of Bianca Colonna: (238)
it is romantic, her history!

I am infinitely obliged to Mr. Chute for his kindness to me, and
still more for his friendship to you.  You cannot think how happy
I am to hear that you are to keep him longer.  You do not mention
his having received my letter from Paris: I directed it to him,
recommended to you.  I would not have him think me capable of
neglecting to answer his letter, which obliged me so much.  I
will deliver Amorevoli his letter the first time I see him.

Lord Islay (239) dined here; I mentioned Stosch's (240)
Maltese cats.  Lord Islay begged I would write to Florence to
have the largest male and female that can be got.  If you will
speak to Stosch, you will oblige me: they may come by sea.
You cannot imagine my amazement at your not being
invited to Riccardi's ball; do tell me, when you know, what can
be the meaning of it; it could not be inadvertence-nay, that were
as bad! Adieu my dear child, once more!

(238A kind friend of Joan of Are, who headed the
Corsican rebels against the Genoese.

(239) Archibald Campbell, Earl of Islay, and, on his
brother's death in 1743, Duke of Argyle.

(240) Baron Stosch, a Prussian virtuoso, and spy for
the court of England on the Pretender.  He had been driven from
Rome, though it was suspected that he was a spy on both sides: he
was a man of a most infamous character in every
respect.  according to the Biographic Universelle, the Baron "ne
put s'acquitter de fonctions aussi d`elicates sans se voir
expos`e `a des naines violentes, qui le forc`erent `a se
retirer `a Florence;" where he died in 1757.  He was one of the
most skilful and industrious antiquaries of his time.  A
catalogue of his gems was drawn up by Winkelmann.]



175 Letter 34
To The Hon. H. S. Conway.
London, 1741.

My Dearest Harry,
Before I thank you for myself, I must thank you for that
excessive good nature you showed in writing to poor Gray. I am
less impatient to see you, as I find you are not the least
altered, but have the same tender friendly temper you always had.
I wanted much to see if you were still the same-but you are.

Don't think of coming before your brother, he is too good to be
left for any one living: besides, if it is possible, I will see
you in the country.  Don't reproach me, and think nothing could
draw me into the country: impatience to see a few
friends has drawn me out of Italy; and Italy, Harry, is
pleasanter than London.  As I do not love living en famille so
much as you (but then indeed my family is not like yours), I am
hurried about getting myself a house; for I have so long lived
single, that I do not much take to being confined with my own
family.

You won't find me much altered, I believe; at least,
outwardly.  'I am not grown a bit shorter, or a bit fatter, but
am just the same long lean creature as usual.  Then I talk no
French., but to my footman; nor Italian, but to myself.  What
inward alterations may have happened to me, you will
discover best; for you know 'tis said, one never knows that one's
self.  I will answer, that that part of it that belongs to you,
has not suffered the least change-I took care of that.
For virt`u, I have a little to entertain you: it is my sole
pleasure.-I am neither young enough nor old enough to be in love.

My dear Harry, will you take care and make my compliments to that
charming Lady Conway, (241) who I hear is so charming, and to
Miss Jenny [Conway], who I know is so?  As for Miss Anne, (242)
and her love as far as it is decent: tell her, decency is out of
the question between us, that I love her without any restriction.
I settled it yesterday with Miss Conway, that you three are
brothers and sister to me, and that if you had been so, I could
not love you better.  I have so many cousins, and uncles and
aunts, and bloods that grow in Norfolk, that if I had portioned
out my affections to them, as they say I should, what a modicum
would have fallen to
each!-So, to avoid fractions, I love my family in you three,
their representatives. (243)

Adieu, my dear Harry! Direct to me at Downing Street.
Good-bye!  Yours ever.

(241) Isabella Fitzroy, daughter of Charles Duke of
Grafton.  She had been married in May, to(Walpole's maternal
cousin), Francis Seymour Conway, afterwards Earl of Hertford.(

242) Miss Anne conway, youngest sister of Henry Seymour
Conway.

(243) They were first cousins by the mother's side; Francis first
Lord conway having married Charlotte, eldest daughter of John
Shorter of Bybrook in Kent, sister to Catherine Shorter Lady
Walpole.



176 Letter 35
To Sir Horace Mann.
Downing Street, Oct. 8, 1741, O. S.

I have been very near sealing this letter with black wax; Sir
Robert came from Richmond on Sunday night extremely ill, and on
Monday was in great danger.  It was an ague and looseness; but
they have stopped the latter, and converted the other into a
fever, which they are curing with the bark.  He came out of his
chamber to-day for the first time, and is quite out of danger.
One of the newspapers says, Sir R. W. is so bad that there are no
Hopes of him.

The Pomfrets (244) are arrived; I went this morning to visit my
lord, but did not find him.  Lady Sophia is ill, and my earl
(245) still at Paris, not coming. There is no news, nor a soul in
town.  One talks of nothing but distempers, like Sir Robert's.
My Lady Townsende (246) was reckoning up the other day the
several things that have cured them; such a doctor so many, such
a medicine, so many; but of all, the greatest
number have found relief from the sudden deaths of their
husbands.

The opera begins the day after the King's birthday: the
singers are not permitted to sing till on the stage, so no one
has heard them, nor have I seen Amorovoli to give him the
letter.  The opera is to be on the French system of dancers,
scenes, and dresses.  The directors have already laid out
great sums.  They talk of a mob to silence the operas, as they
did the French players; but it will be more difficult, for here
half the young noblemen in town are engaged, and they will not be
so easily persuaded to humour the taste of the mobility: in
short, they have already retained several eminent lawyers from
the Bear Garden (247) to plead their defence.  I have had a long
visit this morning from Don Benjamin: (248) he is one of the best
kind of agreeable men I ever saw-quite fat and easy, with
universal knowledge: he is in the greatest
esteem at my court.

I am going to trouble you with some commissions.  Miss Rich,
(249) who is the finest singer except your sister (250) in the
world, has begged me to get her some music, particularly "the
office of the Virgin of the Seven Sorrows," by Pergolesi,
(251) the "Serva Padrona, il Pastor se torna Aprile," and
"Symplicetta Pastorella."  If you can send these easily, you will
much oblige me.  Do, too, let me know by your brother, what you
have already laid out for me, that I may pay him.
I was mentioning to Sir Robert some pictures in italy, which I
wished him to buy; two particularly, if they can be got, would
make him delight in you beyond measure.  They are, a Madonna, and
Child, by Dominichino, (252) in the palace Zambeccari, at
Boloana, or Caliambec, (253) as they call it; Mr. Chute knows the
picture.  The other is by Corregio, in a convent at Parma, and
reckoned the second best of that hand in the world.  There are
the Madonna and Child, St. Catherine, St. Matthew, and other
figures: it is a most known picture, and has been
engraved by Augustin Caracei.  If you can employ any body
privately to inquire about these pictures, be so good as to let
me know; Sir R. would not scruple almost any price, for he has of
neither hand: the convent is poor: the Zambeccari
collection is to be sold, though, when I inquired after this
picture, they would not set a price.

Lord Euston is to be married to Lady Dorothy Boyle (254)
tomorrow, after so many delays.  I have received your long
letter, and Mr. Chute's too, which I will answer next post.  I
wish I had the least politics to tell you; but all is silent.
The opposition sav not a syllable, because they don't know what
the Court will think of public 'affairs; and they will not take
their part till they are sure of contradicting.  The Court will
not be very ready to declare themselves, as their present
situation is every way disagreeable.  All they say, is to throw
the blame entirely on the obstinacy of the Austrian Court, who
-,vould never stir or soften for themselves, while they thought
any one obliged to defend them.  All I know of news is, that
Poland is leaning towards the acquisition side, like her
neighbours, and proposes to get a lock of the Golden Fleece too.
Is this any part of Gregory's (255) negotiation?  I delight in
his Scapatta--"Scappata, no; egli solamente ha preso la posta."
My service to Seriston; he is charming.

How excessively obliging to go to Madame Grifoni's (256)
festino!  but believe me, I shall be angry, if for my sake, you
do things that are out of your character: don't you know that I
am infinitely fonder of that than of her?

I read your story of the Sposa Panciatici at table, to the great
entertainment of the company, and Prince Craon's
epitaph, which Lord Cholmley (257) says he has heard before, and
does not think it is the prince's own; no more do I, it is too
good; but make my compliments of thanks to him; he shall have his
buckles the first opportunity I find of sending them.
Say a thousand things for me to dear Mr. Chute, till I can say
them next post for myself: till then, adieu.  Yours ever.

(244) Thomas Earl of Pomfret, and Henrietta Louisa, his
consort, and his two eldest daughters, Sophia and Charlotte, had
been in Italy at the same time with Mr. Walpole.  The Earl had
been master of the horse to Queen Caroline, and the
countess lady of the bedchamber.

(245) Henry Earl of Lincoln was at that time in love with Lady
Sophia Fermor.

(246) Ethelreda Harrison, wife of Charles Lord Viscount
Townsend, but parted from him.

(247) Boxers.

(248) Sir Benjamin Keene, ambassador at Madrid.

(249) Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Sir Robert Rich, since
married to Sir George Lyttelton.  [Eldest son of sir Thomas
Lyttelton of hagley; in 1744 appointed one of the lords of the
treasury, and in 1755, chancellor of the exchequer.  In
1757,when he retired from public life, he was raised to the
peerage, by the title of Lord Lyttelton.  He died in 1773.  His
prose works were printed collectively in 1774; and his poems have
given him a place among the British poets.]

(250) Mary, daughter of R. Mann, Esq. since married to Mr. Foote.

(251) Better known to all lovers of the works of this great
composer as his " Stabat mater."-E.

(252) It will be seen by Walpole's letter to Mr. Chute, of the
20th August 1743, now first published, that he eventually
succeeded in purchasing this picture.-E.

(253) A corrupted pronunciation of the Bolognese.

(254) This unfortunate marriage is alluded to several times in
the course of the subsequent letters.  George Earl of Euston was
the eldest son of Charles the second Duke of Grafton.  He
married, in 1741, Lady Dorothy Boyle, eldest daughter and
co-heir of Richard, third and last heir of B(irlington.  She died
in 1742, from the effects, as it is supposed, of his
brutal treatment of her.  The details of his cruelty towards her
are almost too revolting to be believed.  In Sir Charles Hanbury
Williams's poems are some pretty lines on her death, beginning,
"Behold one moment Dorothea's fate."-D.

(255) Gregorio ALdollo, an Asiatic, from being a prisoner at
Leghorn, raised himself to be employed to the Great Duke by the
King of Poland.

(256) Elisabetta Capponi, wife of signor
Grifoni, a great beauty.

(257) George third Earl of Cholmondeley, had married Mary
Walpole, only legitimate daughter of Sir Robert Walpole-D.



178 Letter 36
To Sir Horace Mann.
London, Oct. 13, 1741.
[The greatest part of this letter is wanting.]

**** The Town will come to town, and then one shall know
something.  Sir Robert is quite recovered.

Lady Pomfret I saw last night: Lady Sophia has been ill with a
cold; her head is to be dressed French, and her body English, for
which I am sorry; her figure is so fine in a robe: she is full as
sorry as I am.  Their trunks are not arrived yet, so they have
not made their appearance.  My lady told me a little out of
humour that Uguecioni wrote her word, that you said her things
could not be sent away yet: I understood from you, that very
wisely, you would have nothing to do about them, so made no
answer.

The parliament meets the fifteenth of November.  ****
Amorevoli has been with me two hours this evening; he is in
panics about the first night, which is the next after the
birthday.

I have taken a master, not to forget my Italian-don't it look
like returning to Florence'!-some time or other.  Good night.
Yours
ever and ever, my dear child.



178 Letter 37
To Sir Horace Mann.
London, Oct. 19, 1741, O. S.
[Great part wanting.]

I write to you up to the head and ears in dirt, straw, and
unpacking.  I have been opening all my cases from the
Custom-house the whole morning; and-are not you glad?-every
individual safe and undamaged.  I am fitting up an apartment in
Downing Street ***(258) was called in the morning, and was asleep
as soon as his head touched the pillow, for I have
frequently known him snore ere they had drawn his curtains, now
never sleeps above an hour without waking; and he, who at dinner
always forgot he was minister, and was more gay and thoughtless
than all his company, now sits without speaking, and with his
eyes fixed for an hour together.  Judge if this is the Sir Robert
you knew.

The politics of the age are entirely suspended; nothing is
mentioned; but this bottling them up, will make them fly out with
the greater violence the moment the parliament meets; till *** a
word to you about this affair.

I am sorry to hear the Venetian journey of the Suares family; it
does not look as if the Teresina was to marry PandOlfini; do you
know, I have set my heart upon that match.

You are very good to the Pucci, to give her that advice,
though I don't suppose she will follow it.  The Bolognese
scheme ***  In return for Amorevoli's letter, he has given me
two.  I fancy it will be troublesome to you; so put his wife into
some other method of correspondence with him.

Do you love puns? A pretty man of the age came into the
playhouse the other night, booted and spurred: says he, "I am
come to see Orpheus"-"And Euridice- You rid I see," replied
another gentleman.

(258) The omissions in these letters marked with stars occur in
the original MS.-D.



179 Letter 38
To Sir Horace Mann.
London, Oct. 22, 1741, O. S.

Your brother has been with me this morning, and we have talked
over your whole affair.  He thinks it will be impossible to find
any servant of the capacities you require, that will live with
you under twenty, if not thirty pounds a-year, especially as he
is not to have your clothes: then the expense of the journey to
Florence, and of back again, in case you should not like him,
will be considerable.  He is for your taking one from Leghorn;
but I, who know a little more of Leghorn than he does, should be
apprehensive of any person from thence being in the interest of
Goldsworthy, (259) or too attached to the merchants: in short, I
mean, he would be liable to prove a spy upon you.  We have agreed
that I shall endeavour to find out a proper man, if such a one
will go to you for twenty pounds a-year, and then you shall ficar
from me.  I am very sensible that Palombo (260) is not fit for
you, and shall be extremely diligent in equipping you with such a
one as you want.  You know how much I want to be of service to
you even in trifles.
I have been much diverted privately, for it is a secret that not
a hundred persons know yet, and is not to be spoken of.  Do but
think on a duel between Winnington (261) and Augustus Townshend;
(262) the latter a pert boy, captain of an
Indiaman; the former declared cicisbeo to my Lady Townshend.  The
quarrel was something that Augustus had said of them; for since
she was parted from her husband, she has broke with all his
family.  Winnington challenged; they walked into Hyde Park last
Sunday morning, scratched one another's fingers, tumbled into two
ditches-that is Augustus did,-kissed, and walked home together.
The other night at Mrs. Boothby's-

Well, I did believe I should never find time to write to you
again; I was interrupted in my letter last post, and could not
finish it; to-day I came home from the King's levee, where I
Kissed his hand, without going to the drawing-room, on purpose to
finish my letter, and the moment I sat down they let
somebody in.  That somebody is gone, and I go on-At Mrs.
Boothby's Lady Townshend was coquetting with Lord Baltimore:
(263) he told her, if she meant any thing with him he was not for
her purpose; if only to make any one jealous, he would throw away
an hour with her with all his heart.

The whole town is to be to-morrow night at Sir Thomas
Robinson's (264) ball, which he gives to a little girl of the
Duke of Richmond's.  There are already two hundred invited, from
miss in bib and apron, to my lord chancellor (265) in bib and
mace.  You shall hear about it next post.

I wrote you word that Lord Euston is married: in a week more I
believe that I shall write you word that he is divorced.  He is
brutal enough; and has forbid Lady Burlington (266) his house,
and that in very ungentle terms.  The whole family is in
confusion: the Duke of Grafton half dead. and Lord
Burlington half mad.  The latter has challenged Lord Euston, who
accepted the challenge, but they were prevented.  There are
different stories: some say that the duel would have been no
breach of consanguinity; others, that there's a contract of
marriage come out in another place, which has had more
consanguinity than ceremony in it: in short, one cannot go into a
room but you hear something of it.  Do you not pity the poor
girl? of the softest temper, vast beauty, birth, and
fortune, to be so sacrificed!

The letters from the West Indies are not the most agreeable.  You
have heard of the fine river and little town which Vernon took,
and named, the former dugusta, the latter Cumberland.  Since
that, they have found out that it is impracticable to take St.
Jago by sea - on which Admiral Vernon and Ogle
insisted that Wentworth, with the land forces, should march to it
by land, which he, by advice of all the land-officers, has
refused; for their march would have been of eighty miles, through
a mountainous, unknown country, full of defiles, where not two
men could march abreast; and they have but four
thousand five hundred men, and twenty-four horses.  Quires of
paper from both sides are come over to the council, who are to
determine from hence what is to be done.  They have taken a
Spanish man-of-war and a register ship, going to Spain,
immensely valuable.

The parliament does not meet till the first of December, which
relieves me into a little happiness, and gives me a little time
to settle myself.  I have unpacked all my things, and have not
had the least thing suffer.  I am now only in a
fright about my birthday clothes, which I bespoke at Paris:
Friday is the day, and this is Monday, without any news of them!

I have been two or three times at the play, very unwillingly; for
nothing was ever so bad as the actors, except the company.  There
is much in vogue a Mrs. Woffington, (267) a bad actress; but she
has life.

Lord Hartington (268) dines here: it is said (and from his
father's partiality to another person's father, I don't think it
impossible) that he is to marry a certain miss:(269) Lord
Fitzwilliam is supposed another candidate.

Here is a new thing which has been much about town, and liked;
your brother Gale (270) gave me the copy of it:

                          "Les cours de l'Europe

L'Allemagne craint tout;
L'Autriche risque tout;
La Bavi`ere esp`ere touut;
La Prusse entreprend tout;
La Mayence vend tout;
Le Portugal regarde tout;
L'Angleterre veut faire tout;
L'Espagne embrouille tout;
La Savoye se d`efie de tout;
Le Mercure se m`ele de tout;
La France sch`ete tout;
Les Jesuites se trouvent par tout;
Rome b`enit tout'
Si dieu ne pourvoye `a tout,
Le diable emportera tout."

Good night, my dear child: you never say a word of your own
health; are not you quite recovered? a thousand services to Mr.
Chute and Mr. Whithed, and to all my friends: do they
begin to forget me? I don't them.  Yours, ever.

(259) Consul at Leghorn, who was endeavouring to supplant Mr.
Mann.

(260)An Italian, secretary to Mr. Mann.

(261"Winnington," says Walpole, (Memoirs, i. P. 151), "had been
bred a Tory, but had left them in the height of Sir
Robert Walpole's power -.  when that minister sunk.  he had
injudiciously, and, to please my Lady Townshend, who had then the
greatest influence over him, declined visiting him, in a manner
to offend the steady old Whigs; and his jolly way of laughing.at
his own want of principles had revolted all the graver sort, who
thought deficiency of honesty too sacred and profitable a
commodity to be profaned and turned into
ridicule.  He had infinitely more wit than any man I ever
knew, and it was as ready and quick as it was constant and
Unmeditated.  His style was a little brutal, his courage not at
all so; his good-humour inexhaustible; it was impossible to hate
or to trust him." Winnington was first Ynade lord of the
admiralty, then of the treasury, then cofferer, and lastly
paymaster of the forces: to which office, on his death in
1746, Mr. Pitt succeeded.-E.

(262) The Hon. Augustus Townshend was second son of the
minister, Lord Townshend, by his second wife, the sister of Sir
Robert Walpole.  He was consequently half-brother to
Charles, the third viscount, husband to Ethelreda, Lady
Townshend.-D.

(263) Charles Calvert, sixth Lord Baltimore in Ireland.  He was
at this time member of parliament for the borough of St.
Germains, and a lord of the admiralty.-D.

(264) Sir Thomas Robinson, of Rokeby Park, in Yorkshire,
commonly called "Long Sir Thomas," on account of his stature, and
in order to distinguish him from the diplomatist, Sir
Thomas Robinson, afterwards created Lord Grantham. [He has
elsewhere been styled the new Robinson Crusoe by Walpole, who
says, when speaking of him, " He was a tall, uncouth man; and his
stature was often rendered still more remarkable by his
hunting-dress, a postilion's cap, a tight green jacket, and
buckskin breeches.  He was liable to sudden whims, and once set
off on a sudden in his hunting suit to visit his sister, who was
married and settled at Paris.  He arrived while there was a large
company at dinner.  The servant announced M.
Robinson, and he came in to the great amazement of the hosts.
Among others, -a French abb`e thrice lifted his fork to his mouth
and thrice laid it down, with an eager stare of
surprise.  Unable to restrain his curiosity any longer, he burst
out with I Excuse me, sir, are you the famous Robinson Crusoe so
remarkable in history?'"]

(265) Philip Yorke, Lord Hardwicke.-D.

(266) Lady Dorothy Savile, eldest daughter and co-heiress of
William second Marquis of Halifax, the mother of the unhappy Lady
Euston.-D.

(267) Margaret Woffington, the celebrated beauty.-D.

(268) William, Marquis of Hartington, afterwards fourth Duke of
Devonshire.  He married Lady Charlotte Boyle, second
daughter of Richard, third Earl of Burlington.-D.

(269) Miss Mary Walpole, daughter of Sir Robert Walpole by his
second wife, Maria Skerrett, but born before their marriage.
When her father was made an earl, she had the rank of an
earl's daughter given to her.-D.

(270) Galfridus Mann.



182 Letter 39
To Sir Horace Mann.
London, Nov. 2, 1741.

You shall not hear a word but of balls and public places: this
one week has seen Sir T. Robinson's ball, my lord mayor's, the
birthday, and the opera.  There were an hundred and
ninety-seven persons at Sir Thomas's, and yet was it so well
conducted that nobody felt a crowd.  He had taken off all his
doors, and so separated the old and the young, that neither were
inconvenienced with the other.  The ball began at eight; each man
danced one minuet with his partner, and then began country
dances.  There were four-and-twenty couple, divided into twelve
a@d twelve: each set danced two dances, and then retired into
another room, while the other set took their two; and so
alternately.  Except Lady Ancram, (271) no married
woman danced; so you see, in England, we do not foot it till
five-and-fifty.  The beauties were the Duke of Richmond's two
daughters (272) and their mother, still handsomer than they: the
duke (273) sat by his wife all night, kissing her hand: how this
must sound in the ears of Florentine cicisbeos, cock or hen! Then
there was Lady Euston, Lady Caroline Fitzroy, (274) Lady Lucy
Manners, (275) Lady Camilla Bennett, (276) and Lady Sophia, (277)
handsomer than all, but a little out of humour at the scarcity of
minuets; however, as usual, she
danced more than any body, and, as usual too, took out what men
she liked or thought the best dancers. Lord Holderness (278) is a
little what Lord Lincoln (279) will be to-morrow; for he is
expected.  There was Churchill's daughter (280) who is prettyish,
and dances well; and the Parsons (281) family from Paris, who are
admired too; but indeed it is `a force des muscles.  Two other
pretty women were Mrs. Colebroke (did you know the he-Colebroke
in Italy?) and a Lady Schaub, a
foreigner, who, as Sir Luke says, would have him.  Sir R. was
afraid of the heat, and did not go.  The supper was served at
twelve; a large table of hot for the lady-dancers; their
partners and other tables stood round.  We danced (for I
country-danced) till four, then had tea and coffee, and came
home.-Finis Balli.

* * Friday was the birthday; it was vastly full, the ball
immoderately so, for there came all the second edition of my lord
mayor's, but not much finery: Lord Fitzwilliam (282) and myself
were far the most superb.  I did not get mine till nine that
morning.

The opera will not tell as well as the other two shows, for they
were obliged to omit the part of Amorevoli, who has a fever.  The
audience was excessive, without the least
disturbance, and almost as little applause; I cannot conceive
why, for Monticelli ***** be able to sing to-morrow.

At court I met the Shadwells; (283) Mademoiselle Misse Molli,
etc.  I love them, for they asked vastly after you, and
kindly.  Do you know, I have had a mind to visit Pucci, the
Florentine minister, but he is so black, and looks so like a
murderer in a play, that I have never brought it about yet?  I
know none of the foreign ministers, but Ossorio, (284) a
little; he is still vastly in fashion, though extremely
altered.  Scandal, who, I believe, is not mistaken, lays a Miss
Macartney to his charge; she is a companion to the
Duchess of Richmond, as Madame Goldsworthy was; but Ossorio will
rather be Wachtendonck (285) than Goldsworthy: what a lamentable
story is that of the hundred sequins per month!  I have mentioned
Mr. Jackson, as you desired, to Sir R., who says, he has a very
good opinion of him.  In case of any
change at Leghorn, you will let me know.  He will not lose his
patron, Lord Hervey, (286) so soon as I imagined; he begins to
recover.

I believe the Euston embroil is adjusted; I was with Lady
Caroline Fitzroy on Friday evening; there were her brother and
the bride, and quite bridal together, quite honeymoonish.

I forgot to tell you that the prince was not at the opera; I
believe it has been settled that he should go thither on
Tuesdays, and Majesty on Saturdays, that they may not meet.
The Neutrality (287) begins to break out, and threatens to be an
excise or convention.  The newspapers are full of it, and the
press teems.  It has already produced three pieces: "The Groans
of Germany," which I will send you by the first
opportunity: "Bedlam, a poem on His Maj'esty's happy escape from
his German dominions, and all the wisdom of his conduct there."
The title of this is all that is remarkable in it.  The third
piece is a ballad, which, not for the goodness, but for the
excessive abuse of it, I shall transcribe:

         THE LATE GALLANT EXPLOITS OF A FAMOUS BALANCING CAPTAIN.
           A NEW SONG.  TO THE TUNE OF THE KING AND THE MILLER.

                 Mene tekel.  The handwriting on the wall.

1. I'll tell you a story as strange as 'tis new,
Which all, who're concerned, will allow to be true,
Of a Balancing Captain, well-known herabouts,
Returned home, God save him as a mere King of Clouts.

2. This Captain he takes, in a gold-ballast'd ship,
Each summer to Terra damnosa a trip,
For which he begs, borrows, scrapes all he can get,
And runs his poor Owners most vilely in debt.

3. The last time he set out for this blessed place,
He met them, and told them a most piteous case,
Of a Sister of his, who, though bred up at court,
Was ready to perish for want of support.

4. This Hungry Sister, he then did pretend,
Would be to his Owners a notable friend,
If they would at that critical junction supply her-
 They did-but alas! all the fat's in the fire!

5. This our Captain no sooner had finger'd the cole,
But he hies him abroad with his good Madam Vole-
Where, like a true tinker, he managed this metal,
And while he stopp'd one hole, made ten in the kettle.

6. His Sister, whom he to his Owners had,,;worn,
To see duly settled before his return,
He gulls with bad messages sent to and fro,
Whilst he underhand claps up a peace with her foe.

7. on He then turns this Sister adrift, and declares
Her most mortal foes were her Father's right heirs-
"G-d z-ds!" cries the world, "such a step was ne'er taken!"
"O, ho!" says Nol Bluff, "I have saved my own bacon."

8. Let France damn the Germans, and undam the Dutch,
And Spain on Old England pish ever so much,
Let Russia bang Sweden, or Sweden bang that,
I care not, by Robert! one kick of my hat.

9. So I by myself can noun substantive stand,
Impose on my Owners, and save my own land;
You call me masculine, feminine, neuter, or block,
Be what will the gender, sirs, hic, haec, or hoc.

10. Or should my choused Owners begin to look sour,
I'll trust to Mate Bob to exert his old power,
Regit animos dictis, or nummis, with ease,
So, spite of your growling, I'll act as I please."

11. Yet worse in this treacherous contract, 'tis said,
Such terms are agreed to, such promises made,
That his Owners must soon feeble beggars become-
"Hold!" cries the crown office, "'twere scandal-so, mum!"

12. This secret, however, must out on the day
When he meets his poor Owners to ask for more pay;
And I fear when they come to adjust the account,
zero for balance will prove their amount.

One or two of the stanzas are tolerable; some, especially the
ninth, most nonsensically bad.  However, this is a specimen of
what we shall have amply commented upon in parliament.

I have already found out a person, who, I believe, will please
you, in Palombo's place: I am to see your brother about it
to-morrow, and next post you shall hear more particularly.
I am quite in concern for the poor prinCess,(289) and her
conjugal and amorous distresses: I really pity them; were they in
England, we should have all the old prudes dealing out
judgments on her, and mumbling toothless ditties to the tune of
Pride will have a fall.  I am bringing some fans and
trifles for her, si mignons! Good night.
Yours ever.


(271) Lady Caroline D'Arcy, daughter of Robert third Earl of
Holdernesse, and wife of William Henry fourth Marquis of
Lothian, at this time, during his father's lifetime, called Earl
of Ancram.-D

(272) Lady Caroline and Lady Emily Lenox. [The former was
married, in 1744, to Henry Fox, the first Lord Holland; the
latter in 1746-7, to James, twentieth Earl of Kildare, in 1766
created Duke of Leinster.]

(273) Charles, second Duke of Richmond, and Lady Sarah
Cadogan, his duchess, eldest daughter of William Earl
Cadogan.-D.

(274) Eldest daughter of Charles Duke of Grafton.-[In 1746
married to Lord Petersham, afterwards Earl of Harrington.]

(275) Sister to John Duke of'Rutland; married in 1742, to the
Duke of Montrose.

(276) Only daughter of Charles second Earl of Tankerville.  She
married, first, Gilbert Fane Fleming, Esq. and secondly, Mr.
Wake, of Bath.-D.

(277) Lady Sophia Fermor.-D.

(278) Robert D'Arcy, fourth and last Earl of Holdernesse.-E.

(279) Lord Lincoln was at this time an admirer of Lady Sophia
Fermor,-D.

(280) Harriet, natural daughter of General Churchill;
afterwards married to Sir Everard Fawkener.

(281) The son and daughters of Alderman Parsons, a Jacobite
brewer, who lived much in France, and had, somehow or other, been
taken notice of by the king.

(282) William third Earl Fitzwilliam, in Ireland; created an
English peer in 1742; and in 1746 an English earl.-D.

(283) Sir John Shadwell, a physician, his wife and daughters, the
youngest of whom was pretty, and by the foreigners
generally called Mademoiselle Misse Molli, had been in Italy,
when Mr. W. was there.

(284) The Chevalier Ossorio, minister from the King of
Sardinia.

(285) General Wachtendonck, commander of the great dukes
troops at Leghorn, was cicisbeo to the conslil's wife there.

(286) John Lord Hervey, lord privy seal, and eldest son of John
first Earl Of Bristol.  He was a man of considerable
celebrity in his day; but is now principally known from his
unfortunate rivalry with Pope, for the good graces of Lady Mary
Wortley Montagu.  He died August 5, 1743, at the age of
forty-seven.-D.

(287) The Neutrality for the electorate of Hanover.(

(288) This song is a satire upon George II., ,the balancing
Captain," and upon that in his vacillating and doubtful
conduct, which his fears for the electorate of Hanover made him
pursue, whenever Germany was the seat of war.  His Sister, whom
he is accused of deserting, was Maria Theresa, Queen of
Hungary.-E.

(289) The Prince de Craon, and the princess his wife, who had
been favourite mistress to Leopold, the last Duke of Lorrain,
resided at this time at Florence, where the prince was head of
the council of regency; but they were extremely ill-treited and
mortified by the Count de Richcourt, a low Lorrainer, who, being
a creature of the great duke's favourite minister, had the chief
ascendant and power there.



186 Letter 40
To Sir Horace Mann.
Downing Street, Nov. 5, 1741, O. S.

I just mentioned to you in my letter on Monday, that I had found
such a person as you wanted; I have since seen your
brother, who is so satisfied with him, that he was for sending
him directly away to you, without staying six weeks for an answer
from you, but I chose to have your consent.  He is the son of a
tradesman in this city, so not yet a fine gentleman.  He is
between fifteen and sixteen, but very tall of his age: he was
disappointed in not going to a merchant at Genoa, as was
intended; but was so far provided for it as to have
learned Italian three months: he speaks French very well,
writes a good hand, and casts accounts; so, you see there will
not be much trouble in forming him to your purpose.  He will go
to you for twenty pounds a-year and his lodging.  If you like
this, Nvrite me word by the first post, and he shall set out
directly.

We hear to-day that the Toulon squadron is airived at
Barcelona; I don't like it of' all things, for it has a look
towards Tuscany.  If it is suffered to go thither quietly, it
will be no small addition to the present discontents.

Here is another letter, which I am entreated to send you, from
poor Amorevoli; he has a continued fever, though not a high one.
Yesterday, Monticelli was taken ill, so there will be no opera on
Saturday; nor was on Tuesday.  MOnticelli is
infinitely admired; next to Farinelli.  The Viscontina is
admired more than liked.  The music displeases every body, and
the dances.  I am quite uneasy about the opera, for Mr. Conway is
one of' the directors, and I fear they will lose
considerably, which he cannot afford.  There are eight; Lord
Middlesex, (290) Lord Holderness, Mr. Frederick, (291) Lord
Conway, (292) Mr. Conway, (293) Mr. Damer, (294) Lord Brook,
(295) and Mr. Brand. (296) The five last are directed by the
three first; they by the first, and he by the Abb`e Vanneschi,
(297) who will make a pretty sum.  I Will give YOU Some
instances; not to mention the improbability of eight young
thoughtless men of fashion understanding economy -. it is
usual to give the poet fifty guineas for composing the
books-Vanneschi and Rolli are allowed three hundred.  Three
hundred more VannesChi had for his journey to Italy to pick up
dancers and performers, which was always as well transacted by
bankers there.  Be has additionally brought over an Italian
tailor-because there are none here!  They have already given this
Taylorini four hundred pounds, and he has already taken a house
of thirty pounds a-year.  Monticelli and the Visconti are to have
a thousand guineas apiece; Amorevoli eight hundred and fifty:
this at the rate of the great singers, is not so extravagant; but
to the Muscovita (though the second woman never had above four
hundred,) they give six; that is for
secret services. (298) By this you may judge of their
frugality! I am quite uneasy for poor Harry, who will thus be to
pay for Lord Middlesex's pleasures! Good night; I have not time
now to write more.
Yours, ever.

(290) Charles Sackville, Earl of Middlesex, and subsequently
second Duke of Dorset, eldest son of Lionel, first Duke of
Dorset.  He was made a lord of the treasury in 1743, and
master of the horse to Frederick, Prince of Wales, in 1747-D.

(291) John Frederick, Esq. afterwards Sir John Frederick,
Bart. by the death of his cousin, Sir Thomas.  He was a
commissioner of customs, and member of parliament for West
Looe.-D.

(292) Francis Seymour Conway, first Earl and Marquis of
Hertford, ambassador at Paris, lord chamberlain of the
household, etc.-D.

(293) Henry Seymour Conway, afterwards secretary of state, and a
field marshal in the army.-D.

(294) Joseph Damer, Esq. created in 1753 Baron Milton, in
Ireland, and by George III. an English peer, by the same
title, and eventually Earl of Dorchester.-D.

(295) Francis Greville, eighth Lord Brooke; created in 1746 Earl
Brooke, and in 1759 Earl of Warwick.-D.

(296) Mr. Brand of the Hoo, in Hertfordshire, one of the
original members of the society of Dilettanti.--D.

(297) If this anticipation of Walpole's was ever realized, "the
pretty sum" was eventually lost on the spot where it had been
gained.  Vanneschi, having in 1753 undertaken the
management of the opera-house on his own account, continued it
until 1756, when his differences with Mingotti, which excited
almost as much of the public attention as the rivalries of Handel
and Bononcini or of Faustina and Cuzzoni, completely prejudiced
the public against him, and eventually ended in making him a
bankrupt, a prisoner in the Fleet, and at last a fugitive.-E.

(298) She was kept by Lord Middlesex.



187 Letter 41
To Sir Horace Mann.
Downing Street, Nov. 12, 1741.

Nothing is equal to my uneasiness about you.  I hear or think of
nothing but Spanish embarkations for Tuscany: before you receive
this, perhaps, they will be at Leghorn.  Then, your brother tells
me you have received none of my letters.  He knows I have never
failed writing once a week, if not twice.  We have had no letters
from You this post.  I shall not have the least respite from
anxiety, till I hear about you, and what you design to do. it is
immpossible but the great duke must lose Tuscany; and I suppose
it is as certain, (I speak on probabilities, for, upon honour, I
know nothing of the
matter,) that as soon as there is a peace, we shall
acknowledge Don Philip, and then you may return to Florence
again.  In the mean while I will ask Sir R. if it is possible to
get your appointments continued, while you stay in
readiness at Bologna, Rome, Lucca, or where you choose.  I talk
at random; but as I think so much of you, I am trying to find out
something that may be of service to you.  I write in infinite
hurry, and am called away, so scarce know what I say.  Lord
Conway and his family are this instant come to town, and have
sent for me.

It is Admiral Vernon's birthday, (299) and the city-shops are
full of favours, the streets of marrowbones and cleavers, and the
night will be full of mobbing, bonfires, and lights.

The opera does not succeed; Amorevoli has not sung yet; here is a
letter to his wife; mind, while he is ill, he sends to the
Chiaretta!  The dances are infamous and ordinary.  Lord
Chesterfield was told that the Viscontina said she was but
four-and-twenty: he answered, "I suppose she means
four-and-twenty stone!"

There is a mad parson goes about; he called to a sentinel the
other day in the Park; "Did you ever see the Leviathan?"
"No." "Well, he is as like Sir.  R. W. as ever two devils were
like one another."

Never was such unwholesome weather! I have a great cold, and have
not been well this fortnight: even immortal majesty has had a
looseness.

The Duke of Ancaster (300) and Lord James Cavendish (301) are
dead.

This is all the news I know: I would I had time to write more;
but I know you will excuse me now.  If I wrote more, it would be
still about the Italian expedition, I am so disturbed about it.
Yours, ever.

(299) Admiral Vernon was now in the height of his popularity, in
consequence of his successful attack upon Porto-Bello, in
November, 1739, and the great gallantry he had shown upon that
occasion.  His determined and violen't opposition, as a member of
parliament, to the measures of the government, assisted in
rendering him the idol of the mob, which he continued for many
years.-D.  [The admiral was actually elected for Rochester,
Ipswich, and Penryn: he'was also set up for the City of
London, where he was beaten by two thousand votes; and in
Westminster, where he was beaten by four hundred.  After the
affair of Porto-Bello, he took Chagre, and continued in the
service till 1748; when several matters which had passed
between him and the lords of the admiralty being laid before the
king, be was struck off the list of flag officers. He died in
1757.  A handsome monument was erected to his memory in
Westminster Abbey.]

(300) Peregrine Bertie, second Duke of Ancaster and Kesteven,
great chamberlain of England, and chief justice in Eyre, north of
Trent.  The report of his death was premature.  His grace
survived till the 1st of January.-E.

(301) The second son of William, second Duke of Devonshire.  He
was colonel of a regiment of foot-guards, and member for
Malton.-E.



189 Letter 42
To Sir Horace Mann.
Downing Street, Nov. 23, 1741.

Your letter has comforted me much, if it can be called comfort to
have one's uncertainty fluctuate to the better side.  You make me
hope that the Spaniards design on Lombardy ; my
passion for Tuscany, and anxiety for you, make me eager to
believe it; but alas!  while I am in the belief of this, they may
be in the act of conquest in Florence, and poor you
retiring politically!  How delightful is Mr. Chute for
cleaving unto you like Ruth!  "Whither thou goest, I will go; and
where thou lodgest, I will lodge!" As to the merchants of Leghorn
and their concerns, Sir R. thinks you are mistaken, and that if
the Spaniards come thither, they will by no means be safe.  I own
I write to you under a great dilemma; I
flatter myself, all is well with you; but if not, how
disagreeable to have one's letters fall into strange hands.  I
write, however.

A brother Of Mine, (302) Edward by name, has lately had a call to
matrimony: the virgins name was Howe. (303) He had agreed to take
her with no fortune, she him with his four children.  The father
of him, to get rid of his importunities, at last acquiesced.  The
very moment he had obtained this consent, he repented; and,
instead of flying on the wings of love to
notify it, he went to his fair One, owned his father had
mollified, but hoped she would be so good as to excuse him.
You cannot imagine what an entertaining fourth act of the
opera we had the other night.  Lord Vane, (304) in the middle of
the pit, making love to my lady.  The Duke of Newcastle (305) has
lately given him three-score thousand pounds, to consent to cut
off the entail of the Newcastle estate.  The fool immediately
wrote to his wife, to beg she would return to him from Lord
Berkeley; that he had got so much money, and now they might live
comfortably: but she will not live
comfortably: she is at Lord Berkeley's house, whither go
divers after her.  Lady Townshend told me an admirable
history; it is of our friend Lady Pomfret.  Somebody that
belonged to the Prince of Wales said, they were going to
Court; it was objected that they ought to say, going to
Carlton House; that the only Court is where the king resides.
Lady P. with her paltry air of significant learning and
absurdity, said, "Oh Lord! is there no Court in England, but the
king's? sure, there are many more! There is the Court of
Chancery, the Court of Exchequer, the Court of King's Bench,
etc." Don't you love her?  Lord Lincoln does her dauhter: he is
come over, and met her the other night: he turned pale, spoke to
her several times in the evening, but not long, and sighed to me
at going away.  He came over all alive; and not only his
uncle-duke, but even majesty is fallen in love with him.  He
talked to the king at his levee, without being spoken to.  That
was always thought high treason; but I don't know how the gruff
gentleman liked it; and then he had been told that Lord Lincoln
designed to have made the campaicn, if we had gone to war; in
short, he says, Lord Lincoln (306) is the handsomest man in
England

I believe I told you that Vernon's birthday passed quietly, but
it was not designed to be pacific; for at twelve at night, eight
gentlemen, dressed like sailors, and masked, went round Covent
Garden with a drum, beating up for a volunteer mob, but it did
not take; and they retired to a great supper that was prepared
for them at the Bedford Head, and ordered by
Whitehead (307) the author of Manners.  It has been written into
the country that Sir R. has had two fits of an apoplexy, and
cannot live till Christmas; but I think he is recovered to be as
well as ever.  To-morrow se'nnight is the Day! (308)  It is
critical.  You shall hear faithfully.

The opera takes: Monticelli (309) pleases almost equal to
Farinelli: Amorevoli is much liked; but the poor, fine
Viscontina scarce at all. (310)I carry the two former to-night to
my Lady Townshend's.

Lord Coventry (311) has had his son thrown out by the party: he
went to Carlton House; the prince asked him about the
election.  "Sir," said he, "the Tories have betrayed me, as they
will you, the first time you have occasion for them."  The
merchants have petitioned the King for more guardships.  My lord
president, (312) referred them to the Admiralty; but they bluntly
refused to go, and said they would have redress from the King
himself.

I am called down to dinner, and cannot write more now.  I will
thank dear Mr. Chute and the Grifona next post.  I hope she and
you liked your things.  Good night, my dearest child! Your
brother and I sit upon your affairs every morning.
Yours ever.

(302) Second son of Sir Robert Walpole.  He was clerk of the
pells, and afterwards knight of the Bath. [Sir Edward died
unmarried, in 1784, leaving three natural daughters; Laura,
married to the Hon. and
Rev.  Frederick Keppel, afterwards Bishop of Exeter; maria,
married, first to the Earl of Waldegrave, and, secondly to the
Duke of Gloucester; and Charlotte, married to the
Earl of Dysart.]

(303) Eldest sister of the Lord Viscount Howe.  She was soon
after this married to a relation of her own name. [John
Howe, Esq. of Hanslop, Bucks.]

(304) William, second Viscount Vane, in Ireland.  His "lady" was
the too-celebrated Lady Vane, first married to
Lord William Hamilton, and secondly to Lord Vane; who has
given her own extraordinary and disreputable adventures to the
world, in Smollett's novel of "Peregrine Pickle," under the title
of "Memoirs of a Lady of Quality." She is also
immortalized in different ways, by Johnson, in his ,Vanity of
Human Wishes," and by Sir Charles Hanbury Williams, in one of his
Odes.-D. [She was the daughter of Mr. Hawes, a South Sea
director, and died in 1788.  Lord Vane died in 1789.  Boswell
distinctly states, that the lady mnentioned in Johnson's
couplet "was not the celebrated Lady Vane, whose Memoirs were
given to the public by Dr. Smollett, but Ann Vane, who was
mistress to Frederick Prince of Wales, and died in 1736, not long
before Johnson settled in London."  See Boswell's
Johnson, vol. i. p. 226, ed. 1835.]

(305) Uncle of Lord Vane, whose father, Lord Barnard, had
married Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Gilbert Holles, Earl of
Clare, and sister and coheir of John Duke of Newcastle.

(306) Henry Clinton, ninth Earl of Lincoln, succeeded as
Duke of Newcastle in 1768, on the death of his uncle, the
minister.

(307) Paul Whitehead, a satirical poet of bad character, was the
son of a tailor, who lived in Castle-yard, Holborn.  He wrote
several abusive poems, now forgotten, entitled "The
State Dances," "Manners," "The Gymnasiad," etc.  In "Manners,"
having attacked some members of the House of Lords, that assembly
summoned Dodsley, the publisher, before them, (Whitehead having
absconded,) and subsequently imprisoned him.  In politics,
Whitehead was a follower of Bubb Dodington; in private life be
was the friend and companion of the profligate Sir Francis
Dashwood, Wilkes, Churchill, etc. and, like them, was a member of
the Hell-fire Club, which held its orgies at Mednam Abbey, in
Bucks.  The estimation in which he was held even by his friends
may be judged of by the lines in which Churchill has damned him
to everlasting fame:

"May I (can worse disgrace on mankind fall?)
Be born a Whitehead and baptized a Paul."

Paul Whitehead died in 1774.-D.  [The proceedings in the
House of Lords against the author of "Manners" which took
place in February, 1739, was, in the opinion of Dr. Johnson,
"intended rather to intimidate Pope, than to punish
Whitehead."]

(308) The day the parliament was to meet.

(309) His voice was clear, sweet, and free from defects of every
kind.  He was a chaste performer, and never hazarded any
difficulty which he was not certain of executing with the utmost
precision.  He was, moreover, an excellent actor, so that nothing
but the recent remembrance of the gigantic
talents of Farinelli, and the grand and majestic style of
Senesino, could have lefl an English audience any thing to
wish.-E.

(310) Amorevoli was an admirable tenor.  "I have heard,"
says Dr. Burney, "better voices of his pitch, but
never, on the stage, more taste and expression.  The
Visconti had a shrill flexible voice, and pleased more in
rapid songs than those that required high colouring and
pathos."-E.

(311) William, fifth Earl of Coventry.  He died in 1751.-D.

(312) Spencer Compton, Earl of Wilmington, a man of moderate
abilities, but who had filled many great offices.  He died in
1743, when his titles extinguished.-D.



191 Letter 43
To Sir Horace Mann.
Nov. 26, 1741.

I don't write you a very long letter, because you will see the
inclosed to Mr. Chute.  I forgot to thank you last post for the
songs, and your design on the Maltese cats.

It is terrible to be in this uncertainty about you! We have not
the least news about the Spaniards, more than what you told us,
of a few vessels being seen off Leghorn.  I send
about the post, and ask Sir R. a thousand times a-day.

I beg to know if you have never heard any thing from Parker about
my statue: (313) it was to have been finished last june.  What is
the meaning he does not mention it? If it is done, I beg it may
not stir from Rome till there is no more danger of Spaniards.

If you get out of your hurry, I will trouble you with a new
commission: I find I cannot live without Stosch's (314)
intaglio of the Gladiator, with the vase, upon a granite.  You
know I offered him fifty pounds: I think, rather than not have
it, I would give a hundred.  What will he do if the Spaniards
should come to Florence? Should he be driven to straits,
perhaps he would part with his Meleager too.  You see I am as
eager about baubles as if I were going to Louis at the Palazzo
Vecchio! You can't think what a closet I have fitted up; such a
mixture of French gaiety and Roman virtu! you would be in love
with it: I have not rested till it was finished: I long to have
you see it. Now I am angry that I did not buy the
Hermaphrodite; the man would have sold it for twenty-five
sequins: do buy it for me; it was a friend of Bianchi.  Can you
forgive me'! I write all this upon the hope and
presumption that the Spaniards go to Lombardy.  Good night.
Yours, ever.

(313) A copy of the Livia Mattei, which Mr. W. designed for a
tomb of his mother: it was erected in Henry VII.'s Chapel, in
Westminster Abbey, in 1754.

(314) He gave it afterwards to Lord Duncannon, for procuring him
the arrears of his pension.



192 Letter 44
To Sir Horace Mann.
Downing Street, Dec. 3, 1741, O. S.


Here I have two letters from you to answer.  You cannot
conceive my joy on the prospect of the Spaniards going to
Lombardy: all advices seem to confirm it.  There is no telling
you what I have felt, and shall feel, till I am certain you are
secure.  You ask me about Admiral Haddock; you must not wonder
that I have told you nothing of him: they know nothing of him
here.  He had discretionary powers to act as he should judge
proper from his notices.  He has been keeping in the Spanish
fleet at Cales. (315)  Sir R. says, if he had let that go out, to
prevent the embarkation, the Tories would have
complained, and said he had favoured the Spanish trade, under pre
tence of hindering an expedition which was never designed.  It
was strongly reported last week that Haddock had shot
himself; a satire on his having been neutral, as they call it.
The parliament met the day before yesterday, and there were four
hundred and eighty-seven members present.  They did no business,
only proceeded to choose a speaker, which was,
unanimously, Mr. Onslow, moved for by Mr. Pelham, (316) and
seconded by Mr. Clutterbuck.  But the Opposition, to flatter his
pretence to popularity and impartiality, call him their own
speaker.  They intend to oppose Mr. Earle's being chairman of the
committee, and to set up a Dr. Lee, a civilian.  To- morrow the
King makes his speech.  Well, I won't keep you any longer in
suspense.  The Court will have a majority of forty-a vast number
for the outset: a good majority, like a good sum of money, soon
makes itself bigger.  The first great point will be the
Westminster election; another, Mr. Pultney's (317) election at
Heydon; Mr. Chute's brother is one of the
petitioners.  It will be an ugly affair for the Court, for
Pultney has asked votes of the courtiers, and said Sir R. was
indifferent about it; but he is warmer than I almost ever saw
him, and declared to Churchill, (318) of whom Pultney claims a
promise, that he must take Walpole or Pultney.  The Sackville
finally were engaged too, by means of George Berkeley, brother to
Lady Betty Germain, (319) whose influence with the Dorset I
suppose you know; but the King was so hot with his grace about
his sons, that I believe they will not venture to follow their
inclinations **** to vote (320) for Pultney, though he has
expressed great concern about it to Sir R.

So much for politics! for I suppose you know that Prague is taken
by storm, in a night's time.  I forgot to tell you that Commodore
Lestock, with twelve ships, has been waiting for a wind this
fortnight, to join Haddock. (321)

I write to you in defiance of a violent headache, which I got
last night at another of Sir T. Robinson's balls.  There were six
hundred invited, and I believe above two hundred there.  Lord
Lincoln, out of prudence, danced with Lady Caroline
Fitzroy, and Mr. Conway, with Lady Sophia; the two couple were
just mismatched, as every body soon perceived, by the
attentions of each man to the woman he did not dance with, and
the emulation of either lady: it was an admirable scene.  The
ball broke up at three; but Lincoln, Lord Holderness, Lord Robert
Sutton, (322) Young Churchill (323) and a dozen more grew 'oily,'
stayed till seven in the morning, and drank
thirty-two bottles.


I will take great care to send the knee-buckles and
pocket-book; I have got them, and Madame Pucci's silks, and only
wait to hear that Tuscany is quiet, and then I will
convey them by the first ship.  I would write to them
to-night, but have not time now; old Cibber, (324) plays
to-night, and all the world will be there.

Here is another letter from Amorevoli, who is out of his wits at
not hearing from his wife.  Adieu! my dearest child.  How happy
shall I be when I know you are in peace;
Yours, ever.

(315) Cadiz.

(316) The Right Hon. Henry Pelham, so long in conjunction with
his brother, the Duke of Newcastle, one of the principal
rulers of this country.  He was a man of some ability, and a
tolerable speaker.  The vacillations, the absurdity, the
foolish jealousy of the duke, greatly injured the stability and
respectability of Mr. Pelham's administration.  Mr. Pelham was
born in 1696, and died in 1754.-D.


(317) William Pulteney, afterwards Earl of Bath, whose
character and history are too well known to require to be here
enlarged upon.-D.

(318) General Charles Churchill, groom of the bedchamber to the
King.

(319) Lady Betty Berkeley, married to the notorious adventurer
and gambler, Sir John Germain, who had previously married the
divorced Duchess of Norfolk, (Lady Mary Mordaunt,) by whose
bequest he became possessed of the estate of Drayton, in
Northamptonshire, which he left on his own death to Lady
Betty, his second @wife.  Lady Betty left it to Lord George
Sackville, third son of Lionel first Duke of Dorset.  Sir John
Germain was so ignorant, that he is said to have left a legacy to
Fair Matthew Decker, as the author of St. Matthew's
Gospel.-D.

(320) sic, in the manuscript.-D.

(321) But for this circumstance, and the junction of the
French squadron, Haddock would certainly have destroyed the
Spanish fleet, and thereby escaped the imputation which was
circulated with much industry, that his hands had been tied up by
a neutrality entered into for Hanover; than which nothing could
be more false.  These reports, though ostensibly
directed against Haddock, were, in reality, aimed at Sir
Robert Walpole, a general election being at hand, and his
opponents wishing to render him as unpopular with the people as
possible.-E.

(322) Second son of John, third Duke of Rutland.  He took the
name of Sutton, on inheriting the estate of his maternal
grandfather, Robert Sutton, Lord Lexington.-D.

(323) Natural son of General Charles Churchill, afterwards
married to Mary, daughter of Sir Robert Walpole.-D.

(324) Colley Cibber, the celebrated dramatic author and actor.
He had left the stage in 1731; but still occasionally acted, in
spite of his age, for he was now seventy.-D. [For those
occasional performances he is said to have had fifty guineas per
night.  So late as 1745, he appeared in the character of
Pandulph, the pope's legate, in his own tragedy, called "Papal
Tyranny."  He died in 1757.]



194 letter 45
To Sir Horace Mann.
Somerset House, (for I write to you wherever I find myself,) Dec.
10, 1741.

I have got no letter from you yet, the post should have
brought it yesterday.  The Gazette says, that the cardinal (325)
has declared that they will suffer no expedition against Tuscany.
I wish he had told me so! if they preserve this
guarantee, personally, I can forgive their breaking the rest.
But I long for your letter; every letter now from each of us is
material.  You will be almost as impatient to hear of the
parliament, as I of Florence.  The lords on Friday went upon the
King's speech; Lord Chesterfield made a very fine speech against
the address, all levelled at the House of Hanover.  Lord
Cholmley, they say, answered him well.  Lord Halifax
(326) spoke Very ill, and was answered by little Lord Raymond,
(327) who always will answer him.  Your friend Lord Sandwich
(328) affronted his grace of Grafton, (329) extremely, who was
ill, and sat out of his place, by calling him to order; it was
indecent in such a boy to a man of his age and rank: the
blood of Fitzroy will not easily pardon it.  The court had a
majority of forty-one, with some converts.

On Tuesday we had the Speech; there were great differences among
the party; the Jacobites, with Shippen (330) and Lord Noel
Somerset at their head, were for a division, Pultney and the
Patriots against one; (332) the ill success in the House of lords
had frightened them; we had no division, but a very warm battle
between Sir.  R.  and Poltney.  The latter made a fine speech,
very personal, on the state of affairs.  Sir R. with as much
health, as much spirits, as much force and
command as ever, answered him for an hour; said, He hadbeen taxed
with all our misfortunes; but did he raise the war in Germany? or
advise the war with Spain? did he kill the late Emperor or King
of Prussia?' did he counsel this King? or was he first minister
to the King of Poland?  did he kindle the war betwixt Muscovy and
Sweden?" For our troubles at home, he said, "all the grievances
of this nation were owing to the Patriots." They laughed much at
this; but does he want proofs of it?  he said, They talked much
of an equilibrium in this parliament, (333) and of what they
designed against him; if it was so, the sooner he knew it the
better; and there-fore if any man would move for a day to examine
the state of the
nation, he would second it." Mr. Pultney did move for it; Sir R.
did second it, and it is fixed for the twenty-first of
January.  Sir R. repeated some words of Lord Chesterfield's in
the House of Lords, that this was a time for truth, for plain
truth for English truth, and hinted at the reception (334) his
lordship had met in France.  After these speeches of such
consequence, and from such men, Mr. Lyttelton (335) got up to
justify, or rather to flatter Lord Chesterfield, though every
body then had forgot that he had been mentioned.  Danvers
(336) who is a rough, rude beast, but now and then mouths out
some humour, said, "that Mr. P. and Sir R. were like two old
bawds, debauching young members."

That day was a day of triumph, but yesterday (Wednesday) the
streamers of victory did not fly so gallantly.  It was the day of
receiving petitions; Mr. Pultney presented an immense
piece of parchment, which he said he could but just lift; it was
the Westminster petition, and is to be heard next Tuesday, when
we shall all have our brains knocked out by the mob; so if you
don't hear from me next post, you will conclude my head was a
little out of order.  After this we went upon a cornish petition,
presented by Sir William Yonge, (337) which drew on a debate and
a division, when lo! we were but 222 to 215-how do you like a
majority of seven? The Opposition triumphs
highly, and with reason; one or two such victories, as
Pyrrhus, the member for Macedon, said, will be the ruin of us.  I
look upon it now, that the question is, Downing Street or the
Tower; will you come and see a body, if one should happen to
lodge at the latter?  There are a thousand pretty things to amuse
you; the lions, the Armoury, the crown, and the axe that beheaded
Anna Bullon.  I design to make interest for the room where the
two princes were smothered; in long winter evenings, when one
wants company, (for I don't suppose that many people will
frequent me then,) one may sit and scribble verses
against Crouch-back'd Richard, and dirges on the sweet babes.  If
I die there, and have my body thrown into a wood, I am too old to
be buried by robin redbreasts, am not I?

Bootle, (338) the prince's chancellor, made a most long and
stupid speech; afterwards, Sir R. called to him, "Brother
Bootle, take care you don't get my old name."  "What's that?"
"Blunderer."

You can't conceive how I was pleased with the vast and
deserved applause that Mr. Chute's (339) brother, the lawyer,
got: I never heard a clearer or a finer speech.  When I went
home, "Dear Sir," said I to Sir R. "I hope Mr. Chute will
carry his election for Heydon; he would be a great loss to you."
He replied. "We will not lose him."  I, who meddle with nothing,
especially elections, and go to no committees,
interest myself extremely for Mr. Chute.

Old Marlborough (340) is dying-but who can tell! last year she
had lain a great while ill, without speaking; her physicians
said, "She must be blistered, or she will die." She called out,
"I won't be blistered, and I won't die." If she takes the same
resolution now, I don't believe she will. (341)

Adieu! my dear child: I have but room to say, yours, ever.

(325) Cardinal Fleury, first minister of France.

(326) George Montague Dunk, second Earl of Halifax, of the last
creation.  Under the reign of George III., he became
secretary of state, and was so unfortunate in that capacity as to
be the opponent of Wilkes, on the subject of General
Warrants, by which he is now principally remembered.-D.

(327) Robert, second Lord Raymond, only son of the chief
justice of that name and title.-D.

(328) John Montagu, fourth Earl of Sandwich, passed through a
long life of office, and left behind him n indifferent
character, both in public and private He was, however, a man of
some ability.-D.

(329) Charles Fitzroy, second Duke of Grafton, and grandson of
Charles II., was a person of considerable weight and influence at
the court of George II., where he long held the post of
chamberlain of the household.

(330) "Honest Will Shippen," as he was called, or ,Downright
Shippen," as Pope terms him, was a zealous Jacobite member of
parliament, possessed of considerable talents, and a vehement
opposer of Sir Robert Walpole's government.  He, however, did
justice to that able minister, for he was accustomed to say,
"Robin and I are honest men; but as for those fellows in long
perriwigs" (meaning the Tories of the day,) " they only want to
get into office themselves." He was the author of a
satirical poem, entitled, "Faction Displayed," which possesses
considerable merit.-D. [Shippen was born in 1672, and died in
1743.  Sir Robert Walpole repeatedly declared, that he would not
say who was corrupted, but he would say who was not
corruptible-that man was Shippen.  His speeches generally
contained some pointed period, which he uttered with great
animation.  He usually spoke in a low tone of voice, with too
great rapidity, and held his glove before his mouth.]

(331) Lord Charles Noel Somerset, second son of Henry, second
Duke of Beaufort.  He succeeded to the family honours in 1746,
when his elder brother, Henry, the third duke, died without
children.-D. [After the death of Sir William Wyndham, which
happened in 1740, Lord Noel Somerset was considered as the rising
head of the Tory interest.  "He was," says Tindal, "a man of
sense, spirit, and activity, unblameable in his morals, but
questionable in his political capacity." He died in 1756.)

(332) Mr. Pulteney declared against dividing; observing, with a
witticism, that "dividing was not the way to multiply."

(333) In speaking of the balance of power, Mr. Pulteney had said,
,He did not know how it was abroad, not being in
secrets, but congratulated the House, that he had not, for these
many years, known it so near an equilibrium as it now was
there."-E.

(334) Lord Chesterfield had been sent by the party, in the
preceding September, to France, to request the Duke of Ormond (at
Avignon,) to obtain the Pretender's order to the
Jacobites, to vote against Sir R. W. upon any question
whatever; many of them having either voted for him, or
retired, on the famous motion the last year for removing him from
the, King's councils. [Lord Chesterfield's biographer, Dr. Maty
states that the object of his lordship's visit to France was the
restoration of his health, which required the assistance of a
warmer climate.  The reception he met with during his short stay
at Paris, is thus noticed in a letter from Mr. Pitt, of the 10th
of September:-" I hope you liked the court of France as well as
it liked you.  The uncommon distinctions I hear the Cardinal
(Fleury) showed you, are the best proof that, old as he is, his
judgment is as good as
ever.  As this great minister has taken so much of his idea, of
the men in power here, from the person of a great
negotiator who has left the stage, (Lord Waldegrave,) I am very
glad he has, had an opportunity, once before he dies, of forming
an idea of those out of power from my Lord
Chesterfield." See Chatham Correspondence, vol. i. p. 3.]

(335) George Lyttelton, afterwards created Lord lyttelton.-D.

(336) Joseph Danvers, Esq. of Swithland, in the county of
Leicester, at this time member for Totness.  In 1746 he was
created a baronet.  He married Frances, the daughter of thomas
babington, Esq. of Rothley Temple, Leicestershire.-E.

(337) the Right Hon. Sir William Yonge, Bart., secretary at war,
to which office he had succeeded in May, 1735.  Walpole, who
tells us (Memoires, i. p. 20,) that " he was vain,
extravagant, and trifling; simple out of the House, and too ready
at assertions in it," adds, "that his vivacity and
parts, whatever the cause was, made him shine, and he was
always content with the lustre that accompanied fame, without
thinking of what was reflected from rewarded fame-a convenient
ambition to ministers, who had few such disinterested
combatants.  Sir Robert Walpole always said of him 'that
nothing but Yonge's character could keep down his parts, and
nothing but his parts support his character.'"  That these parts
were very great is shown by the fact, that Sir Robert Walpole
often, when he did not care to enter early into the debate
himself, gave Yonge his notes, as the latter came late into the
House, from which be could speak admirably and
fluently, though he had missed the preceding discussion.  Sir
William, who had a proneness to poetry, wrote the epilogue to
Johnson's tragedy of "Irene."  'When I published the plan for my
Dictionary," says the Doctor, "Lord'Chesterfield told me that the
word great should be pronounced so as to rhyme to state; and Sir
William Yonge sent me word, that it should be pronounced so as to
rhyme to seat, and that none but an
Irishman would pronounce it great.  Now, here were two men of the
highest rank, the one the best speaker in the House of Lords, the
other the best speaker in the House of Commons, differing
entirely." See Boswell's Johnson,vol.iii.p.191.


(338) Sir Thomas Bootle, chancellor to the Prince of Wales; a
dull, heavy man, and who is, therefore, ironically called, by Sir
C. H. Williams, "Bright Bootle,"-D.

(339) Francis Chute, an eminent lawyer, second brother of
Anthony Chute, of the Vine, in Hampshire, had, in concert with
Luke Robinson, another lawyer, disputed Mr. Pultney's borough of
Heydon with him at the general elections and been returned but on
a petition, and the removal of Sir R. W. they were
voted out of their seats, and Mr. Chute died soon after.-E.

(340) Sarah, Dowager Duchess of Marlborough.

(341) Nor did she, Her grace survived the date of this letter
nearly three years.  She died on the 18th of October 1744, being
then eighty-four years of age.-E.



197 Letter 46
To Sir Horace Mann.
Wednesday night, eleven o'clock, Dec. 16, 1741.

Remember this day.

Nous voil`a de la Minorit`e! entens-tu cela! h`e! My dear child,
since you will have these ugly words explained, they just mean
that we ar-- metamorphosed into the minority.  This was the night
of choosing a chairman of the committee of elections.  Gyles
Earle, (342) (as in the two last parliaments) was named by the
Court; Dr. Lee, (343) a civilian, by the Opposition, a man of a
fair character. (344)  Earle was formerly a dependent on the Duke
of Argyle,(345) is of remarkable covetousness and wit, which he
has dealt out largely against the Scotch and the Patriots.  It
was a day of much expectation, and both sides had raked together
all probabilities: I except near twenty who are in town, but stay
to vote on a second question, when the majority may be decided to
either party.  have you not read of such in story?
Men, who would not care to find themselves on the weaker side,
contrary to their intent.  In short, the determined sick were
dragged out of their beds; zeal came in a great coat.  There were
two vast dinners at two taverns, for either-party; at six we met
in the House.  Sir William Yonge, seconded by my uncle Horace,
(346) moved for Mr. Earle: Sir Paul Methuen (347) and Sir Watkyn
Williams (348) proposed Dr. Lee-and carried him, by a majority of
four: 242 against 238-the greatest number, I believe, that ever
lost a question.  You have no idea of their huzza! unless you can
conceive how people must triumph after defeats of twenty years
together.  We had one vote shut out, by coming a moment too late;
one that quitted us, for having been ill used by the Duke of
Newcastle but yesterday-for which in all probability, he will use
him well to-morrow-I mean, for quitting us. Sir Thomas
Lowther,(349) Lord Hartington's (350) uncle, was fetched down by
him and voted against us.  Young Ross,(351) son to a commissioner
of the customs, and saved from the dishonour of not liking to go
to the West Indies when it was his turn, by Sir R.s giving him a
lieutenancy, voted against us; and Tom Hervey,(352) who is always
with us, but is quite mad; and being asked why he left us,
replied, "Jesus knows my thoughts; one day I blaspheme, and pray
the next."  so, you see what accidents were against us, or we had
carried our point.  They cry, Sir R. miscalculated: how should he
calculate, when there are men like Ross, and fifty others he
could name! It was not very pleasant to be stared in the face to
see how one bore it-you can guess at my bearing it, who interest
myself so little about any thing.  I have had a taste of what I
am to meet from all sorts of people.  The moment we had lost the
question, I went from the heat of the house into the Speaker's
chamber, and there were some fifteen others of us-an under
door-keeper thought a question was new put, when it was not, and,
withou@ giving us notice, clapped the door to.  I asked him how
he dared lock us out without calling us: he replied insolently,
"It was his duty, and he would do it again:" one of
the party went to him, commended him, and told him he should be
punished if he acted otherwise.  Sir R. is in great spirits, and
still sanguine.  I have so little experience, that I shall not be
amazed at whatever scenes follow.  My dear child, we have
triumphed twenty years; is it strange that fortune should at last
forsake us; or ought we not always to expect it, especially in
this kingdom?  They talk loudly of the year forty-one, and
promise themselves all the confusions that began a hundred years
ago from the same date.  I hope they prognosticate wrong; but
should it be so, I can be happy in other places.  One reflection
I shall have, very sweet, though very melancholy; that if our
family is to be the sacrifice that shall first pamper discord, at
least the one,' the part of it that interested all my concerns,
and must have suffered from our ruin, is safe, secure, and above
the rage of confusion: nothing in this world can touch her peace
now!

To-morrow and Friday we go upon the Westminster election-you will
not wonder, shall you, if you hear the next post that we have
lost that too?  Good night.
Yours, ever.


(342) Giles Earle, Esq. one of the lords of the treasury and who
had been chairman of the committees of the House of Commons from
1727 to the date of this letter.  He had been successively groom
of the bedchamber to the Prince of Wales in 1718, clerk
comptroller of the King"s household in 1720, commissioner of the
Irish revenue in 1728, and a lord of the treasury in 1738.  Mr.
Earle was a man of broad coarse wit, and a lively image of his
style and sentiments has been preserved by Sir C. H. Williams, in
his "Dialogue between Giles Earle and Bubb Dodington."-E.

(343) George Lee, brother to the lord-chief justice; he was
appointed one of the lords of the admiralty on the following
change, which post he resigned on the disgrace of his patron,
Lord Granville.  He was designed by the Prince of Wales for his
first minister, and, immediately on the prince's death, was
appointed treasurer to the princess dowager, and soon after made
dean of the arches, a knight, and privy counsellor.  He died in
1758.

(344) In a letter to Dodington, written from Spa, on the 8th of
September, Lord Chesterfield says:-"I am for acting at the very
beginning of the session.  The court generally proposes some
servile and shameless tool of theirs to be chairman of the
committee of privileges.  Why should not we, therefore, pick up
some Whig of a fair character, and with personal connexions, to
set up in opposition? I think we should be pretty strong upon
this point."-E.

(345) John, the great Duke of Argyle and Greenwich.-D.

(346) Horace Walpole, younger brother of Sir Robert, created. in
his old age, Lord Walpole of Wolterton.  He was commonly called
"Old Horace," to distinguish him from his nephew, the writer of
these letters.-D.

(347) The son of John Methuen, Esq. the diplomatist, and author
of the celebrated Methuen treaty with Portugal.  Sir Paul was a
knight of the Bath, and died in 1757.-D.

(348) Sir Watkyn Williams Wynn, Bart. the third baronet of the
family, was long one of the leaders in the House of Commons.-D.
(349) Sir Thomas Lowther, Bart.  of Holker, in Lancashire.  He
had married Lady Elizabeth Cavendish, daughter of the second Duke
of Devonshire.-D.

(350) Afterwards the fourth Duke of Devonshire.

(351) Charles Ross, killed in flannders, at the battle of
Fontenoy, 1745.

(352) Thomas Hervey, second son of John, first Earl of Bristol,
'and Surveyor of the royal gardens.  He was at this time writing
his famous letter to Sir Thomas Hanmer. [With whose wife he had
eloped.  In the letter alluded to, he expresses his conviction
that his conduct was natural and delicate, and that, finally, in
heaven, Lady Hanmer, in the distribution of wives, would be
considered to be his.  Dr. Johnson (to whom he had left a legacy
of fifty pounds, but -,afterwards gave it him in his life-time)
characterises him as "very vicious."  " Alas!" observes Mr.
Croker, "it is but too probable that he was disordered in mind,
and that what was called vice was. in truth, disease, and
required a madhouse rather than a prison." He died in 1775.  See
Boswell's Johnson, Vol. iii.  P. 18, ed. 1835.)

(353) His mother, Catherine Lady Walpole, who died August 20,
1737.



199 Letter 47
To Sir Horace Mann.
Thursday, six o'clock. [Dec. 17, 1741.

You will hardly divine where I am writing to you-in the
Speaker's chamber.  The House is examining witnesses on the
Westminster election, which will not be determined to-day; I am
not in haste it should, for I believe we shall lose it.  A great
fat fellow, a constable, on their side, has just
deposed, that Lord Sundon,(355) and the high constable, took him
by the collar at the election, and threw him down stairs.  Do you
know the figure of Lord Sundon? If you do, only think of that
little old creature throwing any man down stairs!

As I was coming down this morning, your brother brought me a long
letter from you, in answer to mine of the 12th of
November.  You try to make me mistrust the designs of Spain
against Tuscany, but I will hope yet: hopes are all I have for
any thing I know!

As to the young man, I will see his mother the first moment I
can; and by next post, hope to give you a definite answer,
whether he will submit to be a servant or not; in every other
respect, I am sure he will please you.

Your friend, Mr. Fane,(356) would not come for us last night, nor
will vote till after the Westminster election: be is
brought into parliament by the Duke of Bedford,(357) and is
unwilling to disoblige him in this.  We flattered ourselves with
better success; for last Friday, after sitting till two in the
morning we carried a Cornish election in four
divisions-the first by a majority of six, then of twelve, then of
fourteen, and lastly by thirty-six.  You can't imagine the zeal
of the young men on both sides: Lord Fitzwilliam, Lord
Hartington, and my friend Coke (358) on ours, are warm as
possible; Lord Quarendon (359) and Sir Francis Dashwood (360) are
as violent on theirs: the former speaks often and well.  But I am
talking to you of nothing but parliament; why,
really, all one's ideas are stuffed with it, and you yourself
will not dislike to hear things so material.  The Opposition who
invent every method of killing Sir R., intend to make us sit on
Saturdays; but how mean and dirty is it, how
scandalous! when they can't ruin him by the least plausible
means, to murder him by denying him air and exercise.(361)
There was a strange affair happened on Saturday; it was
strange, yet very English.  One Nourse, an old gamester, said, in
the coffee-house, that Mr. Shuttleworth, a member, only pretended
to be ill.  This was told to Lord Windsor,(362) his friend, who
quarrelled with Nourse, and the latter challenged him.  My lord
replied, he would not fight him, he was too old.  The other
replied, he was not too old to fight with pistols.  Lord Windsor
still refused: Nourse, in a rage, went home and cut his own
throat.  This was one of the odd ways in which men are made.

I have scarce seen Lady Pomfret lately, but I am sure Lord
Lincoln is not going to marry her daughter.  I am not
surprised at her sister being shy of receiving civilities from
you-that was English too!

Say a great deal for me to the Chutes.  How I envy your snug
suppers! I never have such suppers! Trust me, if we fall, all the
grandeur, all the envied grandeur of our house, will not cost me
a sigh: it has given me no pleasure while we have it, and will
give me no pain when I part with it.  My liberty, my ease, and
choice of my own friends and company, will
sufficiently counterbalance the crowds of Downing-street. I am so
sick of it all, that if we are victorious or not, I propose
leaving England in the spring,.  Adieu!
Yours, ever and ever.

(355) William clayton, Lord Sundon, in Ireland, so created in
1735.  His wife was a favourite of Queen Caroline, to whom she
was mistress of the robes.

(356) Charles Fane, Only son of Lord Viscount Fane, whom he
succeeded, had been minister at Florence.

(357) John Russell, fourth Duke of Bedford.-D.

(358) Edward, Lord Viscount Coke, only son of the Earl of
Leicester.  He died in 1753.

(359) George Henry Lee, Lord Viscount Quarendon, eldest son of
the Earl of Lichfield, whom he succeeded in that title.

(360) Sir Francis Dashwood, Bart., afterwards Lord Le
Despencer.  Under the administration of Lord Bute he was, for a
short time, chancellor of the exchequer.-D.

(361) Sir Robert always went every Saturday to Newpark,
Richmond, to hunt.  (From his early youth, Sir Robert was fond of
the diversions of the field.  He was accustomed to hunt in
Richmond Park with a pack of beagles.  On receiving a packet of
letters, he usually opened that from his gamekeeper first.]
(362) Herbert Windsor Hickman, second Viscount Windsor in
Ireland, and Baron Montjoy of the Isle of Wight. [His lordship
died in 1758, when all his honours, in default of male issue,
became extinct.]



201 Letter 48
To Sir Horace Mann.
Christmas eve, 1741.

My dearest child, if I had not heard regularly from you, what a
shock it would have given me! The other night at the opera, Mr.
Worseley, with his peevish face, half smiling through
ill-nature, told me (only mind!) by way of news, "that he
heard Mr. Mann was dead at Florence!"' How kind! To entertain one
with the chitchat of the town, a man comes and tells one that
one's dearest friend is dead! I am sure he would have lost his
speech if he had had any thing pleasurable to tell.  If ever
there is a metempsychosis, his soul will pass into a vulture and
prey upon carcases after a battle, and then go and bode at the
windows of their relations.  But I will say no more of him; I
will punish him sufficiently, if sufficiently there be, by
telling him you are perfectly well: you are, are you not? Send me
certificate signed by Dr. Cocchi,(363) and I will choke him with
it: another's health must be venomous to him.

Sir Francis Dashwood too,-as you know all ill-natured people hear
all ill news,-told me he heard you was ill: I vowed you was grown
as strong as the Farnese Hercules.  Then he desires you will send
him four of the Volterra urns, of the
chimney-piece size; send them with any of my things; do, or he
will think I neglected it because he is our enemy; and I would
not be peevish, not to be like them.  He is one of the most
inveterate; they list under Sandys,(364) a parcel of them with no
more brains than their general; but being malicious they pass for
ingenious, as in these countries fogs are reckoned warm weather.
Did you ever hear what Earle said of Sandys?  "that he never
laughed but once, and that was when his best friend broke his
thigh."

Last Thursday I wrote you word of our losing the chairman of the
committee.  This winter is to be all ups and downs.  The next day
(Friday) we had a most complete victory.  Mr. Pultney moved for
all papers and letters, etc. between the King and the Queen of
Hungary and their ministers.  Sir R. agreed to give them all the
papers relative to those transactions, only desiring to except
the letters written by the two sovereigns themselves.  They
divided, and we carried it, 237 against 227.  They moved to have
those relations to France, Prussia, and Holland.  Sir R. begged
they would defer asking for those of Prussia till the end of
January, at which time a negotiation would be at an end with that
King, which now he might break off, if he knew it was to be made
public.  Mr. Pultney
persisted; but his obstinacy, which might be so prejudicial to
the public, revolted even his own partisans, and seven of them
spoke against him.  We carried that question by
twenty-four; and another by twenty-one, against sitting on the
next day (Saturday).  Monday and Tuesday we went on the
Westminster election.  Murray (365) spoke divinely; he Was their
counsel.  Lloyd (366) answered him extremely well: but on summing
up the evidence on both sides, and in his reply, Murray was in
short, beyond what was ever heard at the
bar.That day (Tuesday) we went on the merits of the cause, and at
ten at night divided, and lost it.  They had 220, we 216; so that
the election was declared void.  You see four is a fortunate
number to them.  We had forty-one more members in town, who would
not, or could not come down.  The time. is a touchstone for
wavering consciences.  All the arts, money, promises, threats,,
all the arts of the. former year 41, are applied; and
self-interest, in the shape of Scotch
members-nay, and of English ones, operates to the aid of their
party, and to the defeat of ours.  Lord Doneraile,(367) a
young Irishman, brought in by the court, was petitioned
against, though his competitor had but one vote.  This young man
spoke as well as ever any one spoke in his own defence insisted
on the petition being heard, and concluded with
declaring, that, "his cause was his Defence, and Impartiality
must be his support." Do you know that, after this, he went and
engaged if they would withdraw the petition, to vote with them in
the Westminster affair!  His friends reproached him so strongly
with his meanness, that he was shocked, and went to Mr. Pultney
to get off; Mr. P. told him he had given him his honour, and he
would not release him, though Lord Doneraile declared it was
against his conscience: but he voted with
them, and lost us the next question which they put (for
censuring the High Bailiff) by his single vote; for in that the
numbers were 217 against 215: the alteration of his vote would
have made it even; and then the Speaker, I suppose,
would have chosen the merciful side, and decided for us.
After this, Mr. Pultney, with an affected humanity, agreed to
commit the High Bailiff only to the serjeant-at-arms.  Then, by a
majority of six, they voted that the soldiers, who had been sent
for after the poll was closed, to save Lord Sundon's (368) life,
had come in a military and illegal manner, and influenced the
election.  In short, they determined, as Mr. Murray had dictated
to them, that no civil magistrate, on any pretence whatsoever,
though he may not be able to suppress even a riot by the
assistance of the militia and constables, may call in the aid of
the army.  Is not this doing the work of the Jacobites?  have
they any other view than to render the riot act useless? and then
they may rise for the Pretender whenever they please.  Then they
moved to punish Justice
Blackerby for calling in the soldiers; and when it was desired
that he might be heard in his own defence, they said he had
already confessed his crime.  Do but think on it! without
being accused, without knowing, or being told it was a crime, a
man gives evidence in another cause, not his own, and then they
call it his-own accusation of himself, and would condemn him for
it. You see what justice we may expect if they
actually get the majority.  But this was too strong a pill for
one of their own leaders to swallow: Sir John Barnard(369 did
propose and persuade them to give him a day to be heard.  In
short we sat till half an hour after four in the morning; the
longest day that ever was known.  I say nothing of myself, for I
could but just speak when I came away; but Sir Robert was as well
as ever, and spoke with as much spirit as ever, at four o'clock.
This way they will not kill him; I Will not answer for any other.
As he came out, Whitehead,(370) the author of Manners, and agent
with one Carey, a surgeon, for the
Opposition, said "D-n him, how well he looks!"  Immediately after
their success, Lord Gage (371) went forth, and begged there might
be no mobbing; but last night we had bonfires all over the town,
and I suppose shall have notable mobbing at the new election;
though I do not believe there will be any
opposition to their Mr. Edwin and Lord Perceval.(372)  Thank God!
we are now adjourned for three weeks.  I shall go to
Swallowfield (373) for a few days: so for one week you will miss
hearing from me.  We have escaped the Prince'S (374)
affair hitherto, but we shall have it after the holidays.  All
depends upon the practices of both sides in securing or
getting new votes during the recess.  Sir Robert is very
sanguine: I hope, for his sake and for his honour, and for the
nation's peace, that he will get the better: but the moment he
has the majority secure, I shall be very earnest with him to
resign.  He has a constitution to last some years, and enjoy some
repose; and for my own part (and both my brothers agree with me
in it), we wish most heartily to see an end of his ministry.  If
I can judge of them by myself, those who want to be in our
situation, do not wish to see it brought about more than we do.
It is fatiguing to bear so much envy and ill-will
undeservedly.-Otium Divos rogo; but adieu, politics, for three
weeks!

The Duchess of Buckingham, (375) who is more mad with pride than
any merchant's wife in Bedlam, came the other night to the opera
en princesse, literally in robes, red velvet and ermine. I must
tell you a story of her: last week she sent for Cori,(376) to pay
him for her opera-ticket; he was not at
home, but went in an hour afterwards.  She said, "Did he treat
her like a tradeswoman? She would teach him to respect women of
her birth; said he was in league with Mr. Sheffield (377) to
abuse her, and bade him come the next morning at nine."  He came,
and she made him wait till eight at night, only sending him an
omlet and a bottle of wine, "as it was Friday, and he a Catholic,
she supposed he did not eat meat." At last she
received him in all the form of a princess giving audience to an
ambassador. "Now," she said, "she had punished him."

In this age we have some who pretend to impartiality: you will
scarce guess how Lord Brook (378) shows his: he gives one vote on
one side, one on the other, and the third time does not vote at
all, and so on, regularly.

My sister is ,up to the elbows in joy and flowers that she has
received from you this morning and begs I will thank you for her.

You know, or have heard of, Mrs. Nugent, Newsham's mother; she
went the other morning to Lord Chesterfield to beg "he would
encourage Mr. Nugent (379) to speak in the house; for that really
he was so bashful, she was afraid his abilities would be lost on
the world." I don't know who has encouraged him; but so it is,
that this modest Irish converted Catholic does talk a prodigious
deal of nonsense in behalf of English
liberty.

Lord Gage (380) is another; no man would trust him in a wager,
unless he stakes, and yet he is trusted by a whole borough with
their privileges and liberties! He told Mr. Winnington the other
day, that he would bring his son into parliament, that he would
not influence him, but leave him entirely to himself.  "D-n it,"
said Winnington, "so you have all his
lifetime."

Your brother says you accuse him of not writing to you, and that
his reasons are, he has not time, and next, that I tell you all
that can be said.  So I do, I think: tell me when I begin to tire
you, or if I am too circumstantial; but I don't believe you will
think so, for I remember how we used to want such a correspondent
when I was with you.

I have spoke about the young man who is well content to live with
you as a servant out of livery.  I am to settle the
affair finally with his father on Monday, and then he shall set
out as soon as possible.  I will send the things for
Prince Craon etc. by him.  I will write to Madame Grifoni the
moment I hear she is returned from the country.

The Princess Hesse (381) is brought to bed of a son.  We are
going into mourning for the Queen of Sweden;(382) she had
always been apprehensive of the small-pox, which has been very
fatal in her family.

You have heard, I suppose, of the new revolution (383) in
Muscovy.  The letters from Holland to-day say, that they have put
to death the young Czar and his mother, and his father too:
which, if true,(384) is going very far, for he was of a sovereign
house in another country, no subject of Russia, and after the
death of his wife and son, could have no pretence or interest to
raise more commotions there.

We have got a new opera, not so good as the former; and we have
got the famous Bettina to dance, but she is a most
indifferent performer.  The house is excessively full every
Saturday, never on Tuesday: here, you know, we make every
thing a fashion.

I am happy that my fears for Tuscany vanish every letter.  There!
there is a letter of twelve sides! I am forced to page it, it is
SO long, and I have not time to read it over and look for the
mistakes.
Yours, ever.

(363) Antonio Cocchi, a learned physician and author, at
Florence; a particular friend of Mr. Mann.  [The following
favourable character of Dr. Cocchi is contained in a letter from
the Earl of Cork to Mr. Duncombe, dated Florence,
November 29, 1754. "Mr Mann's fortunate in the friendship, skill,
and care of his physician, Dr. Cocchi.  He is a man of most
extensive learning; understands, reads, and speaks all the
European languages; studious, polite, modest, humane, and
instructive.  He is always to be admired and beloved by all who
know him.  Could I live with these two gentlemen only, and
converse with few or none others, I should scarce desire to
return to England for many years."]

(364) Samuel Sandys, a republican, raised on the fall of Sir
R.'W. to be chancellor of the exchequer, then degraded to a peer
and cofferer, and soon afterwards laid aside. [In 1743, he was
raised to the peerage by the title of Lord Sandys,
Baron of Omberley in the county of Worcester, and died in
1770.  Dr. Nash, in his history of that county, states him to
have been "a very useful, diligent senator-a warm, steady
friend-a good neighbor, and a most hospitable country
gentleman and provincial magistrate."]

(365) William Murray, brother of Lord- Stormont, and of Lord
Dunbar, the Pretender's first minister.  He is known by his
eloquence and the friendship of Mr. Pope.  He was soon
afterwards promoted to be solicitor-general. (Afterwards the
celebrated chief-justice of the King's Bench, and Earl of
Man's'field.-D.)

(366) Sir Richard Lloyd, advanced in 1754 to be
solicitor-general, in the room of Mr. Murray, appointed
attorney-general. [And in 1759, appointed one of the Barons of
the exchequer.]

(367) Arthur St. Leger, Lord Doneraile, died in 1750, being lord
of the bedchamber to the Prince of Wales.

(368) Lord Sundon and Sir Charles Wager had been the Court
candidates for Westminster at the late election against
Admiral Vernon and Charles Edwin, Esq.-D.

(369) A great London merchant, and one of the members for the
City.  His reputation for integrity and ability gave him much
weight in the House of Commons.-D. (Lord Chatham, when mr. Pitt,
frequently calls him the Great Commoner.  In 1749, he became
father of the City; when, much against his will, the merchants
erected a statue of him in the Royal Exchange.  He died in 1764.]

(370) Paul Whitehead, an infamous but not despicable poet. [See
ante, p. 190, Letter 42.]

(371) Thomas Lord Viscount Gage had been a Roman Catholic, and
was master of the household to the Prince. [Lord Gage, in
1721, was elected for the borough of Tewksbury; which he
represented till within a few months of his death, in 1754.  He
was a zealous politician, and distinguished himself, in 1732, by
detecting the fraudulent sale of the Derwentwater estates.]

(372) John Perceval, second Earl of Egmont, in Ireland,
created, in 176@, Lord Lovel and Rolland in the peerage of Great
Britain.  He became, in 1747, a lord of the bedchamber to
Frederick Prince of Wales, and in the early part of the reign of
George III. held successively the offices of
postmaster-general and first lord of the admiralty.  He was a man
of some ability and a frequent and fluent speaker, and was the
author of a celebrated party pamphlet of' the day,
entitled "Faction Detected."  His excessive love of ancestry led
him, in Conjunction with his father, and assisted by
Anderson, the genealogist, to print two thick octavo volumes
respecting his family, entitled "History of the House of
Ivery;" a most remarkable monument of human vanity.-D.
[Boswell was not of this opinion.  "Some have affected to
laugh," he says, "at the History of the House of Ivery: it would
be well if many others would transmit their pedigrees to
posterity, with the same accuracy and generous zeal with which
the noble lord who compiled that work has honoured and
perpetuated his ancestry.  Family histories, like the imagines
majorum of the ancients, excite to virtue." See "Life of
Johnson," vol viii. p. 188.]

(373) Swallowfield, in Berkshire, the seat of John Dodd, Esq.

(374) A scheme for obtaining a larger allowance for the Prince of
Wales.

(375) Catherine, Duchess Dowager of Buckingham, natural
daughter of King James II.  (Supposed to be really the
daughter of Colonel Graham, a man of Gallantry of the time, and a
lover of her mother, Lady Dorchester.-D.)  [This
remarkable woman was extravagantly proud of her descent from
James the Second, and affected to be the head of the Jacobite
party in England.  She maintained a kind of royal state, and
affected great devotion to the memory of her father and
grandfather.  On the death of her son, the second Duke of
Buckingham of the Sheffield family (whose funeral was
celebrated in a most extraordinary manner), she applied to the
old Duchess of Marlborough, who was as high spirited as
herself, for the loan of the richly-ornamented hearse which had
conveyed the great duke to his grave. "Tell her," said Sarah, "it
carried the Duke of Marlborough, and shall never carry any one
else."  "My upholsterer," rejoined Catherine of Buckingham in a
fury, "tells me I can have a finer for twenty pounds."-"  This
last stroke," says the editor of the Suffolk Correspondence, "
was aimed at the parsimony of their Graces of Marlborough, which
was supposed to have been visible even in the funeral; but the
sarcasm was as unjust as the original request of borrowing the
hearse was mean and unfeeling."-E.]

(376) Angelo Maria Cori, prompter to the Opera.

(377) Mr. Sheffield, natural son of the late Duke of
Buckingham, with whom she was at law.


(378) Francis, Baron, and afterwards created Earl Brooke.

(379) Robert Nugent, a poet, a patriot, an author, a lord of the
treasury, (and finally an Irish peer by the titles of Lord Clare
and Earl Nugent.  He seems to have passed his long life in
seeking lucrative places and courting rich widows, in both of
which pursuits be was eminently successful.-D.) [He married the
sister and heiress of Secretary Craggs, and his only
daughter married the first Marquis of Buckingham.  A volume of
his ,Odes and Epistles" were published anonymously in 1733.  He
died in 1788.)

(380) Lord Gage was one of those persons to whom the
privileges of parliament were of extreme consequence, as their
own liberties were inseparable from them.

(381) Mary, fourth daughter of King George II.

(382) Ulrica, Queen of Sweden, sister of Charles XII.

(383) This relates to the revolution by which the young Czar John
was deposed, and the Princess Elizabeth raised to the throne.

(384) This was not true.  The Princess Anne of Mecklenburgh died
in prison at Riga, a few years afterwards.  Her son, the young
Czar, and her husband, Prince Antony of Brunswick
Wolfenbuttle, were confined for many years.



206 Letter 49
To Sir Horace Mann.
London, Dec. 29, 1741.

I write to YOU two days before the post goes out, because
to-morrow I am to go out of town; but I would answer your
letter by way of Holland, to tell you how much you have
obliged both Sir Robert and me about the Dominichini;(385) and to
beg you to thank Mr. Chute and Mr. Whithed-but I cannot leave it
to you.

"My dear Mr. Chute, was ever any thing so kind!  I crossed the
Giogo (386) with Mr. Coke,(387) but it was in August, and I
thought it then the greatest compliment that ever was paid to
mortal; and I went with him too!  but you to go only for a
picture, and in the month of December: What can I say to you? You
do more to oblige your friend, than I can find terms to thank you
for.  If I was to tell-it here, it would be believed as little as
the rape of poor Tory (388) by a wolf.  I can only say that I
know the Giogo, its snows and its inns, and consequently know the
extent of the obligation that I have to you and Mr. Whithed."

Now I return to you, my dear child: I am really so much
obliged to you and to them, that I know not what to say.  I read
Pennee's letter to Sir.  R., who was much pleased with his
discretion; he will be quite a favourite of mine.  And now we are
longing for the picture; you know, of old, my
impatience.

Your young secretary-servant is looking out for a ship, and will
set out in the first that goes: I envy him.

The Court has been trying but can get nobody to stand for
Westminster.  You know Mr. Doddington has lost himself
extremely by his new turn, after so often changing sides: he is
grown very fat and lethargic; my brother Ned says, "he is grown
of less consequence, but more weight."(389)

One hears of nothing but follies said by the Opposition, who grow
mad on having the least prospect.  Lady Carteret,(390) who, you
know, did not want any new fuel to her absurdity, says, "they
talk every day of making her lord first minister, but he is not
so easily persuaded as they think for."  Good night.
Yours, ever.

(385) A celebrated picture of a Madonna and Child by
Dominichino, in the palace Zembeccari, at Bologna, now in the
collection of the Earl of Orford, at Houghton, in Norfolk.
(Since sent to Russia with the rest of the collection.-D.)

(386) The Giogo is the highest part of the Apennine between
Florence and Bologna.

(387) Son of Lord Lovel, since Earl of Leicester. [In 1744, Lord
Lovel was created Viscount Coke of Holkham and Earl of Leicester.
His only son Edward died before him, in 1753,
without issue; having married Lady Mary, one of the co-heirs of
John Duke of Argyle and Greenwich.]

(388) A black spaniel of Mr. Walpole's was seized by a wolf on
the Alps, as it was running at the head of the chaise-horses, at
noonday. [See ante, p. 139 letter 14.]

(389) George Bubb Dodington had lately resigned his post of one
of the lords of the treasury, and gone again into
opposition.  [In Walpole's copy of the celebrated Diary of this
versatile politician, he had written a "Brief account of George
Bubb Doddington, Lord Melcombe," which the noble editor of the
"Memoires" has inserted.  It describes him, "as his Diary shows,
vain, fickle, ambitious, and corrupt,' and very lethargic; but
gives him credit for great wit and readiness."  Cumberland, in
his Memoirs, thus paints him:-"Dodington,
lolling in his chair, in perfect apathy and self-command,
dozing, and even snoring, at intervals, in his lethargic way,
broke out every now and then into gleams and flashes of wit and
humour."  In 1761, he was created Lord Melcombe, and died in the
following year.]


(390) Frances, daughter of Sir Robert Worseley, and first wife of
John Lord Carteret, afterwards Earl of Granville.



207 Letter 50
To Sir Horace Mann.
London, Jan. 7, 1741-2, O. S.

I must answer for your brother a paragraph that he showed me in
one of your letters: "Mr. W.'s letters are full of wit; don't
they adore him in England?"  Not at all-and I don't
wonder at them: for if I have any wit in my letters, which I do
not at all take for granted, it is ten to one that I have none
out of my letters.  A thousand people can write, that cannot
talk; and besides, you know, (or I conclude so, from the little
one hears stirring,) that numbers of the English have wit, who
don't care to produce it.  Then, as to adoring; YOU now See Only
my letters, and you may be sure I take care not to write you word
of any of my bad qualities, which other people must see in the
gross; and that may be a great
hindrance to their adoration.  Oh! there are a thousand other
reasons I could give you, why I am not the least in fashion.  I
came over in an ill season: it is a million to one that
nobody thinks a declining old minister's son has wit.  At any
time, men in opposition have always most; but now, it would be
absurd for a courtier to have even common sense.  There is not a
Mr. Stuart, or a Mr. Stewart, whose names begin but with the
first letters of Stanhope,(391) that has not a better chance than
I, for being liked.  I can assure you, even those of the same
party would be fools, not to pretend to think me one.  Sir Robert
has showed no partiality for me;(392) and do you think they would
commend where he does not?  even supposing they had no envy,
which by the way, I am far from saying they have not.  Then. my
dear child, I am the coolest man of my party, and if I am ever
warm, it is by contagion; and where violence passes for parts,
what will indifference be called? But how could you think of such
a question '! I don't want money, consequently Do old women pay
me for my wit; I have a very flimsy constitution, consequently
the young women won't taste my wit, and it is a long while before
wit makes its own way in the world; especially, as I never prove
it, by assuring people that I have it by me.  Indeed, if I were
disposed to brag, I could quote two or three half-pay officers,
and an old aunt or two, who laugh prodigiously at every thing I
say; but till they are allowed judges, I will not brag of such
authorities.

If you have a mind to know who is adored and has wit, there is
old Churchill has as much God-d-n-ye wit as ever-except that he
has lost two teeth.  There are half a dozen Scotchmen who vote
against the Court, and are cried up by the Opposition for wit, to
keep them steady.  They are forced to cry up their parts, for it
would be too barefaced to commend their honesty.  Then Mr. Nugent
has had a great deal of wit till within this week; but he is so
busy and so witty, that even his own party grow tired of him.
His plump wife, who talks of nothing else, says he entertained
her all the way on the road with repeating his speeches.

I did not go into the country, last week, as I intended, the
weather was so bad; but I shall go on Sunday for three or four
days, and perhaps shall not be able to write to you that week.
You are in an agitation, I suppose, about politics: both sides
are trafficking deeply for votes during the holidays.  It is
allowed, I think, that we shall have a majority of twenty-six:
Sir R. says more; but now, upon a pinch, he brags like any
bridegroom.

The Westminster election passed without any disturbance, in
favour of Lord Perceive-all (394) and Mr. Perceive-nothing, as my
uncle calls them.  Lord Chesterfield was vaunting to Lord Lovel,
that they should have carried it, if they had set up two
broomsticks. "So I see," replied Lovel.  But it seems we have not
done with it yet: if we get the majority, this will be declared a
void election too, for my Lord Chancellor (395) has found out,
that the person who made the return, had no right to make it: it
was the High Bailiff's clerk, the High Bailiff himself being in
custody of the sergeant-at-arms.  it makes a great noise, and
they talk of making subscriptions for a Petition.

Lord Stafford (396) is come over.  He told me some good
stories of the Primate.(397)

Last night I had a good deal of company to hear Monticelli and
Amorevoli, particularly the three beauty-Fitzroys, Lady
Euston, Lady Conway, and Lady Caroline.(398)  Sir R. liked the
singers extremely: he had not heard them before, I forgot to tell
you all our beauties there was Miss Hervey,(399) my
lord's daughter, a fine, black girl, but as masculine as her
father should be;(400) and jenny Conway, handsomer Still,(401)
though changed with illness, than even the Fitzroys.  I made the
music for my Lord Hervey, who is too ill to go to operas: yet,
with a coffin-face, is as full of his little dirty
politics as ever.  He will not be well enough to go to the House
till the majority is certain somewhere, but lives shut up with my
Lord Chesterfield and Mr. Pultney-a triumvirate, who hate one
another more than any body they could proscribe, had they the
power.  I dropped in at my Lord Hervey's, the other night,
knowing my lady had company: it was soon after our defeats. My
lord, who has always professed particularly to me, turned his
back on me, and retired for an hour into a
whisper with young Hammond,(402) at the end of the room.  Not
being at all amazed at one whose heart I knew so well, I
stayed on, to see more of this behaviour; indeed, to rise
myself to it.  At last he came up to me, and begged this
music. which I gave him, and would often again, to see how many
times I shall be ill and well with him within this month.
Yesterday came news that his brother, Captain William Hervey, has
taken a Caracca ship, worth full two hundred thousand
pounds.  He was afterwards separated from it by a storm, for two
or three days, and was afraid of losing it, having but
five-and-twenty men to thirty-six Spaniards; but he has
brought it home safe.  I forgot to tell you, that upon losing the
first question, Lord Hervey kept away for a week; on our carrying
the next great one, he wrote to Sir Robert, how much he desired
to see him, "not upon any business, but Lord Hervey longs to see
Sir Robert Walpole."

Lady Sundon(402)  is dead, and Lady M- disappointed: she, who is
full as politic as my Lord Hervey, had made herself an
absolute servant to Lady Sundon, but I don't hear that she has
left her even her old clothes.  Lord Sundon is in great grief: I
am surprised, for she has had fits of madness ever since her
ambition met such a check by the death of the Queen.(404)  She
had great power with her, though the Queen pretended to
despise her; but had unluckily told her, or fallen into her power
by some secret.(405)  I was saying to Lady Pomfret, to be sure
she is dead very rich!" She replied, with some warmth, She never
took money."  When I came home, I mentioned this to Sir R.  "No,"
said he, "but she took jewels; Lord Pomfret's place of master of
the horse to the Queen was bought of her for a pair of diamond
earrings, of fourteen hundred pounds value."  One day that she
wore them at a visit at old
Marlboro's, as soon as she was gone, the Duchess said to Lady
Mary Wortley,(406) "How can that woman have the impudence to go
about in that bribe?"-,, Madam," said Lady Mary, "how would you
have people know where wine is to be sold, unless there is a sign
hung out!" Sir R. told me, that in the enthusiasm of her vanity,
Lady Sundon had proposed to him to unite with her, and govern the
kingdom together: he bowed, begged her
patronage, but said he thought nobody fit to govern the
kingdom, but the King and Queen.-Another day.

Friday morning.  I was forced to leave off last night, as I found
it would be impossible to send away this letter finished in any
time.  It will be enormously long, but I have prepared you for
it.  When I consider the beginning of my letter, it looks as if I
were entirely of your opinion about the
agreeableness of them.  I believe you will never commend them
again, when you see how they increase upon your hands.  I have
seen letters of two or three sheets, written from merchants at
Bengal and Canton to their wives: but then they contain the
history of a twelvemonth: I grow voluminous from week to week.  I
can plead in excuse nothing but the true reason; you desired it;
and I remember how I used to wish for such letters, when I was in
Italy.  My Lady Pomfret carries this humanity still farther, and
because people were civil to her in Italy, she makes it a rule to
visit all strangers in general.  She has been to visit a Spanish
Count (407) and his wife, though she cannot open her lips in
their language.  They fled from Spain, he and his brother having
offended the Queen, (408) by their attachments to the Prince of
Asturias; his brother ventured back to bring off this woman, who
was engaged to him.  Lord Harrington (409) has procured them a
pension of six hundred a-year.  They live chiefly with Lord
Carteret and his
daughter,(410) who speak Spanish.  But to proceed from where I
left off last night, like the Princess Dinarzade in the
Arabian Nights, for you will want to know what happened one day.
Sir Robert was at dinner with Lady Sundon, who hated the Bishop
of London, as much as she loved the Church.  "Well," said she to
Sir R., "how does your pope do!"-"Madam," replied he, "he is my
pope, and shall be my Pope; every body has some pope or other;
don't you know that you are one!  They call you Pope Joan."  She
flew into a passion, and desired he would not fix any names on
her; that they were not so easily got rid of.

We had a little ball the other night at Mrs. Boothby's, and by
 dancing, did not perceive an earthquake, which frightened all
the undancing part of the town.

We had a civility from his Royal Highness,(411) who sent for
Monticelli the night he was engaged here, but, on hearing it,
said he would send for him some other night.  If I did not live
so near St. James's, I would find out some politics in
this-should not one?

Sir William Stanhope (412) has had a hint from the same
Highness, that his company is not quite agreeable: whenever he
met any body at Carlton House whom he did not know, he said,
"Your humble servant, Mr. or Mrs. Hamilton."

I have this morning sent aboard the St. Quintin a box for you,
with your secretary-not in it.

Old Weston of Exeter is dead.  Dr. Clarke, the Dean, Dr.
Willes, the decipherer, and Dr. Gilbert of Llandaff, are
candidates to succeed him.(413)  Sir R. is for Willes, who, he
says, knows so many secrets, that he might insist upon being
archbishop.

My dear Mr. Chute! how concerned I am that he took all that
trouble to no purpose.  I will not write to him this post, for as
you show him my letters, this here will sufficiently employ any
one's patience-but I have done.  I long to hear that the
Dominichini is safe.  Good night.
Yours, ever.

(391) The name of Lord Chesterfield.

(392) On the subject of Sir Robert's alleged want of
partiality for his son, the following passage occurs in the
anecdotes prefixed to Lord Wharncliffe's edition of the works of
Lady Mary Wortley Montagu:-"Those ironical lines, where Pope says
that Sir Robert Had never made a friend in private life, And was,
besides, a tyrant to his wife,' are well
understood, as conveying a sly allusion to his good-humoured
unconcern about some things which more strait-laced husbands do
not take so coolly.  In a word, Horace Walpole was
generally supposed to be the son of Carr Lord Hervey, and Sir
Robert not to be ignorant of it.  One striking circumstance was
visible to the naked eye; no beings in human shape could resemble
each other less than the two passing for father and son; and
while their reverse of personal likeness provoked a malicious
whisper, Sir Robert's marked neglect of Horace in his infancy
tended to confirm it.  Sir Robert took scarcely any notice of him
till his proficiency in Eton school, when a lad of some standing,
drew his attention, and proved that, whether he had or had not a
right to the name he went by, he was likely to do it Honour."
Vol. i. 1). 33.-E.

(393) General Charles Churchill. (Whose character has been so
inimitably sketched, at about the same period when this letter
was written, by Sir Charles Hanbury Williams, in his poem of',
Isabella, or the Morning:"-

"The General, one of those brave old commanders,
Who served through all our glorious wars in Flanders.
Frank and good-natur'd, of an honest heart,
Loving to act the steady friendly part;
None led through youth a gayer life than he,
Cheerful in converse, smart in repartee;
But with old age, its Vices Come along,
And in narration he's extremely long;
Exact in circumstance, and nice in dates,
He each minute particular relates.
If you name one of marlbro's ten campaigns,
         He gives you its whole history for your pains,
And Blenheim's field becomes by his reciting,
As long in telling as it was in fighting.
His old desire to please is still express'd,
His hat's well cock'd, his periwig's well dress'd.
He rolls his stockings still, white gloves he wears,
And in the boxes with the beaux appears.
His eyes through wrinkled corners cast their rays,
Still he looks cheerful, still soft things he says,
And still remembering that he once was young,
He strains his crippled knees, and struts along."-D.)

(394) Vide an account of the erection of Lord Perceval and one
Edwin, in that Lord's History of the House of Ivery.

(395) Philip Yorke, Lord, and afterwards Earl of Hardwicke, for
twenty years Lord Chancellor of England.-D.

(396) William mathias Howard, Earl of Stafford.

(397) The Primate of Lorrain, eldest son of Prince Craon, was
famous for his wit and vices of all kinds.

(398) Lady Dorothy Boyle, eldest daughter of Lord Burlington;
Isabella, wife of Francis Lord Conway, and Caroline,
afterwards married to Lord Petersham, were the daughter-in-law
and daughters of Charles Fitzroy, Duke of grafton, lord
chamberlain.

(399) Lepel, eldest daughter of John Lord Hervey, afterwards
married to Mr. Phipps.  (Constantine Phipps, in 1767 created Lord
Mulgrave.]

(400) The effeminacy of Lord Hervey formed a continual subject
for the satire of his opponents.  Pope's bitter lines on him- are
well remembered.  The old Duchess of Marlborough, too, in her
"Opinions," describes him as having "certainly parts and wit; but
he is the most wretched profligate man that ever was born,
besides ridiculous; a painted face, and not a tooth in his head."
on which the editor of that curious little book, Lord Hailes,
remarks, "Lord Hervey, having felt some attacks of the epilepsy,
entered upon and persisted in a very strict regimen, and thus
stopped the progress and prevented the
effects of that dreadful disease.  His daily food was a small
quantity of asses' milk and a flour biscuit.  Once a week he
indulged himself with eating an apple; he used emetics daily.
Mr. Pope and he were once friends; but they quarrelled, and
persecuted each other with virulent satire.  Pope, knowing the
abstemious regimen which Lord Hervey observed, was so
ungenerous as to call him "mere cheese-curd of asses' milk!" Lord
Hervey used paint to soften his ghastly appearance.  Mr. Pope
must have known this also; and therefore it was
unpardonable in him to introduce it into his "celebrated
portrait." It ought to be remembered, that Lord Hervey is very
differently described by Dr. Middleton; who, in his dedication to
him of "The History of the Life of Tully," praises him for his
strong good sense, patriotism, temperance, and
information.-E.

(401) Jane, only daughter of Francis, the first Lord Conway, by
his second wife, Mrs. Bodens.  (She died unmarried, May 5,
1749.-D.)

(402) Author of some Love Elegies, and a favourite of Lord
Chesterfield.  He died this year. [Hammond was equerry to the
Prince of Wales, and member for Truro.  He died in June, 1742, at
Stowe, the seat of Lord Cobham, in his thirty.second year.  Miss
Dashwood long survived him, and died unmarried in 1779.  "  The
character," says Johnson, "which her lover gave her was, indeed,
not likely to attract courtship."]

(402) Wife of William Clayton, Lord Sundon, woman of the
bedchamber and mistress of the robes to Queen Caroline. [She had
been the friend and correspondent of Sarah Duchess of'
Marlborough; who, on the accession of George I , through Baron
Bothmar's influence, procured for her friend the place of lady of
the bedchamber to the Princess with whom she grew as great a
favourite as her colleague, Mrs. Howard, with the Prince; and
eventually, on the Princess becoming Queen, exercised an
influence over her, of which even sir Robert Walpole was
jealous.]

(404) Queen Caroline, died November 1737.-D.

(405) This is now known to have been a rupture, with which the
Queen was afflicted, and which she had the weakness to wish, and
the courage to be able, to conceal.-E.

(406) The celebrated Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, oldest
daughter of Evelyn, first Duke of Kingston, and wife of
Wortley Montagu, Esq.-D.

(407) Marquis de Sabernego: he returned to Spain after the death
of Philip V.

(408) The Princess of Parma, second wife of Philip V. King of
Spain, and consequently  stepmother to the Prince of Asturias,
son of that King, by his first wife, a princess of Savoy.-D.

(409) William Stanhope, created Lord Harrington in 1729, and Earl
of the same in 1741.  He held various high offices, and was, at
the time this was written, secretary of
state.-D.

(410) Frances, youngest daughter of Lord Carteret, afterwards
married to the Marquis of Tweedale. (in 1748.  The marquis was an
extraordinary lord of session, and the last person who held a
similar appointment.]


(411) Frederick Prince of Wales.-D.

(412) Brother to Lord Chesterfield.  This bon mot was
occasioned by the numbers of Hamiltons which Lady Archibald
Hamilton, the Prince's mistress, had placed at that court.

(413) Nicholas Clagget, Bishop of St. David's, succeeded, on
Weston's death, to the see of Exeter.-Dr. Clagget was,
however, succeeded in the see of St. David's by Dr. Edward
Willes, Dean of Lincoln and decipherer to the King; and, in the
following year, translated to the bishopric of Bath and Wells.
The art of deciphering, for which Dr. Willes was so celebrated,
has been the subject of many learned and curious works by
Trithemius, Baptista Porta, the Duke Augustus of
Brunswick, and other more recent writers.  The Gentleman's
Magazine for 1742, contains a very ingenious system of
deciphering: but the old modes of secret writing having been, for
the most part, superseded by the modern system of
cryptography, in which, according to a simple rule which may be
communicated verbally, and easily retained in the memory, the
signs for the letters can be changed continually; it is the
chiffre quarr`e or chiffre ind`echiffrable, used, if not
universally, yet by most courts.  None of the old systems of
deciphering are any longer available.]



212 Letter 51
To Sir Horace Mann.
Friday, Jan. 22, 1742.

Don't wonder that I missed writing to you yesterday, my
constant day: you will pity me when you hear that I was shut up
in the House of Commons till one in the morning.  I came away
more dead than alive, and was forced to leave Sir R. at supper
with my brothers: he was all alive and in spirits.(414) He says
he is younger than me, and indeed I think so, in spite of his
forty years more.  My head aches to-night, but we rose early; and
if I don't write to-night when shall I find a
moment to spare?  Now you want to know what we did last night;
stay, I will tell you presently in its place: it was well, and of
infinite consequence-so far I tell you now.  Our recess finished
last Monday, and never at school did I enjoy holidays so
much-but, les voil`a finis jusqu'au printefps! Tuesday (for you
see I write you an absolute journal) we sat on a Scotch election,
a double return; their man was Hume Campbell,(415) Lord
Marchmont's brother, lately made solicitor to the Prince, for
being as troublesome, as violent, and almost as able as his
brother.  They made a great point of it, and gained so many of
our votes, that at ten at night we were forced to give it up
without dividing.  Sandys, who loves persecution, even unto the
death, moved to punish the sheriff; and as we dared not divide,
they ordered him into custody, where by this time, I suppose,
Sandys has eaten him.

On Wednesday, Sir Robert Godschall, the Lord Mayor, presented the
Merchant's petition, signed by three hundred of them, and drawn
up by Leonidas Glover.(416)  This is to be heard next Wednesday.
This gold-chain came into parliament, cried up for his parts, but
proves so dull, one would think he chewed
opium.  Earle says, "I have heard an oyster speak as well
twenty times."

Well, now I come to yesterday: we met, not expecting much
business.  Five of our members were gone to the York election,
and the three Lord Beauclercs (417) to their mother's funeral at
Windsor; for that old beauty St. Albans (418) is dead at last.
On this they depended for getting the majority, and towards three
o'clock, when we thought of breaking up, poured in their most
violent questions: one was a motion for leave to bring in the
Place Bill to limit the number of placemen in the House.  This
was not opposed, because, out of decency, it is generally
suffered to pass the Commons, and is thrown out by the Lords;
only Colonel Cholmondeley (419) desired to know if they designed
to limit the number of those that have promises of places, as
well as of those that have places now.  I must tell you that we
are a very conclave; they buy votes with
reversions of places on the change of the ministry.  Lord Gage
was giving an account in Tom's coffeehouse of the intended
alterations: that Mr. Pultney is to be chancellor of the
exchequer, and Chesterfield and Carteret secretaries of state.
Somebody asked who was to be paymaster?  Numps Edwin,(420) who
stood by, replied, "We have not thought so low as that yet."
Lord Gage harangues every day at Tom's, and has read there a very
false account of the King'S message to the Prince.(421)  The
Court, to show their contempt of Gage, have given their copy to
be read by Swinny.(422)  This is the authentic copy, which they
have made the bishop write from the message which he carried, and
as he and Lord Cholmondeley agree it was
given.

On this Thursday, of which I was telling you, at three
o'clock, Mr. Pultney rose up, and moved for a secret committee of
twenty-one.  This inquisition, this council of ten, was to sit
and examine whatever persons and papers they should
please, and to meet when and where they pleased.  He protested
much on its not being intended against any person, but merely to
give the King advice, and on this foot they fought it till ten at
night, when Lord Perceval blundered out what they had been
cloaking with so @much art, and declared that he should vote for
it as a committee of accusation.  Sir Robert
immediately rose, and protested that he should not have
spoken, but for what he had heard last; but that now, he must
take it to himself.  He portrayed the malice of the
Opposition, who, for twenty years, had not been able to touch
him, and were now reduced to this infamous shift.  He defied them
to accuse him, and only desired that if they should,
might be in an open and fair manner: desired no favour, but to be
acquainted with his accusation.  He spoke of Mr.
Doddington, who had called his administration infamous, as of a
person of great self-mortification, who, for sixteen years, had
condescended to bear part of the odium.  For Mr. Pultney, who had
just spoken a second time, Sir R. said, he had begun the debate
with great calmness, but give him his due, he had made amends for
it in the end.  In short, never was innocence so triumphant.

There were several glorious speeches on both sides: Mr.
Pultney's two, W. Pitt's (423) and George Grenville's,(424) Sir
Robert's, Sir W. Yonge's, Harry Fox's, (425) Mr. Chute's, and the
Attorney-General's.(426)  My friend Coke, for the
first time, spoke vastly well, and mentioned how great Sir
Robert's character is abroad.  ' Sir Francis Dashwood replied,
that he had found quite the reverse from Mr. Coke, and that
foreigners always spoke with contempt of the Chevalier de
Walpole.  That was going too far, and he was called to order, but
got off well enough, by saying, that he knew it was
contrary to rule to name any member, but that he only
mentioned it as spoken by an impertinent Frenchman.

But of all speeches, none ever was so full of wit as Mr.
Pultney's last.  He said, "I have heard this committee
represented as a most dreadful spectre; it has been likened to
all terrible things; it has been likened to the King; to the
inquisition; it will be a committee of safety; it is a
committee of danger; I don't know what it is to be!  One
gentleman, I think, called it a cloud! (this was the Attorney) a
cloud!  I remember Hamlet takes Lord Polonius by the hand and
shows him a cloud, and then asks him if he does not think it is
like a whale." Well, in short, at eleven at night we divided, and
threw                         out this famous committee by 253 to
250, the greatest number that                         ever was in
the house, and the greatest number that ever lost a question.

It was a most shocking sight to see the sick and dead brought in
                      on both sides! Men on crutches, and Sir
William Gordon (427) from his                         bed, with a
blister on his head, and flannel hanging out from under
             his wig.  I could scarce pity him for his
ingratitude.  The day before the Westminster petition, Sir
Charles Wager (428) gave his son a ship, and the next day the
father came down and voted against him.  The son has since been
east away; but they concealed it from the father, that he might
not absent himself.  However, as we have our
good-natured men too on our side, one of his own countrymen went
and told him of it in the House.  The old man, who looked like
Lazarus at his resuscitation, bore it with great
resolution, and said, he knew why he was told of it, but when he
thought his country in danger, he would not go away.  As he is so
near death, that it is indifferent to him whether he died two
thousand years ago or to-morrow, it is unlucky for him not to
have lived when such insensibility would have been a Roman
virtue. (429)

There are no arts, no menaces, which the Opposition do not
practise.  They have threatened one gentleman to have a
reversion cut off from his son, unless he will vote with them.
To Totness there came a letter to the mayor from the Prince, and
signed by two of his lords, to recommend a candidate in
opposition to the solicitor-general.  The mayor sent the
letter to Sir Robert.                       They have turned the
Scotch to the best account.  There is a young Oswald
(430) who had engaged to Sir R. but has voted against us.  Sir R.
sent a friend to reproach him: the moment the gentleman who had
engaged for him came into the room, Oswald said, "You had liked
to have led me into a fine error! did you not tell me that Sir R.
would have the majority?"

When the debate was over, Mr. Pultney owned that he had never
heard so fine a debate on our side; and said to Sir Robert,
"Well, nobody can do what you can!" "Yes," replied Sir R., "Yonge
did better." Mr. P. answered, "It was fine, but not of that
weight with what you said." They all allow it- and now their plan
is to persuade Sir Robert to retire with honour.  All that
evening there was a report about the town, that he and my uncle
were to be sent to the Tower, and people hired windows in the
city to see them pass by-but for this time I believe we shall not
exhibit so historical a parade.

The night of the committee, my brother Walpole
 (431) had got two or three invalids at his house,
designing to carry them into the House by his door, as they were
too ill to go round by Westminster hall: the patriots, who have
rather more contrivances than their predecessors of Grecian and
Roman memory, had taken the precaution of stopping the keyhole
with sand.  How Livy's eloquence would have been hampered, if
there had been back-doors and keyholes to the Temple of Concord!

A few days ago there were lists of the officers at Port Mahon
laid before the House of Lords -. unfortunately, it appeared that
two-thirds of the regiment had been absent.  The Duke of Argyll
said, "Such a list was a libel on the government;" and of all
men, the Duke of Newcastle was the man who rose up and agreed
with him: remember what I have told you once before of his union
with Carteret.  We have
                  carried the York election by a majority of 956.

The other night the Bishop of Canterbury(432) was with Sir
'Robert, and on going away, said, "Sir, I have been lately
reading Thaunus; he mentions a minister, who having long been
persecuted by his enemies, at length vanquished them: the
reason he gives, quia se non
                  deseruit."

Sir Thomas Robinson is at last named to the government of
Barbadoes; he has long prevented its being asked for, by
declaring that he had the promise of it.  Luckily for him, Lord
Lincoln liked his house, and procured him this government on
condition of                   hiring it.

I have mentioned Lord Perceval's speeches; he has a set who have
a rostrum at his house, and harangue there.  A gentleman who came
thither one evening was refused, but insisting that he was
engaged to come, "Oh, Sir," said the porter, "what, are you one
of those who play at members of Parliament?"

I must tell you something, though Mr. Chute will see my
letter.  Sir Robert brought home yesterday to dinner, a fat
comely gentleman, who came up to me, and said he believed I knew
his brother abroad.  I asked his name; he replied, He is with Mr.
Whithed."  I thought he said,   It is Whithed." After I had
talked to him of Mr. Whithed, I said,     There is a very
sensible man with Mr. Whithed,
                  one Mr. Chute." "Sir," said he, "my name is
Chute." "My dear
                  Mr. Chute, now I know both your brothers.  You
will forgive my mistake."

With what little conscience I begin a third sheet! but it
shall be but half a one.  I have received your vast packet of
music by the messenger, for which I thank you a thousand
times; and the political
                  sonnet, which is far from bad.  Who
translated it? I like the translation.

I am obliged to you about the gladiator, etc.: the temptation of
having them at all is great, but too enormous.  If I could have
the gladiator for about an hundred pounds, I would give it.

I enclose one of the bills of lading of the things that I sent
you by your secretary: he sets out tomorrow.  By Oswald's
(433) folly, to whom I entrusted the putting them on board, they
are consigned to Goldsworthy, (434) but pray take care that he
does not open them.  The captain mortifies me by
proposing to stay three weeks at Genoa.  I have sent away
to-night a small additional box of steel wares, which I
received but to-day from Woodstock.  As they are better than the
first, you will choose out some of them for Prince Craon, and
give away the rest as you please.

We have a new opera by Pescetti, but a very bad one; however, all
the town runs after it, for it ends with a charming
dance.(435)  They have flung open the stage to a great length,
and made                 a perfect view of Venice, with the
Rialto, and numbers of gondolas that row about full of masks, who
land and dance.  You would like it.

Well, I have done.  Excuse me if I don't take the trouble to read
it all over again, for it is immense, as you will find.  Good
night!

(414) Sir Robert Wilmot also, in a letter to the Duke of
Devonshire, written on the 12th,
 Sir Robert was today observed to be more naturally gay and full
of spirits than                                    he has been
for some time past."-E.

(415) HUme Campbell was twin brother of Hugh, third Earl of
Marchmont.  They were                              sons of
Alexander, the second earl, who had quarrelled with Sir Robert
Walpole at the                              time of the excise
scheme in 1733.  Sir Robert, in consequence, prevented him from
being                              reelected one of the sixteen
representative Scotch peers in 1734; in requital for which,
                      the old earl's two sons became the
bitterest opponents of the Minister.  They were both
               men of considerable talents; extremely similar in
their characters and dispositions, and
 so much so in their outward
appearance that it was very difficult to know them apart.-D.  The
estimation in which Lord Marchmont was held by his
contemporaries, maybe                              judged of by
the fact, that Lord Cobham gave his bust a place in the Temple of
Worthies,                              at Stowe, and the mention
of him in Pope's inscription in his grotto at
Twickenham;-

"Where British siglis from dying Wyndham stole,
And the bright flame was shot through Marchmont's soul."

We are told by Coxe, that Sir Robert Walpole "used frequently to
rally his sons, who                              were
praising the speeches of Pultney, Pitt, Lyttelton, and others, by
saying, "You may cry up their speeches if you please, but when I
have answered Sir John Barnard and
Lord Polwarth, I think I have concluded the debate."]

(416) Glover, a merchant, author of "Leonidas," a poem,
"Boadicea," a tragedy, etc.
[Glover's talent for public speaking, and information
concerning trade and Commerce,
naturally pointed him out to the merchants of London to
conduct their application to parliament on the neglect of
their trade.]

(417) Lord Vere, Lord Henry, and Lord Sidney Beauclerc, sons of
the Duchess Dowager of St. Albans, who is painted among the
beauties at Hampton Court.

(418) Lady Diana Vere, daughter, and at length sole heir, of
Aubrey de Vere, twentieth and last Earl of Oxford.  She
married, in 1694, Charles, first Duke of St. Albans, natural son
of Charles II. by Nell Gwin.  She died Jan. 15, 1742.

(419) Colonel James Cholmondeley, only brother of the Earl.
Afterwards distinguished himself at the battles of Fontenoy and
Falkirk, and died in 1775.-E.

(420) Charles Edwin, Admiral Vernon's unsuccessful colleague at
Westminster.-E.

(421) During the holidays, Sir R. W. had prevailed on the King to
send to the Prince of Wales, to offer to pay his debts and double
his allowance.  This negotiation was intrusted to Lord
Cholmondeley on the King's, and to Secker, Bishop of Oxford, on
the Prince's side, but came to nothing, [The Prince, in his
answer, stated, that "he could not come to court while Sir Robert
Walpole presided in His Majesty's councils; that he looked on him
as the sole author of our grievances at home, and of our ill
success in the West Indies; and that the
disadvantageous figure we at present made in all the courts of
Europe was to be attributed alone to him."]

(422) Owen MacSwinny, a buffoon; formerly director of the
playhouse. [He had been a manager of Drury Lane Theatre, and was
the author of several dramatic pieces.  He resided in
Italy for several years, and, on his return, was appointed keeper
of the King's Mews.  He died in 1754, leaving his
fortune to the celebrated Mrs. Woffington.](

423) Afterwards the great Lord Chatham.-D.

(424) First minister in the early part of the reign of George
III.-D.

(425) Afterwards the first Lord Holland.-D.

(426) Sir Dudley Ryder.-D.

(427) Sir Robert Wilmot, in a letter to the Duke of
Devonshire, says:-,,Sir William Gordon was brought in like a
corpse.  Some thought it had been an old woman in disguise,
having a white cloth round his head:
others,, who found him out, expected him to expire every moment.
Other incurables were introduced on their side.  Mr. Hopton, for
Hereford, w, is carried in with crutches.  Sir Robert Walpole
exceeded himself; Mr. Pelham, with the greatest decency, cut
Pultney into a thousand pieces.  Sir Robert actually dissected
him, and laid his heart open to the view of the House."-E.

(428) Admiral Sir Charles Wager. He had been knighted by Queen
Anne, for his Gallantry in taking and destroying some rich
Spanish galleons.  He was at this time first lord of the
Admiralty.  He died in 1743.-D.

(429) Sir William died in the May following.

(430) James Oswald, afterwards one of the commissioners of trade
and plantations.

(431) Robert, Lord Walpole, afterwards Earl of Orford.  He was
auditor of the Exchequer, and his house joined to the House of
commons, to which he had a door: but it was soon afterwards
locked up, by an order of the House.

(432) John Potter, Archbishop of Canterbury, translated, in 1737,
from the see of Oxford.  He died in 1747.-D.

)433) George Oswald, steward to Sir  R. W.

(434) Mr. Goldsworthy, consul at Leghorn, had married Sir
Charles Wager's niece, and was endeavouring to supplant Mr. Mann
at Florence.

(435) Vestris, the celebrated dancer, would have been
delighted with it; for it is related of him, that when Gluck had
finished his noble opera, "Iphigenia," Vestris was sadly
disappointed on finding that it did not end with a
"chaconne," and worried the composer to induce him to
introduce one.  At length Gluck, losing all patience,
exclaimed, "Chaconne! chaconne!  Had, then, the Greeks, whose
manners we are to represent, chaconnes?"  "Certainly not,"
replied Vestris, "certainly not; but so much the worse for the
Greeks."-D.



218 Letter 52
To Sir Horace Mann.
London, Feb. 1741-2.

I am miserable that I have not more time to write to you,
especially as you will want to know so much of what I have to
tell you; but for a week or fortnight I shall be so hurried, that
I shall scarce know what I say.  I sit here writing to you, and
receiving all the town, who flock to this house; Sir Robert has
already had three levees this morning, and the
rooms still overflowing-they overflow up to me. You will think
this the prelude to some victory! On the contrary, when you
receive this, there will be no longer a Sir Robert Walpole: you
must know him for the future by the title of Earl of
Orford.  That other envied name expires next week with his
ministry! Preparatory to this change.  I should tell you, that
last week we heard in the House of Commons the Chippenham
election, when Jack Frederick and his brother-in-law, Mr. Hume,
on our side, petitioned against Sir Edmund Thomas and Mr. Baynton
Holt.  Both sides made it the decisive question-but our people
were not all equally true: and upon the previous question we had
but 235 against 236, so lost it by one.  From that time my
brothers, my uncle, I, and some of his particular friends,
persuaded Sir R. to resign.  He was undetermined till Sunday
night.  Tuesday we were to finish the election, when we lost it
by 16; upon which Sir Robert declared to some particular persons
in the House his resolution to retire,(436) and had that morning
sent the Prince of Wales notice of' it.  It is understood from
the heads of the party, that nothing more is to be pursued
against him.  Yesterday (Wednesday) the King adjourned both
Houses for a fortnight, for time to settle
things.  Next week Sir Robert resigns and goes into the House of
Lords.  The only change yet fixed, is, that Lord Wilmington (437)
is to be at the head of the Treasury-but numberless
other alterations and confusions must follow.  The Prince will be
reconciled, and the Whig-patriots will come in.  There were a few
bonfires last night, but they are very unfashionable, for never
was fallen minister so followed.  When he kissed the King's hand
to take his first leave, the King fell on his
neck, wept and kissed him, and begged to see him frequently.  He
will continue in town, and assist the ministry in the
Lords.  Mr. Pelham has declared that he will accept nothing, that
was Sir Robert's; and this moment the Duke of Richmond has been
here from court to tell Sir R. that he had resigned the
mastership of the horse, having received it from him,
unasked, and that he would not keep it beyond his ministry.  This
is the greater honour, as it was so unexpected, and as he had no
personal friendship with the duke.

For myself, I am quite happy to be free from all the fatigue,
envy, and uncertainty of our late situation.  I go every
where; indeed, to have the stare over, and to use myself to
neglect, but I meet nothing but civilities.  Here have been Lord
Hartington, Coke, and poor Fitzwilliam,(438) and others crying:
here has been Lord Deskford (439) and numbers to wish me joy; in
short, it is a most extraordinary and various
scene.(440)

There are three people whom I pity much; the King, Lord
Wilmington, and my own sister; the first, for the affront, to be
forced to part with his minister, and to be forced to
forgive his son; the second, as he is too old, and (even when he
was young,) unfit for the burthen: and the poor girl,(441) who
must be created an earl's daughter, as her birth would deprive
her of the rank.  She must kiss hands, and bear the flirts of
impertinent real quality

I am invited to dinner to-day by Lord Strafford (442) Argyll's
son-in-law.  You see we shall grow the fashion.

My dear child, these are the most material points: I am
sensible how much you must want particulars; but you must be
sensible, too, that just yet, I have not time.

Don't be uneasy; your brother Ned has been here to wish me joy:
your brother Gal. has been here and cried; your tender nature
will at first make you like the latter; but afterwards you will
rejoice with the elder and me.  Adieu! Yours, ever, and the same.

(436) "Sir Robert," says Coxe, "seemed to have anticipated this
event, and met it with his usual fortitude and
cheerfulness.  While the tellers were performing their office, he
beckoned Sir Edward Baynton, the member whose return was
supported by the Opposition, to sit near him., spoke to him with
great complacency, animadverted on the ingratitude of several
individuals who were voting against him, on whom he had conferred
great favour, and declared he would never again sit in that
House."-E.

(437) Sir Spencer Compton, Earl of Wilmington, knight of the
garter, and at this time lord president of the council.

(438) william, Baron, and afterwards Earl Fitzwilliam; a young
lord, much attached to Sir R. W.

(439) James Ogilvy, Lord Deskford succeeded his father, in 1764,
as sixth Earl of Findlater, and third Earl of Seafield.  He held
some inconsiderable offices in Scotland, and died in 1770.-D.

(440) the peculiar antipathy to Lord Hardwicke manifested by
Horace Walpole on all occasions is founded, no doubt, upon the
opinion which he had taken up, that the resignation of Sir Robert
Walpole at this moment had been rendered necessary by the
treachery and intrigues of that nobleman and the Duke of
Newcastle.  In his "Memoires" he repeatedly charges him with such
treachery; and the Edinburgh reviewer of that work
(xxxvi. 1). 29) favours this view, observing, "It appears
that, unless there was a secret understanding of Newcastle and
Hardwicke with Pulteney and Carteret, before Sir Robert's
determination to resign, the coalition was effected between the
31st of January and 2d of February; for on the 2d of
February it was already settled that Lord Wilmington should be at
the head of the Treasury in the new administration.  So speedy an
adjustment of a point of such consequence looks
somewhat like previous concert."  However much appearances might
favour this opinion, another writer has shown most
satisfactorily that no such previous concert existed.  The
reviewer of the "Memoires" in the Quarterly Review (xxvii. p.
191) proves, in the first place, that it was Sir Robert
himself who determined the course of events, and, as he
emphatically said, turned the key of the closet on Mr.
Pulteney; so that, if he was betrayed, it must have been by
himself; and secondly, that we have the evidence of his family
and friends, that he was lost by his own inactivity and
timidity; in other words, the great minister was worn out with
age and business." And these views are confirmed by extracts from
the "Walpoliana," written, be it remembered, by Philip, second
Earl -of Hardwicke, son of the chancellor, from the information
of the Walpole family, and even of Sir Robert
himself; who, after his retirement, admitted his young friend
into his conversation and confidence-a fact totally
inconsistent with a belief in his father's treachery;-by Sir
Robert's own authority, who, in a private and confidential letter
to the Duke of Devonshire, dated 2d of February, 1742, giving an
account of his resignation, and the efforts of his triumphant
antagonists to form a new ministry, distinctly
states "that he himself prevented the Duke of Newcastle's
dismissal;" and lastly, by Horace Walpole's own pamphlet, "A
Detection of a late Forgery," etc., in which he speaks of "the
breach between the King and the Prince, as open, the known,
avowed cause of the resignation, and which Sir Robert never
disguised;"-and again, among the errors of the writer he
notices, Sir Robert Walpole is made to complain of being
abandoned by his friends.  This is for once an undeserved
satire on mankind: no fallen minister ever experienced such
attachment from his friends as he did."-E.

(441) Maria, natural daughter of Sir R. W. by Maria Skerret, his
mistress, whom he afterwards married.  She had a patent to take
place as an earl's daughter.

(442) William Wentworth, second Earl of Strafford, of the
second creation. He married Anne Campbell, second daughter of
John, Duke of Argyle.-D.



220 Letter 53
To Sir Horace Mann.
Feb. 9, 1741-2.

You will have had my letter that told you of the great change.
The scene is not quite so pleasant as it was, nor the
tranquility arrived that we expected.  All is in confusion; no
overtures from the Prince, who, it must seem, proposes to be
King.  His party have persuaded him not to make up, but on much
greater conditions than he first demanded: in short,
notwithstanding his professions to the Bishop,(443)-he is to
insist on the impeachment of Sir R., saying now, that his
terms not being accepted at first, he is not bound to stick to
them.  He is pushed on to this violence by Argyll,
Chesterfield, Cobham,(444) Sir John Hind Cotton,(445) and Lord
Marchmont.  The first says, "What impudence it is in Sir R. to be
driving about the streets!" and all cry out, that he is still
minister behind the curtain.  They will none of them come into
the ministry, till several are displaced  but have summoned a
great meeting of the faction for Friday, at the Fountain Tavern,
to consult measures against Sir R., and
to-morrow the Common Council meet, to draw up instructions for
their members.  They have sent into Scotland and into the
counties for the same purpose.  Carteret ind Pulteney@ pretend to
be against this violence, but own that if their party
insist upon it, they cannot desert them.  The cry against Sir R.
has been greater this week than ever; first, against a
grant of four thousand pounds a-year, which the King gave him on
his resignation, but which, to quiet them, he has given Up.(446)
Then, upon making his daughter a lady; their wives and daughters
declare against giving her place.  He and she both kissed hands
yesterday, and on Friday go to Richmond for a week.  He seems
quite secure in his innocence-but what
protection is that, against the power and malice of' party!
Indeed, his friends seem as firm is ever, and frequent him as
much; but they are not now the strongest.  As to an
impeachment, I think they will not be so mad as to proceed to it:
it is too solemn and too public to be attempted, without proof of
crimes, of which he certainly is not guilty.  For a bill of'
pains and penalties, they may, if they will, I
believe, pass it through the Commons, but will scarce get the
assent of the King and Lords.  In a week more I shall be able to
write with less uncertainty.

I hate sending you false news, as that was, of the Duke of
Richmond's resignation.  It arose from his being two hours below
with Sir R., and from some very warm discourse of his in the
House of Lords, against the present violences; but went no
further.  Zeal magnified this, as she came up stairs to me, and I
wrote to you before I had seen Sir Robert.

At a time when we ought to be most united, we are in the
greatest confusion; such is the virtue of the patriots, though
they have obtained what they professed alone to seek.  They will
not stir one step in foreign affairs, though Sir R. has offered
to unite with them, with all his friends, for the
common cause.  It will now be seen whether he or they are most
patriot.  You see I call him Sir Robert still! after one has
known him by that name for these threescore years, it is
difficult to accustom one's mouth to another title.

In the midst of all this, we are diverting ourselves as
cordially as if Righteousness and Peace had just been kissing one
another.  Balls, operas, and masquerades! The Duchess of Norfolk
(447) makes a grand masquing next week; and to-morrow there is
one at the Opera-house.

Here is a Saxe-Gothic prince, brother to her Royal
Highness:(448) he sent her word from Dover that he was driven in
there, in his way to Italy.  The man of the inn, Whom he
consulted about lodgings in town, recommended him to one of very
ill-fame in Suffolk-street.  He has got a neutrality for himself,
and goes to both courts.

Churchill (449) asked Pultney the other day, "Well, Mr.
Pultney, will you break me too?"-"No, Charles," replied he, "you
break fast enough of yourself!"  Don't you think it hurt him more
than the other breaking would? Good night!
Yours, ever.

Thursday, Feb. 11, 1741-2.

P. S. I had finished my letter, and unwillingly resolved to send
you all that bad news, rather than leave you ignorant of our
doings; but I have the pleasure of mending your prospect a
little.  Yesterday the Common Council met, and resolved upon
instructions to their members, which, except one not very
descriptive paragraph, contains nothing personal -,against our
new earl; and ends with resolutions "to stand by our present
constitution." Mind what followed! One of them proposed to insert
"the King and Royal Family" before the words, "our
present constitution;" but, on a division, it was rejected by
three to one.

But to-day, for good news! Sir Robert has resigned; Lord
Wilmington is first lord of the treasury, and Sandys has
accepted the seals as chancellor of the exchequer, with Gibbon
(450) and Sir John Rushout,(451) joined to him as other lords of
the treasury.  Waller was to have been the other, but has
formally refused.  So, Lord Sundon, Earle, Treby,(452) and
Clutterbuck (453) are the first discarded, unless the latter
saves himself by Waller's refusal.  Lord Harrington, who is
created an earl, is made president of the council, and Lord
Carteret has consented to be secretary of state in his
room-but mind; not one of them has promised to be against the
prosecution of Sir Robert, though I don't believe now that it
will go on.  You see Pultney is not come in, except in his friend
Sir John Rushout, but is to hold the balance between liberty and
prerogative; at least, in this, he acts with
honour.  They say Sir John Hind Cotton and the Jacobites will be
left out,,unless they bring in Dr. Lee and Sir John Barnard to
the admiralty, as they propose; for I do not think it is decided
what are their principles.  Sir Charles Wager has
resigned this morning:(454) he says, "We shall not die, but be
all changed!"  though he says, a parson lately reading this text
in an old Bible, where the c was rubbed out, read it, not die,
but be all hanged!

To-morrow our earl goes to Richmond Park, en retir`e; comes on
Thursday to take his seat in the Lords, and returns thither
again.  Sandys is very angry at his taking the title of
Orford, which belonged to his wife's (455) great uncle.  You know
a step of that nature cost the great Lord Strafford (456) his
head, at the prosecution of a less bloody-minded man than Sandys.

I remain in town, and have not taken at all to withdrawing, which
I hear has given offence,(457) as well as my gay face in public;
but as I had so little joy in the grandeur, I am
determined to take as little part in the disgrace.  I am
looking about for a new house.

I have received two vast packets from you to-day, I believe from
the bottom of the sea, for they have been so washed that I could
scarce read them.  I could read the terrible history of the
earthquakes at Leghorn: how infinitely good you was to poor Mrs.
Goldsworthy!  How could you think I should not
approve such vast humanity? but you are all humanity and
forgiveness.  I am only concerned that they will be present when
you receive all these disagreeable accounts of your
friends.  Their support" is removed as well as yours.  I only
fear the interest of the Richmonds (458) with the Duke of
Newcastle; but I will try to put you well with Lord Lincoln.  We
must write circumspectly, for our letters now are no longer safe.

I shall see Amorevoli to-night to give him the letter.  Ah!
Monticelli and the Visconti are to sing to-night at a great
assembly at Lady Conway's.  I have not time to write more: so,
good night, my dearest child! be in good spirits.
Yours, most faithfully.

P. S. We have at last got Cr`ebillon's "Sofa:" Lord
Chesterfield received three hundred, and gave them to be sold at
White's.  It is admirable! except the beginning of the
first volume, and the last story, it is equal to any thing he has
written.  How he has painted the most refined nature in Mazulhim!
the most retired nature in Mocles! the man of
fashion, that sets himself above natural sensations, and the man
of sense and devotion, that would skirmish himself from their
influence, are equally justly reduced to the standard of their
own weakness.(459)

(443) Secker, Bishop of Oxford.

(444) Richard Temple, Viscount Cobham, so created in 1717, with
remainder to the issue male of his sister, Hester
Grenville.  He had served in Flanders under the Duke of
Marlborough, and was upon the overthrow of Sir Robert
Walpole's administration promoted to the military rank of
field marshal.  He is now best remembered as the friend of pope
and the creator of the gardens at Stowe.-D.

(445) Sir John Hinde Cotton, Bart. of Landwade, in
Cambridgeshire; long a member of parliament, and one of the
leaders of the Jacobite party.  He died in 1752, and Horace
Walpole, in his Memoires, in noticing this event, says, "Died Sir
John Cotton, the last Jacobite of any sensible
activity."-D.

Lord Carteret and Mr. Pulteney had really betrayed their party,
and so injudiciously, that they lost their old friends and gained
no new ones.

(446) Sir Robert, at the persuasion of his brother, Mr.
Selwyn, and others, desisted from this grant.  Three years
afterwards, when the clamour was at an end, and his affairs
extremely involved, he sued for it; which Mr. Pelham, his
friend and `el`eve, was brought with the worst grace in the world
to ask, and his old obliged master the King prevailed upon, with
as ill grace, to grant. ["February 6. Sir R.
Walpole was presented at Court as Earl of Orford.  He was
persuaded to refuse a grant of four thousand pounds a-year during
the King's life and his own, but could not be dissuaded from
accepting a letter of honour from the King, to grant his natural
daughter Maria, precedence as an earl's daughter; who was also
presented this day.  The same thing had been done for Scrope,
Earl of Sunderland, who left no lawful issue, and from one of
whom Lord Howe is descended."-Secker MS.]

(447) Mary, daughter of Edward Blount, Esq. and wife of
Edward, ninth Duke of Norfolk.-D.

(448) The Princess of Wales.-D.

(449)General Charles Churchill.-D.

(450) Philip Gibbons, Esq.-D.

(451) Sir John Rushout, the fourth baronet of the family, had
particularly distinguished himself as an opponent of Sir R.
Walpole's excise scheme.  He was made treasurer of the navy in
1743, and died in 1775, at the advanced age of ninety-one.  His
son was created Lord Northwick, in 1797.-D.

(452) George Treby, Esq.-D.

(453) Thomas Clutterbuck, Esq.  He left the Treasury in
February 1742, and was made treasurer of the navy.-D.

(454) "February II.  Lord Orford and Sir Charles Wager
resigned.  Mr. Sandys kissed hands as chancellor of the
exchequer: Lord Wilmington declared first commissioner of the
Treasury: offers made to the Duke of Argyle, but refused: none to
Lord Chesterfield."-Secker MS.-E.

(455) Lady Sandys was daughter of Lady Tipping, niece of
Russel, Earl of Orford.

(456) Sir Thomas Wentworth, the great Earl of Strafford, took the
title of Raby from a castle of that name, which belonged to Sir
Henry Vane, who, from that time, became his mortal foe.

(457) Sir Charles Wager. [In the following December Sir
Charles was appointed treasurer of the navy, which office he held
till his death, in May 1743.)

(458) Mrs. Goldsworthy had been a companion of the Duchess of
Richmond.

(459) Posterity has not confirmed the eulogium here given to the
indecent trash of the younger Cr`ebillon: but in the age of
George II. coarseness passed for humour, and obscenity was
wit."-D



224 Letter 54
To Sir Horace Mann.
Feb. 18, 1741-2.

I write to you more tired, and with more headache, than any one
but you could conceive! I came home at five this morning from the
Duchess of Norfolk's masquerade, and was forced to rise before
eleven, for my father, who came from Richmond to take his seat in
the Lords, for the Houses met to-day.  He is gone back to his
retirement.  Things wear a better aspect: at the great meeting
(460) on Friday, at the Fountain, Lord
Carteret and Lord Winchilsea (461) refused to go, only saying,
that they never dined at a tavern.  Pultney and the new
chancellor of the exchequer went, and were abused by his Grace of
Argyll.  The former said he was content with what was
already done, and would not be active in any further
proceedings, though he would not desert the party.  Sandys said
the King had done him the honour to offer him that place; why
should he not accept it? if he had not, another would: if nobody
would, the King would be obliged to employ his old
minister again, which he imagined the gentlemen present would not
wish to see; and protested against screening, with the same
conclusion as Pultney.  The Duke of Bedford was very warm against
Sir William Yonge; Lord Talbot (462) was so in
general.(463)

During the recess, they have employed Fazakerley to draw up four
impeachments; against Sir Robert, my uncle, Mr. Keene, and
Colonel Bladen, who was only commissioner for the tariff at
Antwerp.  One of the articles against Sir R. is, his having at
this conjuncture trusted Lord Waldegrave as ambassador, who is so
near a relation (464) of the Pretender-. but these
impeachments are likely to grow obsolete manuscripts.  The minds
of the people grow more candid: at first, they made one of the
actors at Drury Lane repeat some applicable lines at the end of
Harry the Fourth; but last Monday, when his Royal Highness-, had
purposely bespoken "The Unhappy Favourite" (465) for Mrs.
Porter's benefit, they never once applied the most glaring
passages; as where they read the indictment against Robert Earl
of Essex, etc.  The Tories declare against further prosecution-if
Tories there are, for now one hears of nothing but the Broad
Bottom: it is the reigning cant word, and means, the taking all
parties and people, indifferently into the
ministry.  The Whigs are the dupes of this; And those in the
Opposition affirm that Tories no longer exist.
Notwithstanding this, they will not come into the new
ministry, unless what were always reckoned Tories are
admitted.  The Treasury has gone a-begging: I mean one of the
lordships, which is at last filled up with Major Compton, a
relation of Lord Wilmington; but now we shall see a new scene.
On Tuesday night Mr. Pultney went to the Prince, and, without the
knowledge of Argyll, etc., prevailed on him to write to the King:
he was so long determining, that it was eleven at night before
the King received his letter.  Yesterday morning the prince,
attended by two of his lords, two grooms of the Bedchamber, and
Lord Scarborough,(466) his treasurer went to the King's
levee.(467) The King said, "How does the Princess do?  I hope she
is well."  The Prince kissed his hand, and this was all!  The
Prince returned to Carlton House, whither crowds went to him.  He
spoke to the Duke of Newcastle and Mr. Pelham; but would not to
the three dukes, Richmond, Grafton, and Marlborough.(468)  At
night the Royal Family were all at the Duchess of Norfolk'@' and
the streets were illuminated and bonfired.  To-day, the Duke of
Bedford, Lord Halifax, and some others, were at St. James's: the
King spoke to all the Lords.  In a day or two, I shall go with my
uncle and brothers to the Prince's levee.

Yesterday there was a meeting of all the Scotch of our side, who,
to a man, determined to defend Sir Robert

Lyttelton (469) is going to marry Miss Fortescue, Lord
Clinton's sister.

When our earl went to the House of lords to-day, he
apprehended some incivilities from his Grace of Argyll, but he
was not there.  Bedford, Halifax, Berkshire,(470) and some more,
were close by him, but would not bow to him.  Lord
Chesterfield wished him joy.  This is all I know for certain; for
I will not send you the thousand lies of every new day.

I must tell you how fine the masquerade of last night was.  There
were five hundred persons, in the greatest variety of handsome
and rich dresses I ever saw, and all the jewels of London-and
London has some! There were dozens of ugly Queens of Scots, of
which I will only name to you the eldest Miss Shadwell!  The
Princess of Wales was one, covered with
diamonds, but did not take off her mask: none of the Royalties
did, but every body else.  Lady Conway (471) was a charming Mary
Stuart: Lord and Lady Euston, man and woman huzzars.  But the two
finest and most charming masks were their Graces of
Richmond,(472) like Harry the Eighth and Jane Seymour:
excessively rich, and both so handsome @ Here is a nephew of the
King of Denmark, who was in armour, and his governor, a most
admirable Quixote.  there were quantities of Vandykes, and all
kinds of old pictures walked out of the frames.  It was an
assemblage of all ages and nations, and would look like the day
of judgment, if tradition did not persuade us that we are all to
meet naked, and if something else did not tell us that we shall
not meet with quite so much indifference, nor thinking quite so
much of the becoming.  My dress was an
Aurungzebe: but of all extravagant figures commend me to our
friend the Countess!(473)  She and my lord trudged in like
pilgrims with vast staffs in their hands; and she was so
heated, that you would have thought her pilgrimage had been, like
Pantagruel's voyage, to the Oracle of the Bottle! Lady Sophia was
in a Spanish dress-so was Lord Lincoln; not, to be sure, by
design, but so it happened.  When the King came in, the Faussans
(474) were there, and danced an entr`ee.  At the masquerade the
King sat by Mrs. Selwyn, and with tears told her, that "the Whigs
should find he loved them, as he had the poor man that was gone!"
He had sworn that he would not speak to the Prince at their
meeting, but was prevailed on.

I received your letter by Holland, and the paper about the
Spaniards.  By this time you will conceive that I can speak of
nothing to any purpose, for Sir R. does not meddle in the
least with business.

As to the Sibyl, I have not mentioned it to him; I still am for
the other.  Except that, he will not care, I believe, to buy more
pictures, having now so many more than he has room for at
Houghton; and he will have but a small house in town when we
leave this.  But you must thank the dear Chutes for their new
offers; the obligations are too great, but I am most sensible to
their goodness, and, were I not so excessively tired now, would
write to them.  I cannot add a word more, but to think of the
Princess:(475) "Comment! vous avez donc des enfans!" You see how
nature sometimes breaks out in spite of religion and prudery,
grandeur and pride, delicacy and
`epuisements!  Good night!
Yours ever.

(460) See an account of this meeting in Lord Egmonfs "Faction
Detected." [To this meeting at the Fountain tavern Sir Charles
Hanbury Williams alludes in his Ode against the Earl of Bath,
called the Statesman-

"Then enlarge on his cunning and wit:
Say, how he harangued at the Fountain;
Say, how the old patriots were bit,
And a mouse was produced by a mountain."]

(461) Daniel Finch, seventh Earl of Winchilsea and third Earl of
Nottingham.  He was made first lord of the admiralty upon the
breaking up of Sir R. Walpole's government.-D.

(462) William, second Lord Talbot, eldest son of the lord
chancellor of that name and title.-D.

(463) The following is from the Secker MS.-"Feb. 12.  Meeting at
the Fountain tavern of above two hundred commoners and
thirty-five Lords.  Duke of Argyle spoke warmly for
prosecuting Lord Orford, with hints of reflection on those who
had accepted.  Mr. Pulteney replied warmly.  Lord Talbot drank to
cleansing the Augean stable of the dung and grooms.  Mr. Sandys
and Mr. Gibbon there.  Lord Carteret and Lord
Winchilsea not.  Lord Chancellor, in the evening, in private
discourse to me, strong against taking in any Tories: owning no
more than that some of them, perhaps, were not for the
Pretender, or, at least, did not know they were for him;
though, when I gave him the account first of my discourse with
the Prince, he said, the main body of them were of the same
principles with the Tories."-E.

(464) His mother was natural daughter of King James II.
(James, first Earl Waldegrave, appointed ambassador to the court
of France in 1730: died in 1741.-D.)

(465) banks's tragedy of "The Unhappy Favourite; or, the Earl of
Essex," was first acted in 1682.  The prologue and epilogue were
written by Dryden.  Speaking of this play, in the Tatler, Sir
Richard Steele says, "there is in it not one good line, and yet
it is a play which was never seen without drawing
tears from some part of the audience; a remarkable instance, that
the soul is not to be moved by words, but things; for the
incidents in the drama are laid together so happily that the
spectator makes the play for himself, by the force with which the
circumstance has upon his imagination."-E.

(466) Thomas Lumley, third Earl of Scarborough.-D.

(467) "February 17.  Prince of Wales went to St. James's.  The
agreement made at eleven the night before, and principally by Mr.
Pultney; as Lord Wilmington told me.  The King received him in
the drawing-room: the Prince kissed his hand: he asked him how
the Princess did: showed no other mark of regard.  All the
courtiers went the same day to Carlton House.  The Bishop of
Gloucester (Dr. Benson) and I went thither.  The Prince and
princess civil to us both." Secker MS.-E.

(468) Charles Spencer, second duke of Marlborough succeeded to
that title on the death of his aunt Henrietta, Duchess of
Marlborough, in 1733.-D.

(469) Sir George Lyttelton, afterwards created Lord Lyttelton.
Miss Fortescue was his first wife, and mother of Thomas,
called the wicked Lord Lyttelton.  She died in childbed and Lord
Lyttelton honoured her Memory with the well-known Monody which
was so unfeelingly parodied by Smollett.-D. [ Under the title of
an "Ode on the Death of My Grandmother.")

(470 Henry Bowes Howard, fourth Earl of Berkshire.  He
succeeded, in 1745, as eleventh Earl of Suffolk, on the death,
without issue, of henry, tenth earl.  He died in 1757.-D.

(471) Lady Isabella Fitzroy, Youngest daughter of the Duke of
grafton, and wife of Francis Seymour, Lord Conway of Hertford.

(472) Charles Lennox, master of the horse, and Sarah Cadogan, his
duchess.  He died in the year following.

(473) The Countess of Pomfret.

(474) Two celebrated comic dancers.

(475) Princess Craon, so often mentioned in these letters.-D.



227 Letter 55
To Sir Horace Mann.
London, Feb. 25, 1742.

I am impatient to hear that you have received my first account of
the change; as to be sure you are now for every post.  This last
week has not produced many new events.  The Prince of Wales has
got the measles,(476) so there has been but little incense
offered up to him: his brother of Saxe-Gotha has got them too.
When the Princess went to St. James's, she fell at the King's
feet and struggled to kiss his hand, and burst into tears.  At
the Norfolk masquerade she was vastly bejewelled; Frankz had lent
her forty thousand pounds worth, and refused to be paid for the
hire, only desiring that she would tell whose they were.  All
this is nothing, but to introduce one of Madame de Pomfret's
ingenuities, who. being dressed like a pilgrim, told the
Princess, that she had taken her for the Lady of Loreto.

But you will wish for politics now, more than for histories of
masquerades, though this last has taken up people's thoughts full
as much.  The House met last Thursday and voted the army without
a division: Shippen (477 alone, unchanged, Opposed it.  They have
since been busied on elections, turning out our
friends and voting in their own.. almost without opposition.  The
chief affair has been the Denbighshire election, on the petition
of Sir Watkyn William . 'They have voted him into parliament and
the high-sheriff into Newgate.  Murray (478) was most eloquent:
Lloyd,(479) the counsel on the other side, and no bad one, (for I
go constantly, though I do not stay long, but "leave the dead to
bury their dead," said that it was objected to the sheriff, that
he was related to the
sitting member; but, indeed, in that country (Wales) it would be
difficult not to be related.  Yesterday we had another
hearing of the petition of the Merchants, when Sir Robert
Godschall shone brighter than even his usual.  There was a copy
of a letter produced, the original having been lost: he asked
whether the copy had been taken before the original was lost, or
after!

Next week they commence their prosecutions, which they will
introduce by voting a committee to inquire into all the
offices: Sir William Yonge is to be added to the impeachments,
but the chief whom they wish to punish is my uncle.(480) He is
the more to be pitied, because nobody will pity him.  They are
not fond of a formal message which the States General have sent
to Sir Robert, "to compliment him on his new honour, and to
condole with him on being out of the ministry, which will be so
detrimental to Europe!

The third augmentation in Holland is confirmed, and that the
Prince of Hesse is chosen generallissimo, which makes it
believed that his Grace of Argyll will not go over, but that we
shall certainly have a war with France in the spring.
Argyll has got the Ordnance restored to him, and they wanted to
give him his regiment; to which Lord Hertford (481) was desired
to resign it, with the offer of his old troop again.  He said he
had received the regiment from the King; if his Majesty pleased
to take it back, he might, but he did not know why he should
resign it.  Since that, he wrote a letter to the King, and sent
it by his son, Lord Beauchamp, resigning his regiment, his
government, and his wife's pension, as lady of the bedchamber to
the late Queen.

No more changes are made yet.  They have offered the Admiralty to
Sir Charles Wager again, but he refused it: he said, he heard
that he was an old woman, and that he did not know what good old
women could do any where.

A comet has appeared here for two nights, which, you know, is
lucky enough at this time and a pretty ingredient for making
prophecies.

These are all the news.  I receive your letters regularly, and
hope you receive mine so: I never miss one week.  Adieu! my
dearest child! I am perfectly well; tell me always that you are.
Are the good Chutes still at Florence? My best love to them, and
services to all.

Here are some new Lines much in vogue:(482)

                                   1741.

Unhappy England, still in forty-one (483)
By Scotland art thou doom'd to be undone!
But Scotland now, to strike alone afraid,
Calls in her worthy sister Cornwall's (484) aid;
And these two common Strumpets, hand in hand,
Walk forth, and preach up virtue through the land;
Start at corruption, at a bribe turn pale,
Shudder at pensions, and at placemen rail.
Peace, peace! ye wretched hypocrites; or rather
With Job, say to Corruption, " Thou'rt our Father."

But how will Walpole justify his fate?
He trusted Islay (485) till it was too late.
Where were those parts! where was that piercing mind!
That judgment, and that knowledge of mankind!
To trust a Traitor that he knew so well!
(Strange truth! I)ctray'd, but not deceived, he fell!)
He knew his heart was, like his aspect, vile;
Knew him the tool, and Brother of Argyll!
Yet to his hands his power and hopes gave up;
And though he saw 'twas poison, drank the cup!
Trusted to one he never could think true,
And perish'd by a villain that he knew.

(476) "February 21.  Prince taken ill of the measles.  The King
sent no message to him in his illnesses Secker MS.-E.

(477) William Shippen, a celebrated Jacobite.  Sir R. Walpole
said that he was the Only man whose price he did not know. [See
ante, p. 194, Letter 45.]

             (478)  William Murray, Mr. Pope's friend,
afterwards Solicitor, and then Attorney-general.

(479) Sir Richard Lloyd, who succeeded Mr. Murray, in 1754, as
Solicitor-general.

(480) Horace Walpole, brother of Sir Robert.

(481) Algernon Seymour, Earl of Hertford, eldest son of
Charles, called the proud Duke of Somerset, whom he succeeded in
that Title, and was the last Duke of Somerset of that
branch; his son, who is here mentioned, having died before
him.-D.

(482) These Lines were written by Sir Charles Hanbury
Williams. [And are published in the edition of his works, in
three volumes, 12 no.1.

(483) Alluding to the Grand Rebellion against Charles the
First.

(484) The Parliament which overthrew Sir R. W. was carried
against him by his losing the majority of the Scotch and
Cornish boroughs; the latter managed by Lord Falmouth
                           and Thomas Pitt.

(485) Archibald Campbell, Earl of Islay, brother of John, Duke of
Argyll, in conjunction with whom (though then openly at variance)
he was supposed to have betrayed Sir R.
                           W. and to have let the Opposition
succeed in the Scotch elections, which were trusted to
                           his management.  It must be
observed, that Sir R. W. would never allow that he believed
                    himself betrayed by Lord Islay.



229 Letter 56
To Sir Horace Mann.
London, March 3d, 1742.

I am Obliged to write to you to-day, for I am sure I shall not
have a moment to-morrow; they are to make their motion for a
secret committee to examine into the late administration.  We are
to oppose it strongly, but to no purpose; for since the change,
they have beat us on no division under a majority of forty.  This
last week has produced no new novelties; his
Royal Highness has been shut up with the measles, of which he was
near dying, by eating China oranges.

We are to send sixteen thousand men into Flanders in the
spring, under his Grace of Argyll; they talk of the Duke of
Marlborough and Lord Albemarle to command under him.  Lord
Cadogan (486) is just dead, so there is another regiment
vacant: they design Lord Delawar's for Westmoreland;(487) so now
Sir Francis Dashwood (488) will grow as fond of the King again as
he used to be-or as he has hated him since.

We have at last finished the Merchants' petition, under the
conduct of the Lord Mayor and Mr. Leonidas;(489) the greatest
coxcomb and the greatest oaf that ever met in blank verse or
prose.  I told you the former's question about the copy of a
letter taken after the original was lost.  They have got a new
story of him; that hearing of a gentleman who had had the
small-pox twice and died of it, he asked, if he died the first
time or the second-if this is made for him, it is at least quite
in his style.  After summing up the evidence (in doing which, Mr.
Glover literally drank several times to the Lord Mayor in a glass
of water that stood by him,) Sir John Barnard moved to vote, that
there had been great neglect in the
protection of the trade, to the great advantage of' the enemy,
and the dishonour of the nation.  He said he did not mean to
charge the Admiralty particularly, for then particular persons
must have had particular days assigned to be heard in their own
defence, which would take up too much time, as we are now going
to make inquiries of a much higher nature.  Mr. Pelham was for
leaving out the last words.  Mr. Doddington rose, and in a set
speech declared that the motion was levelled at a particular
person, who had so usurped all authority, that all inferior
offices were obliged to submit to his will, and so either bend
and bow, or be broken: but that he hoped the steps we were now
going to take, would make the office of first
minister so dangerous a post, that nobody would care to accept it
for the future.  Do but think of this fellow, who has so lost all
character, and made himself so odious to both King, and Prince,
by his alternate flatteries, changes, oppositions, and changes of
flatteries and oppositions, that he can never expect what he has
so much courted by all methods,-think of his talking of making it
dangerous for any one else to accept the first ministership!
Should such a period ever arrive, he would accept it with joy-the
only chance he can ever have for it! But sure, never was
impudence more put to shame! The whole debate turned upon him.
Lord Doneraile (490) (who, by the way, has produced blossoms of
Doddington like fruit, and
consequently is the fitter scourge for him) stood up and said, he
did not know what that gentleman meant; that he himself was as
willing to bring all offenders to justice as any man; but that he
did not intend to confine punishment to those who had been
employed only at the end of the last ministry, but
proposed to extend it to all who had been engaged in it, and
wished that that gentleman would speak with more lenity of an
administration, in which he himself had been concerned for so
many years.  Winnington said, he did not know what Mr.
Doddington had meant, by either bending or being broken; that he
knew some who had been broken, though they had bowed an bended.
Waller defended Doddington, and said, if he was
gilty, at least Mr. Winnington was so too; on which Fox rose up,
and, laying his hand on his breast, said, he never wished to have
such a friend, as could only excuse him by bringing in another
for equal share of his guilt.  Sir John Cotton
replied; he did not wonder that Mr. Fox (who had spoken with
great warmth) was angry at hearing his friend in place,
compared to one out of place.  Do but figure how Doddington must
have looked and felt during such dialogues!  In short, it ended
in Mr. Pultney's rising, and saying, he could not be against the
latter words, as he thought the former part of the motion had
been proved . and wished both parties would join in carrying on
the war vigorously, or in procuring a good peace, rather than in
ripping open old sores, and continuing the
heats and violences of parties.  We came to no division-for we
should have lost it by too many.

Thursday evening.

I had written all the former part of my letter, only reserving
room to tell you, that they had carried the secret
committee-but it is put off till next Tuesday.  To-day we had
nothing but the giving up the Heydon election, when Mr.
Ppultney had an opportunity (as Mr. Chute and Mr. Robinson would
not take the trouble to defend a cause which they could not
carry) to declaim upon corruption: had it come to a trial, there
were eighteen witnesses ready to swear positive bribery against
Mr. Pultney.  I would write to Mr. Chute, and thank him for his
letter which you sent me, but I am so out of
humour at his brother's losing his seat, that I cannot speak
civilly even to him to-day.

It is said, that my Lord's Grace of Argyll has carried his great
point of the Broad Bottom-as I suppose you will hear by
rejoicings from Rome.  The new Admiralty is named; at the head is
to be Lord Winchilsea, with Lord Granard,(491) Mr.
Cockburn, his Grace's friend, Dr. Lee, the chairman, Lord Vere
Beauclerc;(492) one of the old set, by the interest of the Duke
of Dorset, and the connexion of Lady Betty Germain, whose niece
Lord Vere married; and two Tories, Sir John Hind Cotton and Will.
Chetwynd,(493) an agent of Bolingbroke's-all this is not declared
yet, but is believed.

This great Duke has named his four aid-de-camps-Lord Charles Hay;
George Stanhope, brother of Earl Stanhope; Dick
Lyttelton, who Was page; and a Campbell.  Lord Cadogan is not
dead, but has been given over.

We are rejoicing over the great success of the Queen of
Hungary's arms, and the number of blows and thwarts which the
French have received.  It is a prosperous season for our new
popular generals to grow glorious!

But, to have done with politics.  Old Marlborough has at last
published her Memoirs; they are digested by one Hooke, (494) who
wrote a Roman history; but from her materials which are so
womanish, that I am sure the man might sooner have made a gown
and petticoat with them.  There are some choice letters from
Queen Anne, little inferior in the fulsome to those from King
James to the Duke of Buckingham.

Lord Oxford's (495) famous sale begins next Monday, where
there is as much rubbish of another kind as in her grace's
history.  Feather bonnets presented by the Americans to Queen
Elizabeth; elks'-horns -cups; true copies converted into
candle of original pictures that never existed; presents to
himself from the Royal Society, etc. particularly forty
volumes of prints of illustrious English personages; which
collection is collected from frontispieces to godly books, bibles
and head-pieces and tail-pieces to Waller's works;
views of King Charles's sufferings; tops of ballads;
particularly earthly crowns for heavenly ones, and streams of
glory.  There are few good pictures.  for the miniatures are not
to be sold, nor the manuscripts , the books not till next year.
There are a few fine bronzes, and a very fine
collection of English coins.

We have got another opera,(496) which is liked.  There was to
have been a vast elephant, but the just directors, designing to
give the audience the full weight of one for their money, made it
so heavy that at the prova it broke through the stage.  It was to
have carried twenty soldiers, with Monticelli on a throne in the
middle.  There is a new subscription begun for next year, thirty
subscribers at two hundred pounds each.  Would you believe that I
am one? You need not believe it
quite, for I am but half an one; Mr. Conway and I take a share
between us.  We keep Monticelli and Amorevoli, and to please Lord
Middlesex, that odious Muscovita; but shall discard Mr. Vaneschi.
We are to have the Barberina and the two Faussans; so, at least,
the singers and dancers will be equal to any thing in Europe.

Our earl is still at Richmond: I have not been there yet; I shall
go once or twice; for however little inclination I have to it, I
would not be thought to grow cool just now.  You know I am above
such dirtiness, and you are sensible that my
coolness is of much longer standing.  Your sister is with mine at
the Park; they came to town last Tuesday for the
opera, and returned next day.  After supper, I prevailed on your
sister (497) to sing, and though I had heard her before, I
thought I never heard any thing beyond it; there is a
sweetness in her voice equal to Cuzzoni's, with a better
manner.                                '

I was last week at the masquerade, dressed like an old woman, and
passed for a good mask.  I took the English liberty of teasing
whomever I pleased, particularly old Churchill.  I told him I was
quite ashamed. of being there till I met him, but was quite
comforted with finding one person in the room older than myself.
The Duke,(498) who had been told who I was, came up and said, "Je
connois cette poitrine." I took him for some Templar, and
replied, "Vous! vous ne connoissez que des poitrines qui sont
bien plus us`ees." It was unluckily pat.  The next night, at the
drawing-room, he asked me, very good-humouredly, if I knew who
was the old woman that had
teased every body at the masquerade.  We were laughing so much at
this, that the King crossed the room to Lady Hervey, who was with
us, and said, "What are those boys laughing at set" She told him,
and that I had said I was so awkward at
undressing myself, that I had stood for an hour in my stays and
under-petticoat before my footman.  My thanks to Madame Grifoni.
I cannot write more now, as I must not make my
letter too big, when it appears at the secretary's office
nouc.  As to my sister, I am sure Sir Robert would never have
accepted Prince Craon's offer, who now, I suppose, would not be
eager to repeat it.

(486) Charles, Lord Cadogan, of Oakley, to which title he
succeeded on the death of his elder brother, William, Earl
Cadogan, who was one of the most distinguished "of
Marlborough's captains." Charles, Lord Cadogan, did not die at
the period when this letter was written.  On the contrary, he
lived, till the year 1776.-D.

(487) John, seventh Earl of Westmoreland.  He built the
Palladian Villa of Mereworth, in Kent, which is a nearly   exact
copy of the celebrated Villa Capra, near Vicenza.  He died in
1762.  Sir Francis Dashwood succeeded, on his decease, to the
barony in fee of Le Despencer.-D.

(488) Sir Francis Dashwood, nephew to the Earl of
Westmoreland, had gone violently into Opposition, on that
lord's losing his regiment.

(489) Mr. Glover. (Walpole always depreciates Glover; but his
conduct, upon the occasion referred to in the text, displayed
considerable ability.-D.) [His speech upon this occasion was
afterwards published in a pamphlet, entitled, ,A short Account of
the late Application to Parliament, made by the Merchants of
London, upon the Neglect of their Trade; with the Substance
thereof, as summed up by Mr. Glover.,,]

(490) Arthur Mohun St. Leger, third Viscount Doneraile, in
Ireland, of the first creation.
                 He was at this time member for Winchilsea, was
appointed a lord of the bedchamber to Frederick Prince of Wales
in 1747, and died at Lisbon in 1749.-D.

(491) George Forbes, third Earl of Granard in Ireland; an
admiral, and a member of the House of Commons.-D.

(492) Third son of the first Duke of St. Albans, created in 1750
Lord Vere of Hanworth in Middlesex.  He was the direct ancestor
of the present line of the St. Albans family.  His wife was Mary,
daughter and heiress of Thomas Chambers, Esq. of Hanworth, by
Lady Mary Berkeley, the sister of lady Betty Germain.-D.

(493) William Richard Chetwynd    'second brother of the first
viscount of that name; member of parliament successively for
Stafford and Plymouth.  He had been envoy at Genoa, and a lord of
the Admiralty; and he finally succeeded his two elder
brothers as third Viscount Chetwynd, in 1767.-D. [He was
familiarly called "Black Will," and sometimes "Oroonoka
Chetwynd," from his dark complexion.  He died in 1770.]

(494) Nathaniel Hooke, a laborious compiler, but a very bad
writer.  It is said, that the Duchess of Marlborough gave him
5000 pounds for the services he rendered her, in the
composition and publication of her apology.  She, however,
afterwards quarrelled with him, because she said he tried to
convert her to Popery.  Hooke was himself of that religion, and
was also a Quietist, and an enthusiastic follower of
Fenelon.  It was Hooke who brought a Catholic priest to attend
the deathbed of Pope; a proceeding which excited such bitter
inclination in the infidel Bolingbroke.  Hooke died July 19,
1763. [When Hooke asked Pope, "whether he should not send for a
priest, the dying    poet replied, "I do not suppose that is
essential, but it will look right."-Spence, p. 322.)

(495) Edward second Earl of Oxford and Earl Mortimer, only son of
the minister, he was a great and liberal patron of
literature and learned men, and completed the valuable
collection of manuscripts commenced by his father, which is now
in the British Museum. He married the great Cavendish
heiress, Lady Henrietta Cavendish Holles, daughter of Holles,
Duke of Newcastle, and died June 16, 1741.-D.

(496) By Buranello, and called "Scipione in Cartagine."-E.
(497) Mary Mann, afterwards married to Mr. Foote.


(498) Of Cumberland.  [William Augustus, third son of George II.)



234 Letter 57
To Sir Horace Mann.
March 10, 1742.

I will not work you up into a fright only to have the pleasure of
putting you out of it, but will tell you at once that we have
gained the greatest victory! I don't mean in the person of
Admiral Vernon, nor of Admiral Haddock; no. nor in that of his
Grace of Argyll.  By we, I don't mean we; England, but we,
literally we; not you and I, but we, the House of Orford.  The
certainty that the Opposition (or rather the Coalition, for that
is the new name they have taken) had of carrying every point they
wished, made them, in the pride of their hearts, declare that
they would move for the Secret Committee
yesterday (Tuesday), and next Friday would name the list, by
which day they should have Mr. Sandys from his reelection.  It
was, however, expected to be put off, as Mr. Pultney could not
attend the House, his only daughter was dying-they say she is
dead.(499) But an affair of consequence to them, and indeed to
the nation in general, roused all their rage, and drove them to
determine on the last violences.  I told you in my last, that the
new Admiralty was named, with a mixture of Tories; that is, it
was named by my Lord of Argyll; but the King
flatly put his negative on Sir John Cotton.  They said he was no
Tory now, (and, in truth, he yesterday in the House
professed himself a Whig,) and that there were no Tories left in
the nation.  The King replied, "that might be; but he was
determined to stand by those who had set him and his family upon
the throne." This refusal enraged them so much, that they
declared they would force him, not only to turn out all the old
ministry, but the new too, if he wished to save Sir R. and others
of his friends; and that, as they supposed he designed to get the
great bills passed, and then prorogue the
Parliament, they were determined to keep back some of the
chief bills, and sit all the summer, examining into the late
administration.  Accordingly, yesterday, in a most full house,
Lord Limerick (500) (who, last year, seconded the famous
motion )501)) moved for a committee to examine into the
conduct of the last twenty years, and was seconded by Sir John
St. Aubin.(502)  In short, (for I have not time to tell you the
debate at length,) we divided, between eight and nine, when there
was not a man of our party that did not expect to lose it by at
least fifteen or twenty, but, to our great
amazement, and their as great confusion, we threw out the
motion, by a majority of 244 against 242.(503) Was there ever a
more surprising event! a disgraced minister, by his personal
interest, to have a majority to defend him even from inquiry!
What was ridiculous, the very man who seconded the motion
happened to be shut out at the division; but there was one on our
side shut out too.

I don't know what violent step they will take next; it must be by
surprise, for when they could not carry this, it will be
impossible for them to carry any thing more personal.  We
trust that the danger is now past, though they had a great
meeting to-day at Doddington 'S,(504) and threaten still.  He was
to have made the motion, but was deterred by the treatment he met
last week.  Sir John Norris was not present; he has resigned all
his employments, in a pique for not being named of the new
Admiralty.  His old Grace of Somerset (505) is
reconciled to his son, Lord Hertford, on his late affair of
having the regiment taken from him: he sent for him, and told him
he had behaved like his son.

My dearest child, I have this moment received a most
unexpected and most melancholy letter from you, with an
account of your fever and new operation.  I did not in the least
dream of your having any more trouble from that
disorder! are YOU never to be delivered from it? Your letter has
shocked me extremely; and then I am terrified at the
Spaniards passing so near Florence.  If they should, as I fear
they will, stay there, how inconvenient and terrible it would be
for you, now you are ill! You tell me, and my good Mr.
Chute tells me, that you are out of all danger, and much
better; but to what can I trust, when you have these continual
relapses? The vast time that passes between your writing and my
receiving your letters, makes me flatter myself, that by now you
are out of all pain: but I am miserable, with finding that you
may be still subject to new torture!  not all your courage, which
is amazing can give me any about you.  But how can you write to
me? I will not suffer it-and now, good Mr. Chute will write for
you.  I am so angry at your writing
immediately after that dreadful operation, though I see your
goodness in it, that I will not say a word more to you.  All the
rest is to Mr. Chute.

What shall I say to you, my dearest Sir, for all your
tenderness to poor Mr. Mann and me? as you have so much
friendship for him, you may conceive how much I am obliged to
you.  How much do I regret not having had more opportunities of
showing you my esteem and love, before this new attention, to Mr.
Mann.  You do flatter me, and tell me he is
recovering--nay I trust you? and don't you say it, only to
comfort me?-Say a great deal for me to Mr. Whithed; he is
excessively good to me; I don't know how to thank him.  I am
happy that you are so well yourself, and so constant to your
fasting.  To reward your virtues, I will tell you the news I
know; not much, but very extraordinary.  What would be the most
extraordinary event that you think could happen? Would not-next
to his becoming a real patriot-the Duke of Argyll's resigning be
the most unexpected?  would any thing be more surprising than his
immediately resigning power at having felt the want of them? Be
that as it will, he literally, actually, resigned all his new
commissions yesterday, because the King refused to employ the
Tories.(506)  What part he will act next is yet to come.  Mrs.
Boothby said, upon the occasion, "that in one month's time he had
contrived to please the whole
nation-the Tories, by going to court; the Whigs, by leaving it."

They talk much of impeaching my father, since they could not
committee him; but as they could not, I think they will scarce be
able to carry a more violent step.  However, to show how little
Tory resentments are feared, the King has named a new Admiralty;
Lord Winchilsea, Admiral Cavendish, Mr. Cockburn, Dr. Lee, Lord
Baltimore, young Trevor,(507) (which is much disliked, for he is
of no consequence for estate, and less for parts, but is a
relation of the Pelhams,) and Lord Archibald Hamilton,(508)-to
please his Royal Highness.  Some of his
people (not the Lytteltons and Pitts) stayed away the other night
upon the Secret Committee, and they think he will at last rather
take his father's part, than Argyll's.

Poor Mr. PUltney has lost his girl: she was an only daughter, and
sensible and handsome.  He has only a son left, and, they say, is
afflicted to the greatest degree.

I will say nothing about old Sarah's Memoirs; for, with some
spirit they are nothing but remnants of old women's frippery.
Good night!  I recommend my poor Mr. Mann to you, and am
yours, most faithfully.

P. S. My dearest child, how unhappy I shall be, till I hear you
are quite recovered

(499) The young lady died on the preceding evening.  She was in
her fourteenth year.-E.

(500) William Hamilton, Lord Viscount Limerick. (According to the
peerages, Lord Limerick's Christian name was James, and not
William.-D.)

(501) For removing Sir Robert Walpole.

(502) Sir John St. Aubyn, of Clowance in Cornwall, third
baronet of that family.-D.  [He died in 1744.

(503) March 9. Motion in the House of Commons for a secret
committee to inquire into our affairs for twenty or twenty-one
years.  The Speaker said Ayes had it: one that was for it
divided the House.  The Noes carried it by 244 against 242.  Mr.
Sandys at Worcester, Mr. Pulteny at home-his daughter
dying.  The Prince at New.  Several of his servants, and
several Scotch members, not at the House; nor Lord
Winchelsea's brothers.  Gibbon, Rushout, Barnard voted for the
committee, but did not speak.  It is said that the Prince had
before this written to Lord Carteret, to desire that Lord
Archibald Hamilton and Lord Baltimore might be lords of the
Admiralty, and that this had been promised."-Secker, MS.-E.

(504) "Never was there," writes Mr. Orlebar to the Rev.  Mr.
Elough, "a greater disappointment.  Those who proved the
minority, were so sure of being the majority, that the great Mr.
Dodington harangued in the lobby those who went out at the
division to desire them not to go away, because there were
several other motions to be made in consequence of that: and
likewise to bespeak their attendance at the Fountain, in order to
settle the committee.  Upon which Sir George Oxenden, after they
found it was lost, whispered -@t friend thus: I Suppose we were
to desire Mr. D. to print the speeches he has just now made in
the lobby."

(505) Charles, commonly called "the proud Duke of Somerset."  An
absurd, vain, pompous man, who appears to have been also most
harsh and unfeeling to those who depended on him.-D.

(506) March 10.  Duke of argyle resigned his places to the
King.  He gave for a reason, that a proposal had been made to him
for going ambassador to Holland, which he understood to be
sending him out of the way." Secker MS.-E.

(507) The Hun. John Trevor, second son of Thomas, first Lord
Trevor.  He succeeded his elder brother Thomas, as third Lord
Trevor, in 1744.-D.

(508) Lord Archibald Hamilton was the seventh and youngest son of
Anne, Duchess of Hamilton, in her own right, and of
William, Earl of Selkirk, her husband, created by Charles II.
Duke of Hamilton, for life b.  Lord Archibald married Lady Jane
Hamilton, daughter of James, Earl of Abercorn, and by her had
three sons; of whom the youngest was Sir William
Hamilton, so long the British envoy at the court of Naples.-D.




237 Letter 58
To Sir Horace Mann.
Monday, March 22, 1742.
[Great part of this letter is lost.]

*** I have at last received a letter from you in answer to the
first I wrote you upon the change in the ministry.  I hope you
have received mine regularly since, that you may know all the
consequent steps.  I like the Pasquinades you sent me, and think
the Emperor's(509) letter as mean as you do.  I hope his state
will grow more abject every day.  It is amazing, the progress and
success of the Queen of Hungary's arms! It is said to-day, that
she has defeated a great body of the
Prussians in Moravia.  We are going to extend a helping hand to
her at last.  Lord Stair (510) has accepted what my Lord Argyll
resigned, and sets out ambassador to Holland in two days; and
afterwards will have the command of' the troops that are to be
sent into Flanders.  I am sorry I must send away this to-night,
without being able to tell you the event of to-morrow; but I will
let you know it on Thursday, if I write but two lines.  You have
no notion how I laughed at Mrs.
Goldsworthy's "talking from hand to mouth."(511)  How happy I am
that you have Mr. Chute still with you; you would have been
distracted else with that simple woman; for fools prey upon one
when one has no companion to laugh Them off.

I shall say every thing that is proper for you to the earl, and
shall take care about expressing you to him, as I know you have
your gratitude far more at heart, than what I am thinking of for
you, I mean your stay at Florence.  I have spoken very warmly to
Lord Lincoln about you, who, I am sure, will serve you to his
power.  Indeed, as all changes are at a stop, I am convinced
there will be no thought of removing you.  However, till I see
the situation of next winter, I cannot be easy on your account.

I have made a few purchases at Lord Oxford's sale; a small
Vandyke, in imitation of Teniers; an old picture of the
Duchess of Suffolk, mother of Lady Jane Grey, and her young
husband; a sweet bronze vase by Flamingo, and two or three other
trifles.  The things sold dear; the antiquities and
pictures for about five thousand pounds, which yet, no doubt,
cost him much more, for he gave the most extravagant prices.  His
coins and medals are now selling, and go still dearer.  Good
night!  How I wish for every letter to hear how you mend!

(509) Charles VII. the Emperor of the Bavarian family.-D.

(510) John Dalrymple, second Earl of Stair, a man much
distinguished both as a general and a diplomatist. [He served
with credit at Dettingen; but, after that battle, resigned his
military rank, indignant at the King's unjust partiality to the
Hanoverians.  However, on the rebellion of 1745, he was made
commander-in-chief, and materially assisted the Duke of
Cumberland in the campaign which ended at Culloden.  He died in
1747.]

(511) An expression of Mr. Chute.



238 Letter 59
To sir Horace Mann.
March 24, 1742.

I promised you in my last letter to send you the event of
yesterday.(512)  It was not such as you would wish, for on the
division, at nine o'clock at night, we lost it by 242 against
245.  We had three people shut out, so that a majority of
three (513) is so small that it is scarce doubted, but that, on
Friday, when we ballot for the twenty-one to form the
committee, we shall carry a list composed of our people, so that
then it will be better that we lost it yesterday, as they never
can trouble my Lord Orford more, when the Secret
Committee consists of his own friends.  The motion was made and
seconded by the same people as before: Mr. Pultney had been
desired, but refused, yet spoke very warmly for it.  He declared,
"that if they found any proofs against the earl, he would not
engage in the prosecution;" and especially protested against
resumptions of grants to his family, of which. he
said, "there had been much talk, but they were what he would
never come into, as being very illegal and unjust." The motion
was quite personal against lord Orford, singly and by name, for
his last ten years-the former question had been for twenty years,
but as the rules of Parliament do not allow of
repeating any individual motion in the same session of its
rejection, and as 'every' evasion is allowed in this country,
half the term was voted by the same House of Commons that had
refused an inquiry into the whole; a sort of proof that every
omne majus does not continere in se minus-but Houses of
Commons can find out evasions to logical axioms, as well as to
their own orders.  If they carry their list, my lord will be
obliged to return from Houghton.

After the division.  Mr. Pultney(514) moved for an address to the
King; to declare their resolution of standing by him,
especially in assisting the Queen of Hungary-but I believe, after
the loss of the question, he will not be in very good humour with
this address.

I am now going to tell you what you, will not have
expected-that a particular friend of yours opposed the motion,
and it was the first time he ever spoke.  To keep you not in
suspense, though you must have guessed, it was 220.(515)  As the
speech was very favourably heard, and has done him
service, I prevailed with him to give me a copy-here it is:-

Mr. Speaker,(516)-I have always thought, Sir, that incapacity and
inexperience must prejudice the cause they undertake to defend;
and it has been diffidence of myself, not distrust of the cause,
that has hitherto made me so silent upon a point on which I ought
to have appeared so zealous.

"While the attempts for this inquiry were made in general
terms, I should have thought it presumption in me to stand up and
defend measures in which so many abler men have been
engaged, and which, consequently, they could so much better
support; but when the attack grows more personal, it grows my
duty to oppose it more particularly, lest I be suspected of an
ingratitude which my heart disdains.  But I think, Sir, I
cannot be suspected of that, unless my not having abilities to
defend my father can be construed into a desire not to defend
him.

"My experience, Sir, is very small; I have never been
conversant in business and politics, and have sat a very short
time in this house -with so slight a fund, I must much
mistrust my power to serve him-especially as in the short time I
have sat here, I have seen that not his own knowledge,
innocence, and eloquence, have been able to protect him
against a powerful and determined party.  I have seen, since his
retirement, that he has many great and noble friends, who have
been able to protect him from farther violence.  But, Sir, when
no repulses can calm the clamour against him, no motives should
sway his friends from openly undertaking his defence.  When the
King has conferred rewards on his services; when the Parliament
has refused its assent to any inquiries of complaint against him;
it is but maintaining the King's and our own honour, to reject
this motion-for the repeating which, however, I cannot think the
authors to blame, as I suppose now they have turned him out, they
are willing to inquire whether they had any reason to do so.

"I shall say no more, Sir, but leave the material part of this
defence to the impartiality, candour, and credit of men who are
no ways dependent on him.  He has already found that
defence, Sir, and I hope he always will! It is to their
authority I trust-and to me, it is the strongest proof of
innocence, that for twenty years together, no crime could be
solemnly alleged against him; and since his dismission, he has
seen a majority rise up to defend his character in that very
House of Commons in which a majority had overturned his power.
As, therefore, Sir, I must think him innocent, I stand up to
protect him from injustice-had he been accused, I should not have
given the House this trouble: but I think, Sir, that the
precedent of what was done upon this question a few days ago, is
a sufficient reason, if I had no other, for me to give my
negative now."

William Pitt, some time after, in the debate, said, how very
commendable it was in him to have made the above speech, which
must have made an impression upon the House; but if It was
becoming in him to remember that he was the child of the
accused, that the House ought to remember too that they are the
children of their country.  It was a great compliment from him,
and very artful too.

I forgot to tell you in my last, that one of our men-of-war,
commanded by Lord Bamffe,(518) a Scotchman, has taken another
register ship, of immense value.

You will laugh at a comical thing that happened the other day to
Lord Lincoln.  He sent the Duke of Richmond word that he would
dine with him in the country, and if he would give him leave,
would bring lord Bury with him.  It happens that Lord Bury is
nothing less than the Duke of Richmond's nephew.(519) The Duke,
very properly, sent him word back, that Lord Bury might bring
him, if he pleased.


I have been plagued all this morning with that oaf of unlicked
antiquity, Prideaux,(520) and his deaf boy.  He talked through
all Italy, and every thing in all Italy.  Upon mentioning
Stosch, I asked if he had seen his collection.  He replied, very
few of his things, for he did not like his company; that he never
heard so much heathenish talk in his days.  I
inquired what it was, and found that Stosch had one day said
before him, "that the soul was only a little glue." I laughed so
much that he walked off; I suppose, thinking, that I
believed so too.  By the way, tell Stosch that a gold Alectus
sold at Lord Oxford's sale for above threescore pounds.  Good
night, my dear child!  I am just going to the ridotto; one hates
those places, comes away out of humour, and yet one goes again!
How are you! I long for your next letter to answer me.

(512) The debate in the House of Commons on Lord Limerick's
motion for a Secret Committee to inquire into the conduct of the
Earl of Orford during the last ten years of his
administration.-E.

(513) The motion was carried by a majority of seven, the
numbers being 252 against 245.-E.

(514) This was much mentioned in the pamphlets written against
the war, which was said to have been determined "by a
gentleman's fumbling in his pocket for a piece of paper at ten
o'clock at night," and the House's agreeing to the motion
without any consideration.

(515) The author of these letters.

(516) There is a fictitious speech printed for this in several
Magazines of that time, but which does not contain one
sentence of the true one.

(517) The following note of this debate is from the Bishop of
Oxford's diary.-,, March 23.  Motion by Lord Limerick, and
seconded by Sir J. St. Aubin, on the 9th instant, for a Secret
Committee of twenty-one, to examine into the Earl of Orford's
conduct for the last ten years of his being chancellor of the
exchequer and lord of the treasury.  Mr. Pultney said,
ministers should always remember the account they must make; that
he was against rancour in the inquiry, desired not to be named
for the committee, particularly because of a rash word he had
used, that he would pursue Sir Robert Walpole to his destruction;
that now the minister was destroyed, he had no ill-will to the
man; that from his own knowledge and
experience of many of the Tories, he believed them to be as
sincerely for the King and this family as himself; that he was
sensible of the disagreeable situation he was in, and would get
out of it as soon as he could.  Mr. Sandys spoke for the motion,
and said, he desired his own conduct might always be strictly
inquired into.  Lord Orford's son, and Mr. Ellis
spoke well against the motion.  It was carried by 252 against
245.  Three or four were shut out, who would have been against
it.  Mr. William -Finch against it. The Prince's servants for it.
Then Mr. Pultney moved for an address of duty to the King &e.
which he begged might pass without opposition; and
accordingly it did so.  But Mr. W. W. wynne and several
others, went out of the House; which was by some understood to be
disapprobation, by others accident or weariness," Secker MS.-E.

(518) alexander Ogilvy, sixth Lord Banff, commanded the
Hastings man-of war in 1742 and 1743, and captured, during that
time, a valuable outward-bound Spanish register-ship, a Spanish
privateer of twenty guns, a French polacca with a rich cargo, and
other vessels.  He died at Lisbon in November 1746, at the early
age of twenty-eight.-D.

(519) George Lord Bury, afterwards third Earl of Albemarle.  His
mother was Lady Anne Lennox, sister of the Duke of
Richmond.-D.  His lordship served as aide-de-camp) to the Duke of
Cumberland at the battle of Fontenoy and at Culloden, and
commanded in chief at the reduction of the Havannah.  He died in
1772.)

(520 Grandson of Dean Prideaux; he was just returned out of
Italy, with his son.



241 Letter 60
To Sir Horace Mann.
Downing Street, April 1, 1742.

I received your letter of March 18th, and would be as
particular in the other dates which you have sent me in the end
of your letter, but our affairs having been in such
confusion, I have removed all my papers In general from hence,
and cannot now examine them.  I have, I think, received all
yours: but lately I received them two days at least after
their arrival, and evidently opened; so we must be cautious now
what we write.  Remember this, for of your last the seal had been
quite taken off and set on again.

Last Friday we balloted for the Secret Committee.  Except the
vacancies, there were but thirty-one members absent: five
hundred and eighteen gave in lists.  At six that evening they
named a committee of which Lord Hartington was chairman, (as
having moved for it,) to examine the lists.  This lasted from
that time, all that night, till four in the afternoon of the next
day; twenty-two hours without remission.  There were
sixteen people, of which were Lord Hartington and Coke, who sat
up the whole time, and one of theirs, Velters
Cornwall,(521) fainted with the fatigue and heat, for people of
all sorts were admitted into the room, to see the lists drawn; it
was in the Speaker's chambers.  On the conclusion, they found the
majority was for a mixed list, but of which the Opposition had
the greater number.  Here are the two lists, which were given out
by each side, but of which people altered several in their
private lists.

THE COURT LIST.

William Bowles.
*Lord Cornbury.(522)
*William Finch.(523)
Lord Fitzwilliam.
Sir Charles Gilmour.
*Charles Gore.
H. Arthur Herbert.(524)
Sir Henry Liddel.(525)
John Plumptree (526)
Sir John Ramsden.
Strange, Solicitor-General.
Cholmley Turnor.
John Talbot.(527)
General Wade.(528)
James West.(529)

THE OPPOSITION LIST.

Sir John Barnard.
Alexander Hume Campbell.(530)
Sir John Cotton.
George Bubb Doddington.(531)
Nicholas Fazakerley.
Henry Furnese.
 Earl of Granird.
Mr. Hooper.(532)
Lord Limerick.(533)
George Lyttelton.(534)
John Philips-(535)
William Pitt.(536)
Mr. Prouse.
Edmund Waller.(537)
Sir Watkyn Williams Wynn.

Besides the following six which were in both lists-

These Six, On casting up the numbers, had those marked against
their names, and were consequently chosen.  Those with this mark
(*) were reckoned of the Opposition.

*George Compton 515
*William Noell 512 (538)
*Lord Quarendon 512 (539)
*Sir John Rushout 516 (540)
*Samuel Sandys 516 (541)
Sir John St. Aubin 518

On casting up the numbers, the lists proved thus:-

*Sir John Barnard 268
*Nicholas Fazakerley 262 (542)
*Henry Furnese 282
*Earl of Granard 258
*Mr.  Hooper 265
*William Pitt 259
*Mr. Prouse 259
*Edmund Waller 259
William Bowles 259
*Lord Cornbury 262
Solicitor-General 259
Cholmley Turnor 259

This made eighteen: Mr. Finch, Sir Harry Liddel, and Mr.
Talbot, had 258 each, and Hume Campbell 257, besides one in which
his name was mis-written, but allowed; out of these
four, two were to be chosen: it was agreed that the Speaker was
to choose them; he, with a resolution not supposed to be in him,
as he has been the most notorious affecter of
popularity, named Sir Harry Liddel and Mr. 'albot; so that, on
the whole, we have just five that we can call our own.(543)
These will not be sufficient to stop their proceedings, but by
being privy, may stop any iniquitous proceedings.  They have
chosen Lord Limerick chairman.  Lord Orford returns tomorrow from
Houghton to Chelsea, from whence my uncle went in great fright to
fetch him.

I was yesterday presented to the Prince and Princess; but had not
the honour of a word from either: he did vouchsafe to talk to
Lord Walpole the day before.

Yesterday the Lord Mayor brought in their favourite bill for
repealing the Septennial Act, but we rejected it by 284 to
204.(544)

You shall have particular accounts of the Secret Committee and
their proceedings: but It will be at least a month before they
can make any progress.  You did not say any thing about
yourself in your last; never omit it, my dear child.

(521) Velters Cornwall, Esq., of Meccas Court, in
Herefordshire, and member for that county.-D.

(522) Son of the Earl of Clarendon.

(523) Afterwards vice-chamberlain.

(524) Afterwards Earl of Powis.

(525) Afterwards Lord Ravensworth.

(526) He had a place in the Ordnance.

(527) Son of the late lord chancellor, and afterwards a judge.

(528) Afterwards field.marshal.

(529) Afterwards secretary of the treasury.

(530) Afterwards solicitor to the Prince.

(531) Had been a lord of the treasury.

(532) Had a place on a change of the ministry. (He was a
Hampshire gentleman, and member for Christchurch.-D.)

(533) Afterwards King's remembrancer.

(534) Afterwards cofferer.

(535) Afterwards a lord of trade and baronet.

(536) Afterwards paymaster.

(537) Afterwards cofferer.

(538) Afterwards a judge.

(539) Afterwards Earl of Lichfield.

(540) Afterwards treasurer of the navy.

(541) Afterwards chancellor of the exchequer, then cofferer, and
then a baron.

(542) Nicholas Fazakerley, Esq.  Walpole calls him "a tiresome
Jacobite lawyer." He, however, appears to have been a speaker of
some weight in the House of Commons, and distinguished
himself by his opposition to Lord Hardwicke's mischievous
marriage bill in the year 1753.-D.  (He died in 1767.)

(543) "March 26, 27. The House of commons balloted for their
committee, being called over, and each opening his list at the
table, and putting it into a vessel which stood there.  This was
ended by five.  Then a committee began to examine the
lists, and sat from that time till four the next afternoon: for,
though two lists were given out, many delivered in
consisted partly of one, and partly of the other; and many were
put in different order.  Sir Thomas Drury, a friend of Lord
Orford's, put down four of the opposite side in his list.  Lord
Orford's friends hoped it would bring moderate persons over to
them, if they put some on their list who were not
partial to him."-" March 29.  The decision between Sir H.
Lyddel, Mr. J. Talbot. and Mr. W. Finch, was left to the
Speaker, who chose the two former." Secker MS.-E.

(544) This is not correct.  It appears, by the Journals, that the
motion passed in the negative by 204 against 184.  The debate is
thus noticed by the Bishop of Oxford:-"March 31. Sir Robert
Cotschall, Lord Mayor, moved for the repeal of the
Septennial Bill.  Mr. Pultney said, he thought annual
parliaments would be best, but preferred septennial to
triennial and voted against the motion.  In all, 204 against it,
and 184 for it."  Secker MS.-E.



243 Letter 61
To Sir Horace Mann.
London, April 8, 1742.

You have no notion how astonished I was, at reading your
account of Sir Francis Dashwood!-that it should be possible for
private and personal pique so to sour any man's temper and
honour, and so utterly to change their principles!  I own I am
for your mentioning him in your next despatch: they may at least
intercept his letters, and prevent his dirty
intelligence.  As to Lady Walpole,(545) her schemes are so wild
and so ill-founded, that I don't think it worth while to take
notice of them.  I possibly may mention this new one of changing
her name, to her husband, and of her coming-over
design, but I am sure he will only laugh at it.

The ill-situation of the King, which you say is so much talked of
at the Petraia,(546) Is not true; indeed he and the Prince are
not at all more reconciled for being reconciled; but I think his
resolution has borne him out.  All the public
questions are easily carried, even with the concurrence of the
Tories.  Mr. Pultney proposed to grant a large sum for
assisting the Queen of Hungary, and got Sir John Barnard to move
it.  They have given the King five hundred thousand
pounds for that purpose.(547)  The land-tax of four shillings in
the pound is continued.  Lord Stair is gone to Holland, and
orders are given to the regiments and guards to have their camp
equipages ready.  As to the Spanish war and Vernon, there is no
more talk of them; one would think they had both been taken by a
privateer.

We talk of adjourning, soon for a month or six weeks, to give the
Secret Committee time to proceed, which yet they have not done.
Their object is returned from Houghton in great health and
greater spirits.  They are extremely angry with him for laughing
at their power.  The concourse to him is as great as ever; so is
the rage against him.  All this week the mob has been carrying
about his effigies in procession, and to the Tower.  The chiefs
of the Opposition have been so mean as to give these mobs money
for bonfires, particularly the Earls of Lichfield, Westmoreland,
Denbigh, (548) and Stanhope:(549) the servants of these last got
one of these figures, chalked out a place for the heart and shot
at it.  You will laugh at me, who, the other day, meeting one of
these mobs, drove up to it to see what was the matter: the first
thing I beheld was a maulkin, in a chair, with three footmen, and
a label on the breast, inscribed "Lady mary." (550)

The Speaker, who has been much abused for naming two of our
friends to the Secret Committee, to show his
disinterestedness, has resigned his place of treasurer of the
navy.  Mr. Clutterbuck,(551) one of the late treasury is to have
it; so there seems a stop put to any new persons from the
Opposition.

His Royal Highness is gone to Kew his drawing-rooms Will not be
so crowded at his return, as he has disobliged so many
considerable people, particularly the Dukes of Montagu (552) and
Richmond, Lord Albemarle,(553) etc.  The Richmond went twice, and
yet was not spoken to; nor the others; nay, he has vented his
princely resentment even upon the women, for to Lady Hervey, not
a word.

This is all the news except that little Brook (554) is on the
point of matrimony with Miss Hamilton, Lady Archibald's
daughter.  She is excessively pretty and sensible, but as
diminutive as he.


I forgot to tell you that the Place Bill has met with the same
fate from the Lords as the Pension Bill (555) and the
Triennial Act; so that, after all their clamour and changing of
measures, they have not been able to get one of their
popular bills passed, though the newspapers, for these three
months, have swarmed with instructions for these purposes, from
the constituents of all parts of Great Britain to their
representatives.

We go into mourning on Sunday for the old Empress Amelia.(556)
Lord Chedworth, (557) one of three new Peers, is dead.  We hear
the King of Sardinia is at Piacenza, to open the
campaign.  I shall be in continual fears lest they disturb you at
Florence.  All love to the Chutes, and my compliments to all my
old acquaintance. I don't think I have forgot one of Them.
Pataman is entirely yours, and entirely handsome. Good night!

(545) Margaret Rolle, a great Devonshire heiress, the wife of
Robert, Lord Walpole, afterwards second Earl of Orford, the
eldest son of the minister.  She was separated from her
husband, and had quarrelled violently with his whole family.  She
resided principally at Florence, where she died in 1781; having
married secondly, after the death of Lord Orford, the Hon.
Sewallis Shirley.  She was a woman of bad character, as well as
Half mad: which last quality she to communicated to her
unfortunate son George, third Earl of Orford.  She
succeeded, in her own right, to the baronies of Clinton and Say,
upon the death, in 1751, of Hugh, Earl and Baron
Clinton.-D.  (This lady was married to Lord Walpole in 1724.  In
a letter to the Countess of mar, written in that year, Lady Mary
Wortley Montagu says:- "I have so good an opinion of your taste,
to believe harlequin in person will not make you laugh so much as
the Earl of Stair's furious passion for Lady
Walpole, aged fourteen and some months.  Mrs. Murray undertook to
bring the business to bear, and provided the opportunity, a great
ingredient You'll Say but the young lady proved
skittish.  She did not only turn his heroic flame into present
ridicule, but exposed all his generous sentiments, to divert her
Husband and father-in-law."  Works, vol. ii. p. 188.]

(546) A villa belonging to the Great Duke, where Prince Craon
resided in summer.

(547) "April 2.  In the Commons, 500,000 pounds voted for the
Queen of Hungary; I believe nem. con. Sir John Barnard moved it;
which, Mr. Sandys told me, was that day making himself the
chancellor of the exchequer.  He told me, also, the King was
unwilling to grant the Prince 50,000 pounds a-year; and I am told
from other hands, that he saith he never promised it.  The Bishop
of Sarum (Sherlock) says, Sir Robert Walpole told him, the King
would give 30,000 pounds, but no more.  Mr.
Sandys appeared determined against admitting Tories, and said it
was wonderful their union had held so long, and could not be
expected to hold longer; that he could not imagine why
every body spoke against Lord Carteret, but that he had better
abilities than any body; that as soon as foreign affairs could be
settled, they would endeavour to reduce the expenses of the crown
and interest of the debts."  Secker MS.

(548) William Fielding, fifth Earl of Denbigh, died 1755.-D.

(549) Philip, second Earl Stanhope, eldest son of the general and
statesman, who founded this branch of the Stanhope family.  Earl
Philip was a man of retired habits, and much devoted to
scientific pursuits.  He died in 1786.-D.

(550) Lady Mary Walpole, daughter of Sir R. W.

(551) This Mr. Clutterbuck had been raised by Lord Carteret, when
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, whom he betrayed to Sir R. Walpole;
the latter employed him, but never would trust him.  He then
ingratiated himself with Mr. Pelham, under a pretence of candour
and integrity, and was continually infusing
scruples into him on political questions, to distress Sir R. On
the latter's quitting the ministry, he appointed a board of
treasury at his own house, in order to sign some grants; Mr.
Clutterbuck made a pretence to slip away, and never returned.  He
was a friend, too, of the Speaker's: when Sir R. W. was told that
Mr. Onslow had resigned his place, and that Mr.
Clutterbuck was to succeed him, said, "I remember that the Duke
of Roxburgh, who was a great pretender to conscience, persuaded
the Duke of Montrose to resign the seals of'
Secretary of state, on some scruple, and begged them himself the
next day."  Mr. Clutterbuck died very soon after this
transaction. [Mr. Clutterbuck was appointed treasurer of the navy
in May, and died in November following.]

(552) John, second and last Duke of Montagu, of the first
creation. He was a man of Some talent, and great eccentricity.
Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough, his mother-in-law, Used to say of
him, "My son-in-law Montagu is fifty, and he is still as mere a
boy as if he was only fifteen.".-D.  On his death, in 1749),the
title became extinct.)

(553) William-Anne Keppel, second Earl of Albemarle.  An
amiable prodigal who filled various great offices, through the
favour of Lady Yarmouth, who died insolvent.-D.  [He married. in
1723, Lady Anne Lennox, daughter of Charles, first Duke of
Richmond, and, whilst ambassador to the French court, died
suddenly at Paris, in 1755.]

(554) Francis Greville, Lord Brooke, created an earl in 1746.
[And, in 1759, raised to the dignity of Earl of Warwick.  He died
in 1773.]

(555) "March 26.  The Pension Bill read a second time in the
Lords.  Duke of Devonshire said a few words against it.  Lord
Sandwich pleaded for it, that some persons now in the ministry
had patronized it, and for their sakes it should be committed;
Lord Romney, that some objections against it had been obviated by
alterations.  These three speeches lasted scarce half a quarter
of an hour.  The question being put for committing, not-content,
76; content, 46. I was one of five bishops for it; Lord Carteret
and Lord Berkeley against it." Secker
318.-E.

(556) Widow of the Emperor Joseph.  She was of the house of
Wolfenbuttle.

(557) John Bowe, Esq. of Stowell, created a baron in May 1741.



246 Letter 62
To Sir Horace Mann.
April 15, 1742.

The great pleasure I receive from your letters is a little abated
by my continually finding that they have been opened.  It is a
mortification as it must restrain the freedom of our
correspondence, and at a time when more than ever I must want to
talk to you.  Your brother showed me a letter, which I
approve extremely, yet do not think this a proper time for it;
for there IS not only no present prospect of any further
alterations, but, if there were, none that will give that
person any interest.  He really has lost himself so much, that it
will be long before he can recover credit enough to do any body
any service.  His childish and troublesome behaviour,
particularly lately (,but I Will not mention instances,
because I would not have it known whom I mean), has set him in
the lowest light imaginable.  I have desired your brother to keep
your letter, and when we see a necessary or convenient
opportunity, which I hope will not arrive, it shall be
delivered.  However, if you are still of that opinion, say so,
and your brother shall carry it.  At present, my dear child, I am
much more at repose about you, as I trust no more will
happen to endanger your situation.  I shall not only give you the
first notice, but employ all the means in my power to
prevent your removal.

The Secret Committee, it seems, are almost aground, and, it is
thought, will soon finish.  They are now reduced, as I hear, to
inquire into the last month, not having met with any
foundation for proceeding in the rest of the time.  However, they
have this week given a strong instance of' their
arbitrariness and private resentments.  They sent for
Paxton,(558) the solicitor of the treasury, and examined him
about five hundred pounds which he had given seven years ago at
Lord Limerick's election.  The man, as it directly tended to
accuse himself, refused to answer.  They complained to the House,
and after a long debate he was committed to the
sergeant-at-arms -, and to-day, I hear, for still refusing, will
be sent to Newgate.(559)  We adjourn to-day for ten days, but the
committee has leave to continue sitting. . But, my dear child,
you may be quite at ease, for they themselves seem to despair of
being able to effect any thing.

The Duke (560) is of age to-day, and I hear by the guns, is just
gone with the King, to take his seat in the Lords.

I have this morning received the jar of cedrati safe, for
which I give you a million of thanks.  I am impatient to hear of
the arrival of your secretary and the things at Florence; it is
time for you to have received them.

Here! Amorevoli has sent me another letter.  Would you believe
that our wise directors for next year will not keep the
Visconti, and have sent for the Fumagalli?  She will not be heard
to the first row of the pit.

I am growing miserable, for it is growing fine weather-that is,
every body is going out of town.  I have but just begun to like
London, and to be settled in an agreeable set of' people, and now
they are going to wander all over the kingdom.
Because they have some chance of having a month of good
weather they will bury themselves three more in bad.

The Duchess of Cleveland (561) died last night of what they call
a miliary fever, which is much about: she had not been ill two
days.  So the poor creature, her duke, is again to be let; she
paid dear for the hopes of being duchess dowager.  Lady Catherine
Pelham,(562) has miscarried of twins; but they are so miserable
with the loss of their former two boys, that they seem glad now
of not having any more to tremble for.

There is a man who has by degrees bred himself up to walk upon
stilts so high, that he now stalks about and peeps into one pair
of stairs windows.  If this practice should spread,
dining-rooms will be as innocent as chapels.  Good night! I never
forget my best loves to the Chutes.

P. S. I this moment hear that Edgecombe (563) and Lord
Fitzwilliam are created English peers: I am sure the first is,
and I believe the second.

(558) Commemorated in a line of Pope-"'Tis all a libel,
Paxton, Sir, will say."-D.

(559) On a division of 180 against 128, Paxton was this day
committed to Newgate where he remained till the end of the
session, July 15.  He died in April 1744.-E.

(560) The Duke of Cumberland, third Son of George the
Second.-E.

(561) Lady Henrietta Finch, sister of the Earl of Winchilsea,
wife of William, Duke of Cleveland. [On whose death, in 1774, the
title became extinct.]

(562) Catherine, sister of John Manners, Duke of Rutland, and
 wife of Henry Pelham.  They lost their two sons by an epidemic
sore-throat, after which she would never go to Esher, or any
house where she had seen them.

(563) Richard Edgecombe, a great friend of Sir R. Walpole, was
Created a baron to prevent his being examined by the Secret
Committee concerning the management of the Cornish boroughs.  (He
was created Lord Edgecumbe on the 20th of April, and in December
appointed chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster.  He died in
1758.]



247 Letter 63
To Sir Horace Mann.
London, April 22, 1742.

You perceive, by the size of my paper, how little I have to say.
The whole town is out of town for Easter, and nothing left but
dust, old women, and the Secret Committee.  They go on warmly,
and have turned their whole thoughts to the
secret-service money, after which they are inquiring by all
methods.  Sir John Rawdon (564) (you remember that genius in
Italy) voluntarily swore before them that, at the late
election at Wallingforrd, he spent two thousand pounds, and that
one Morley promised him fifteen hundred more, if he would lay it
out. "Whence was Morley to have it?"-"I don't know; I believe
from the first minister." This makes an evidence.  It is thought
that they will ask leave to examine members, which was the reason
of Edgecumbe's going into the peerage, as they supposed he had
been the principal agent for the Cornish
boroughs.  Sir John Cotton said, upon the occasion, "Between
Newgate (565 and the House of Lords the committee will not get
information."

The troops for Flanders go on board Saturday se'nnight, the first
embarkation of five thousand men: the whole number is to be
sixteen thousand.  It is not yet known what success Earl Stair
has had at the Hague.  We are in great joy upon the news of the
King of Prussia's running away from the Austrians:
(566) though his cowardice is well established, it is yet
believed that the flight in question was determined by his head,
not his heart; in short, that it was treachery to his allies.

I forgot to tell you, that of the Secret Committee Sir John
Rushout and Cholmley TurnOr never go to it, nor, which is more
extraordinary, Sir John Barnard.  He says he thought their views
were more general, but finding them so particular
against one man, he Will not engage with them.

I have been breakfasting this morning at Ranelagh-garden:
(567) they have built an immense amphitheatre, with balconies
full of little ale-houses; it is in rivalry to Vauxhall, and
costs above twelve thousand pounds.  The building is not
finished, but, they get great sums by people going to see it and
breakfasting in the house: there were yesterday no less than
three hundred and eighty persons, at eighteen pence
a-piece.  You see how poor we are, when, with a tax of four
shillings in the pound, we are laying out such sums for cakes and
ale.

We have a new opera, with your favourite song, se cerca, se dice:
(568) Monticelli sings it beyond what you can conceive.  Your
last was of April 8th.  I like the medal of the Caesars and
Nihils (569) extremely; but don't at all like the cracking of
your house, (570) except that it drives away your
Pettegola. (571) What I like much worse is your recovering your
strength so slowly; but I trust to the warm weather.

Miss Granville, daughter of the late Lord Lansdown, (572) is
named maid of honour, in the room of Miss Hamilton, who I told
you is to be Lady Brook-they are both so small! what little eggs
they will lay!

How does my Princess?(573)  does not she deign to visit you too?
Is Sade (574) there still?  Is Madame Suares quite gone into
devotion yet?  Tell me any thing-I love any thing that you write
to me.  Good night!

(564) He was afterwards made an Irish lord. (Lord Rawdon in 1750,
and Earl of Moira in 1761.  His first two wives were the
daughters of the Earl of Egmont and Viscount Hillsborough.  His
third wife, by whom he was the father of the late Lord Hastings,
was the daughter, and eventually the heiress, of Theophilus,
ninth Earl of Huntingdon.-D.)

(565) Alluding to Paxton, who was sent thither for refusing to
 give evidence.

(566) this must allude to the King of Prussia's abandonment of
his design to penetrate through Austria to Vienna, which he gave
of) in consequence of the lukewarmness of his Saxon and the
absence of his French allies.  It is curious now, when the mist
of contemporary prejudices has passed away, to hear
Frederick the Great accused of cowardice.-D.

(567) the once celebrated place of amusement was so called from
its site being that of a villa of' Viscount Ranelagh, near
Chelsea. The last entertainment given in it was the
installation ball of the Knights of the Bath, in 1802.  It has
since been razed to the ground.-E.

(568) In the Olimpiade.

(569) A satirical medal: on one side was the head of Francis,
Duke of Lorrain (afterwards emperor) with this motto, aut
Caesar aut nihil: on the reverse, that of the Emperor Charles
Vii. Elector of Bavaria, who had been driven out of his
dominions, et Caesar et nihil.

(570) Sir H. Mann had mentioned, in one of his letters, the
appearance of several cracks in the walls of his house at
Florence.  Mrs. Goldsworthy, the wife of the English consul,
               had taken refuge in it when driven from Leghorn by
an earthquake.-D.

(571) Mrs. ('Goldsworthy.

(572) George Granville, Lord Lansdown, Pope's "Granville the
polite," one of Queen
                     Anne's twelve peers, and one of the minor
poets of that time. He died in 1734, without
                     male issue, and his honours
extinguished.-D.

(573) Princess Craon.

(574) The Chevalier de Sade.



249 Letter 64
To Sir Horace Mann.
London, April 29, 1742.

By yours of April 17, N. S. and some of your last letters, I find
my Lady Walpole is more mad than ever-why, there never was so
wild a scheme as this, of setting up an interest
through Lord Chesterfield!  one who has no power; and, if he had,
would think of, or serve her, one of the last persons upon earth.
What connexion has he with what interest could he have in
obliging her? and, but from views, what has he ever done, or will
he ever do? But is Richcourt (575) so shallow, and so ambitious,
as to put any trust in there projects?  My dear child, believe
me, if I was to mention them here, they would sound so
chimerical, so womanish, that I should be
laughed at for repeating them.  For yourself, be quite at
rest, and laugh, as I do, at feeble, visionary malice, and assure
yourself, whoever mentions such politics to you, that my Lady
Walpole must have very frippery intelligence from
hence, if she can raise no better views and on no better
foundations.  For the poem you mention, I never read it: upon
inquiry, I find there was such a thing though now quite
obsolete: undoubtedly not Pope's, and only proves what I said
before, how low, how paltry, how uninformed her ladyship's
correspondents must be.

We are now all military! all preparations for Flanders! no
parties but reviews; no officers, but "hope" they are to go
abroad-at least, it is the fashion to say so.  I am studying
lists of regiments and Dames of colonels-not that "I hope I am to
go abroad," but to talk of those who do.  Three thousand men
embarked yesterday and the day before, and the thirteen thousand
others sail as soon as the transports can return.  Messieurs
d'Allemagne (576) roll their red eyes, stroke up their great
beards, and look fierce-you know one loves a
review and a tattoo.

We had a debate yesterday in the House on a proposal for
replacing four thousand men of some that are to be sent
abroad, that, in short, we might have fifteen thousand men to
guard the kingdom.  This was strongly opposed by the Tories, but
we carried it in the committee, 214 against 123, and
to-day, in the House, 280 against 169.  Sir John Barnard,
Pultney, the new ministry, all the Prince's people, except the
Cobham cousins,(577) the Lord Mayor, several of the
Opposition, voted with us; so you must interpret Tories in the
strongest sense of the word.

The Secret Committee has desired leave to-day to examine three
members, Burrel, Bristow, and Hanbury Williams: (578) the two
first are directors of the bank; and it is upon an agreement made
with them, and at which Williams was present, about
remitting some money to Jamaica, and in which they pretend Sir
Robert made a bad bargain, to oblige them as members of
Parliament.  they all three stood up, and voluntarily offered to
be examined; so no vote passed upon it.

These are all the political news: there is little of any other
sort; so little gallantry is stirring, that I do not hear of so
much as one maid of honour who has declared herself with child by
any officer, to engage him not to go abroad.  I told you once or
twice that Miss Hamilton is going to be married to Lord Brook:
somebody wished Lord Archibald joy.  He replied, "Providence has
been very good to my family."

We had a great scuffle the other night at the Opera, which
interrupted it.  Lord Lincoln was abused in the most shocking
manner by a drunken officer, upon which he kicked him, and was
drawing his sword, but was prevented.  were they were put
under arrest, and the next morning, the man begged his pardon
before the Duke of Marlborough, Lord Albemarle, and other
officers, in the most submissive terms.  I saw the quarrel from
the other side of the house, and rushing to get to Lord Lincoln,
could not for the crowd.  I climbed into the front boxes, and
stepping over the shoulders of three ladies, before I knew where
I was, found I had lighted in Lord Rockingham's (579) lap.  It
was ridiculous! Good night!

(575) Count Richcourt was a Lorrainer, and chief minister of
Florence; there was a great connexion between him and Lady
Walpole.

(576)The royal family.

(577) Pitts, Grenvilles, Lytteltons, all related by marriage, or
female descent, to Lord Cobham.-D.

(578) Sir Charles Hanbury Williams, a devoted follower of Sir
Robert Walpole.  His various satirical poems against the
enemies and successors of that minister are well known, and must
ever be admired for their ease, their spirit, and the wit and
humour of their sarcasm.  It was said at the time that Sir
Charles's poetry had done more in three months to lower and
discredit those it was written against, than the Craftsman and
other abusive papers had been able to effect against Sir
Robert in a long series of years.-D.

(579) Lewis Watson, second Earl of Rockingham.  He married
Catharine, second daughter and coheir of George Sondes, Earl of
Feversham, and died in 1745.-D.



251 Letter 65
To Richard West, Esq.
London, May 4, 1742.

Dear West,
Your letter made me quite melancholy, till I came to the
postscript of fine weather.  Your so suddenly finding the
benefit of it makes me trust you will entirely recover your
health and spirits with the warm season: nobody wishes it more
than I: nobody has more reason, as few have known you so long.
Don't be afraid of your letters being dull.  I don't deserve to
be called your friend, if I were impatient at hearing your
complaints.  I do not desire you to suppress them till the causes
cease; nor should I expect you to write cheerfully
while you are Ill.  I never desire to write any man's life as a
stoic, and consequently should not desire him to furnish me with
opportunities of assuring posterity what pains he took not to
show any pain.

If you did amuse yourself with writing any thing in poetry, you
know how pleased I should be to see it; but for
encouraging you to it, d'ye see, 'tis an age most unpoetical!
'Tis even a test of wit to dislike poetry; and though Pope has
half a dozen old friends that he has preserved from the taste of
last century, yet, I assure you, the generality of readers are
more diverted with any paltry prose answer to old
Marlborough's secret history of Queen Mary's robes.  I do not
think an author would be universally commended for any
production in verse, unless it were an ode to the Secret
Committee, with rhymes of liberty and property, nation and
administration.

Wit itself is monopolized by politics; no laugh would be
ridiculous if it were not on one side or t'other.  Thus,
Sandys thinks he has spoken an epigram, when he crincles up his
nose and lays a smart accent on ways and means.

We may, indeed. hope a little better now to the declining
arts.  The reconciliation between the royalties is finished, and
fifty thousand pounds a-year more added to the heir
apparent's revenue.  He will have money now to tune up Glover,
and Thomson, and Dodsley again: Et spes
et ratio studiorum in Caesare tantUM.

Asheton is much yours.  He has preached twice at Somerset
Chapel with the greatest applause.  I do not mind his pleasing
the generality, for you know they ran as much after Whitfield as
they could after Tillotson; and I do not doubt but St. Jude
converted as many Honourable women as St. Paul.  But I am sure
you would approve his compositions, and admire them still more
when you heard him deliver them.  He will write to you himself
next post, but is not mad enough with his fame to write you a
sermon.  Adieu, dear child!  Write me the progress of your
recovery,(580) and believe it will give me a sincere pleasure;
for I am, yours ever.

(580) Mr. West died in less than a month from the date of this
letter, in the twenty-sixth year of his age.  (see ant`e, p. 121,
Letter 1.)  In his last letter to Grey, written a few days before
his death, he says, "I will take my leave of you for the present,
with a vale et vive paulisper cum vivis:" so little was he aware
of the short time that he himself would be
numbered among the living.  But this is almost constantly the
case with those who die of that most flattering of all
diseases, a consumption.  "Shall humanity," says Mason, "be
thankful or sorry that it is so?  Thankful, surely! for as this
malady generally attacks the young and the innocent, it seems the
merciful intention of Heaven, that to these death should come
unperceived, and, as it were, by stealth; divested of one of its
sharpest stings, the lingering expectation of their
dissolution."-E.




252 Letter 66
To Sir Horace Mann.
Downing Street, May 6, 1742.

I have received a long letter from you of the 22d of April.  It
amazes me! that our friends of Florence should not prove our
friends.(581)  Is it possible?  I have always talked of their
cordiality, because I was convinced they could have no shadow of
interest in their professions:--of that, indeed, I am convinced
still-but how could they fancy they had?  There is the wonder!
If they wanted common honesty, they seem to have wanted common
sense more.  What hope of connexion could there ever be between
the British ministry and the Florentine nobility!  The latter
have no views for being, or knowledge for being envoys, etc.
They are too poor and proud to think of trading with us; too
abject to hope for the restoration of their liberty from us-and,
indeed, however we may affection our own, we have showed no
regard for their liberty-they have had no reason ever to expect
that from us!  In short, to me it is mystery! But how could you
not tell me some particulars?  Have I so little interested myself
with Florence, that you should think I can be satisfied without
knowing the least particulars? I must know names.  Who are these
wretches that I am to scratch out of my list?  I shall give them
a black blot the moment I know who have behaved ill to you.  Is
Casa Ferroni of the number?  I suspect it:-that was of your first
attachments.  Are the prince and princess dirty?-the Suares?-tell
me, tell me!  Indeed, my dear Mr. Chute, I am not of your
opinion, that he should shut himself up and despise them; let him
go abroad and despise them.  Must he mope because the Florentines
are like the rest of the world? But that is not true, for the
world in England have not declared themselves so suddenly.  It
has not been the fashion to desert the earl and his friends: he
has had more concourse, more professions, and has still, than in
the height of his power.  So your neighbours have been too hasty:
they are new style, at least, eleven days before us.  Tell them,
tell Richcourt, tell his Cleopatra,(582) that all their hopes are
vanished, all their faith in Secret Committees-the reconciliation
is made, and whatever reports their secretships may produce,
there will be at least above a hundred votes added to our party.
Their triumph has been but in hope, and their hope has failed in
two months.

As to your embroil with Richcourt, I condemn you excessively: not
that you was originally in fault, but by seeming to own yourself
so. He is an impertinent fellow, and will be so if you'll let
him.  My dear child, act with the spirit of your friends here;
show we have lost no credit by losing power, and that a little
Italian minister must not dare to insult you.  Publish the
accounts I send you; which I give you my honour are authentic.
If they are not, let Cytheris, your Antony's travelling
concubine, contradict them.

You tell me the St. Quintin is arrived at Genoa: I see by the
prints of to-day that it is got to leghorn: I am extremely glad,
for I feared for it, for the poor boy, and for the things.  Tell
me how you like your secretary.  I shall be quite happy, if I
have placed one with you that you like.

I laughed much at the family of cats I am to receive.  I believe
they will be extremely welcome to Lord Islay now: for he appears
little, lives more darkly and more like a wizard than ever.
These huge cats will figure prodigiously in his cell: he is of'
the mysterious, dingy nature of Stosch.

As words is what I have not rhetoric to
find out to thank you, for sending me this paragraph of Madame
Goldsworthy, I can only tell you that I have laughed for an hour
at it.  This was one of my Lady Pomfret's correspondents.

There seems to be a little stop in our embarkations: since the
first, they have discovered that the horse must not go till all
the hay is provided.  Three thousand men will make a fine figure
towards supporting the balance of power! Our whole number was to
be but sixteen; and if all these cannot be assembled before the
end of July, what will be said of it?

The Secret Committee go on very pitifully: they are now inquiring
about some customhouse officers that were turned out at Weymouth
for voting wrong at elections.  Don't you think these articles
will prove to the world what they have been saying of Sir Robert
for these twenty years?  The House still sits in observance to
them; which is pleasant to me, for it keeps people in town.  We
have operas too; but they are almost over, and if it were not for
a daily east wind, they would give way to Vauxhall and Chelsea.
The new directors have agreed with the Fumagalli for next year,
but she is to be second woman: they keep the Visconti. Did I
never mention the Bettina, the first dancer.  It seems she was
kept by a Neapolitan prince, who is extremely jealous of her
thither.  About a fortnight ago, she fell ill, upon which her
Neapolitan footman made off immediately.  She dances again, but
is very weak, and thinks herself poisoned.

Adieu! my dear child; tell me you are well, easy, and in
spirits: kiss the Chutes for me, and believe me, etc

(581) This alludes to an account given by Sir Horace Mann, in one
of his letters, of the change he had observed in the manner of
many of the Florentines towards himself since Sir Robert
Walpole's retirement from office, upon the supposition
entertained by them that he was intimately connected with the
fallen minister@D.

(582) Lady Walpole.



254 Letter 67
To Sir Horace Mann.
London, May 13, 1742.

As I am obliged to put my letter into the secretary's office by
nine o'clock, and it now don't want a quarter of it, I can say
but three words, and must defer till next post answering Your
long letter by the courier.  I am this moment come from the
House, where we have had the first part of the Report from the
Secret Committee. It is pretty long; but, unfortunately for them,
there is not once to be found in it the name of the Earl of
Orford: there is a good deal about Mr. Paxton and the borough of
Wendover; and it appears that in eleven years Mr. Paxton has
received ninety-four thousand pounds unaccounted for: now, if
Lady Richcourt can make any thing of all this, you have freely my
leave to communicate it to her.  Pursuant to this report, and Mr.
Paxton's contumacy, they moved for leave to bring in a bill to
indemnify all persons who should accuse themselves of any crime,
provided they do but accuse Lord Orford, and they have carried it
by 251 to 228! but it is so absurd a bill, that there is not the
least likelihood of its passing the Lords.  By this bill, whoever
are guilty of murder, treason, forgery, etc. have nothing to do
but to add perjury, and swear Lord Orford knew of it, and they
may plead their pardon.  Tell Lady Richcourt this.  Lord Orford
knew of her gallantries: she may plead her pardon.  Good night! I
have not a moment to lose.




254 Letter 68
To Sir Horace Mann.
May 20, 1742.

I sent you a sketch last post of the division on the Indemnity
Bill.  As they carried the question for its being brought in,
they brought it in on Saturday; but were prevailed on to defer
the second reading till Tuesday.  Then we had a long debate till
eight at night, when they carried it, 228 against 217, only
eleven majority: before, they had had twenty-three.  They
immediately went into the committee on it,-and reported it that
night.  Yesterday it came to the last reading; but the House,
having sat so late the night before, was not so full, and they
carried it, 216 to 184.  But to-day it comes into the
Lords,-where they do not in the least expect to succeed; yet, to
show their spirit, they have appointed a great dinner at the
Fountain to-morrow to consider on methods for supporting the
honour of the Commons, as they call it, against the Lords, So now
all prospect of quiet seems to vanish!  The noise this bill makes
is incredible; it is so unprecedented, so violent a step! Every
thing is inflamed by Pultney, who governs both parties only, I
think, to exasperate both more.  Three of our own people of the
committee, the Solicitor,(582) Talbot, and Bowles, vote against
us in the Indemnity Bill, the two latter have even spoke against
us.  Sir Robert said, at the
beginning, when he was congratulated on having some of his own
friends in the committee, "The moment they are appointed, they
will grow so jealous of the honour of their committee, that they
will prefer that to every other consideration."(583)

Our foreign news are as bad as our domestic: there seem little
hopes of the Dutch coming into our measures; there are even
letters, that mention strongly their resolution of not
stirring-so we have Quixoted away sixteen thousand men! On
Saturday we had accounts of the Austrians having cut off two
thousand Prussians, in a retreat; but on Sunday came news of the
great victory,(584) which the latter have gained, killing six,
and taking two thousand Austrians prisoners, and that Prince
Charles is retired to Vienna wounded.  This will but too much
confirm the Dutch in their apprehensions of Prussia.
As to the long letter you wrote me, in answer to a very
particular one of mine, I cannot explain myself, till I find a
safer conveyance than the post, by which, I perceive all our
letters are opened.  I can only tell you, that in most things you
guessed right; and that as to myself (585) all is quiet.
I am in great concern, for you seem not satisfied with the boy we
sent you.  Your brother entirely agreed with me that he was what
you seem to describe; and as to his being on the foot of a
servant, I give you my honour I repeated it over and over to his
mother.  I suppose her folly was afraid of shocking him.  As to
Italian, she assured me he had been learning it some time.  If he
does not answer your purpose, let me know if you can dispose of
him any other way, and I will try to
accommodate you better.  Your brother has this moment been here,
but there was no letter for me; at least, none that they will
deliver yet.

I know not in the least how to advise Mr. Jackson.(586)  I do not
think Mr. Pelham the proper person to apply to; for the Duke of
Newcastle is as jealous of him as of any body.(587)  Don't say
this to him.  For Lord Hervey, though Mr. Jackson has interest
there, I would not advise him to try it, for both hate him.  The
application to the Duke of Newcastle by the Most direct means, I
should think the best, or by any one that can be serviceable to
the government.

You will laugh at an odd accident that happened the other day to
my uncle:(588) they put him into the papers for Earl of
Sheffield.  There have been little disputes between the two
Houses about coming into each other's House; when a lord comes
into the Commons, they call out, withdraw: that day, the
moment my uncle came in, they all roared out, Withdraw!
withdraw!

The great Mr. Nugent has been unfortunate, too, in parliament;
besides being very ill heard, from being a very indifferent
speaker, the other day on the Place Bill, (which, by the way, we
have new modelled and softened, and to which the Lords have
submitted to agree to humour Pultney,) he rose, and said, "He
would not vote, as he was not determined in his opinion; but he
would offer his sentiments; which were, particularly, that the
bishops had been the cause of this bill being thrown out before."
Winnington called him to order, desiring he would be tender of
the Church of England.  You know he was a papist.  In answer to
the beginning of his speech, Velters Cornwall, who is of the same
side, said, "He wondered that when that gentleman could not
convince himself by his eloquence, he
should expect to convince the majority."

Did I tell you that Lord Rochford,(589) has at last married Miss
Young?(590)  I say, at last, for they don't pretend to have been
married this twelvemonth; but they were publicly married last
week.  Adieu!

(582) John Strange, Esq. made Solicitor-general in 1736, and
Master of the Rolls in 1750, he died in 1754.-E.

(583) Voltaire has since made the same kind of observation in his
"Life of Louis XlV." Art of Calvinism;-"Les hommes se
piquent toujours de remplir un devoir qui les distingue."

(584) The battle of Chotusitz, or Czaslau, gained by the King of
Prussia over the very superior forces of the Austrians.  This
victory occasioned the peace between the contending
powers, and the cession of Silesia to the Prussian monarchy.- D.

(585) This relates to some differences between Mr. Walpole and
his father, to which the former had alluded in one of his
letters.  They never suited one another either in habits,
tastes, or opinions; in addition to which, Sir Robert appears to
have been rather a harsh father to his youngest son.  If such was
the case, the latter nobly revenged himself, by his earnest
solicitude through life for the Honour of his parent's memory.-D.
[See ant`e,
p. 207, Letter 50.)

(586) He had been consul at Genoa.

(587) Sir Robert Walpole used to say of the Duke of Newcastle,
"He has a foolish head and a perfidious heart.  His name is
perfidy."-E.

(588) Horace Walpole the elder@D.

(589) William Henry Zulestein Nassau, fourth Earl of Rochford.
He filled many diplomatic situations, and was also at
different times, groom of the stole and secretary of state.
He died in 1781.-D.

(590) Daughter of Edward Young, Esq.  She had been maid of honour
to the Princess of Wales.



256 Letter 69
To Sir Horace Mann
Downing Street, May 26, 1742.

To-day calls itself May the 26th, as you perceive by the date;
but I am writing to you by the fireside, instead of going to
Vauxhall.  if we have one warm day in seven, "we bless our stars,
and think it luxury."  And yet we have as much
waterworks and fresco diversions, as if we lay ten degrees nearer
warmth.  Two nights ago Ranelagh-gardens were opened at Chelsea;
the Prince, Princess, Duke, much nobility, and much mob besides,
were there.  There is a vast amphitheatre, finely gilt, painted,
and illuminated, into which every body that loves eating,
drinking, staring, or crowding, is admitted for twelvepence.  The
building and disposition of the gardens cost sixteen thousand
pounds.  Twice a-week there are to be
ridottos, at guinea tickets, for which you are to have a
supper and music.  I was there last night, but did not find the
joy of it.  Vauxhall is a little better; for the garden is
pleasanter, and one goes by water.  Our operas are almost
over; there were but three-and-forty people last night in the pit
and boxes.  There is a little simple farce at Drury Lane, called
"Miss Lucy in Town,"(591) in which Mrs. Clive (592) mimes the
Muscovita admirably, and Beard, Amorevoli tolerably.  But all the
run is now after Garrick, a wine-merchant, who is turned player,
at Goodman's-fields.  He plays all parts, and is a very good
mimic.  His acting I have seen, and may say to you, who will not
tell it again here, I see nothing wonderful in it.(593)  but it
is heresy to say so: the Duke of Argyll says, he is superior to
Betterton.  Now I talk of players, tell Mr. Chute that his friend
Bracegirdle breakfasted with me this morning.  As she went out,
and wanted her clogs, she
turned to me, and said, "I remember at the playhouse, they used
to call Mrs.  Oldfield's chair! Mrs. Barry's clogs! and Mrs.
Bracegirdle's pattens!"

I did, indeed, design the letter of this post for Mr. Chute; but
I have received two such charming long ones from you of the 15th
and 20th of May (N.  S.), that I must answer them, and beg him to
excuse me till another post; so must the
Prince,(594) Princess, the Grifona, and Countess Galli.  For the
Princess's letter, I am not sure I shall answer it so
soon, for hitherto I have not been able to read above every third
word; however, you may thank her as much as if I
understood it all.  I am very happy that mes bagatelles (for I
still insist they were so) pleased.  You, my dear child, are very
good to be pleased with the snuff-box.. I am much obliged to the
superior lumi`eres of old Sarasin (595) about the
Indian ink: if' she meant the black, I am sorry to say I had it
into the bargain with the rest of the Japan: for the
coloured, it is only a curiosity, because it has seldom been
brought over.  I remember Sir Hans Sloane was the first who ever
had any of it, and would on no account give my mother the least
morsel of it.  since that, She afterwards got a good deal of it
from China; and more has come over; but it is even less valuable
than the other, for we never could tell how to use it; however,
let it make its figure.

I am sure you blame me all this time, for chatting about so many
trifles, and telling you no politics.  I own to you, I am so
wearied, so worn with them, that I scarce know how to turn my
hand to them; but you shall know all I know.  I told you of the
meeting at the Fountain tavern: Pultney had promised to be there,
but was-not; nor Carteret.  As the Lords had put off the debate
on the Indemnity Bill, nothing material passed; but the meeting
was very Jacobite.  Yesterday the bill came on, and Lord Carteret
took the lead against it, and about seven in the evening it was
flung out by almost two to one, 92 to 47, and 17 proxies to 10.
To-day we had a motion by the new Lord
Hillsborough,(596) (for the father is Just dead,) and seconded by
Lord Barrington,(597) to examine the Lords' votes, to see what
has become of the bill: this is the form.  The chancellor of the
exchequer, and all the new ministry, were with us
against it; but they carried it, 164 to 159.  It is to be
reported to-morrow, and as we have notice, we may possibly throw
it out; else they will hurry on to a breach with the Lords.
Pultney was not in the House: he was riding the other day, and
met the King's coach; endeavouring to turn out of the way, his
horse started, flung him, and fell upon him: he is much bruised
but not at all dangerously.  On this occasion, there was an
epigram fixed to a list, which I will explain to you afterwards
it is not known who wrote it, but it was
addressed to him:

"Thy horse does things by halves, like thee:
Thou, with irresolution,
Hurt'st friend and foe, thyself and me,
The King and Constitution."

The list I meant: you must know, some time ago, before the
change, they had moved for a committee to examine, and state the
public accounts: It was passed.  Finding how little
success they had with their Secret Committee, they have set this
on foot, and we were to ballot for seven commissioners, who are
to have a thousand a-year; We balloted yesterday: on our lists
were Sir Richard Corbet,(598) Charles Hamilton (599) Lady
Archibald's brother,) Sir William Middleton,(600) Mr. West, Mr.
Fonnereau, Mr. Thompson, and Mr. Ellis.(601)  On theirs
 Mr. Bance, George Grenville, Mr. Hooper, Sir Charles
Mordaunt,(602) Mr, Phillips, Mr. Pitt, and Mr. Stuart.  On
casting up the numbers, the four first on ours, and the three
first on their list, appeared to have the majority,: so no great
harm will come from this, should it pass the Lords;
which it is not likely to do.  I have now told you, I think, all
the political news, except that the troops continue going to
Flanders, though we hear no good news yet from Holland.
If we can prevent any dispute between the two Houses, it is
believed and much hoped by the Court, that the Secret
Committee will desire to be dissolved: if it does, there is an
end of all this tempest!

I must tell you an ingenuity of Lord Raymond,(603) an epitaph on
the Indemnifying Bill-I believe you would guess the
author:-

"Interr'd beneath this marble stone doth lie
The Bill of Indemnity;
To show the good for which it was designed,
It died itself to save mankind."

My Lady Townshend made me laugh the other night about your old
acquaintance, Miss Edwin; who, by the way, is grown almost a
Methodist.  My lady says she was forced to have an issue made on
one side of her head, for her eyes, and that Kent(604)
advised her to have another on the other side for symmetry.
There has lately been published one of the most impudent
things that ever was printed; it is called "The Irish
Recister," and is a list of all the unmarried women of any
fashion in England, ranked in order, duchesses-dowager,
ladies, widows, misses, etc. with their names at length, for the
benefit of Irish fortune-hunters, or as it is said, for the
incorporating and manufacturing of British commodities.  Miss
Edwards(605) is the only one printed with a dash, because they
have placed her among the widows.  I will send you this, "Miss
Lucy in Town," and the magazines, by the first
opportunity, as I should the other things, but your brother tells
me you have had then) by another hand.  I received the cedarati,
for which I have already thanked you: but I have been so much
thanked by several people to whom I gave some, that I can very
well afford to thank you again.

As to Stosch expecting any present from me, he was so
extremely well paid for all I had of' him, that I do not think
myself at all in his debt: however, you was very good to offer to
pay him.

As to my Lady Walpole, I shall say nothing now, as I have not
seen either of the two persons since I received your letter to
whom I design to mention her; only that I am extremely sorry to
find you still disturbed at any of the little nonsense of' that
cibal.  I hoped that the accounts which I have sent you, and
which, except in my last letter, must have been very
satisfactory, would have served you as an antidote to their
legends; and I think the great victory in the House of Lords, and
which, I assure you, is here reckoned prodigious, Will raise your
spirits against them.  I am happy you have taken that step about
Sir Francis Dashwood; the credit it must have given you with the
King will more than counterbalance any
little hurt you might apprehend from the cabal.

I am in no hurry for any of my things; as we shall be moving from
hence as soon as Sir Robert has taken another house, I shall not
want them till I am more settled.

Adieu! I hope to tell you soon that we are all at peace, and then
I trust you will be so.  A thousand loves to the Chutes.  How I
long to see you all!

P. S. I unseal my letter to tell you what a vast and,
probably, final victory we have gained to-day.  They moved, that
the lords flinging out the Bill of Indemnity was an
obstruction of justice, and might prove fatal to the liberties
of' this country.  We have sat till this moment, seven
o'clock, and have rejected this motion by 245 to 193.  The call
of the House, which they have kept off from fortnight to
fortnight, to keep people in town, was appointed for to-day.  The
moment the division was over, Sir John Cotton rose and said, "As
I think the inquiry is at an end, you may do what you will with
the call." We have put it off for two months.  There's a noble
postscript!

(591) This farce, the production of Fielding, was acted
several nights with success; but it being hinted, that one of the
characters was written in ridicule of a man of quality, the Lord
Chamberlain sent an order to forbid its being
performed any more.-E.

(592) catherine Clive, an excellent actress in low comedy.
Churchill says of her, in the Rosciad,

In spite of outward blemishes she shone,
For humour famed, and humour all her own.
Easy, as if at home, the stage she trod,
Nor sought the critic's praise, nor fear'd his rod
Original in spirit and in ease,
She pleased by hiding all attempts to please.
No comic actress ever yet could raise
On humour's base, more merit or more praise."

In after life she lived at Twickenham, in the house now called
Little Strawberry Hill, and
became an intimate friend of Horace Walpole@D.

(593) Garrick made his first appearance, October 19, 1741, in the
character of Richard the Third.  Walpole does not appear to have
been singular in the opinion here given.  Gray in a letter to
Chute, says, "Did I tell you about Mr. Garrick, that the town are
horn-mad after: there are a dozen dukes of a
night at Goodman-fields sometimes; and vet I am stiff in the
opposition."-E.

(594) prince Craon.

(595) Madame Sarasin, a Lorrain lady, companion to Princess
Craon.

(596) Wills Hill, the second Lord Hillsborough, afterwards
created an Irish earl and made cofferer of the household. (In the
reign of George III. he was created Earl of Hillsborough, in
England, and finally Marquis of Downshire, in Ireland; and held
the office of secretary of state for the colonies.-D.)

(597) William Wildman, Viscount Barrington, made a lord of the
admiralty on the coalition, and master of the great wardrobe, in
1754.  He afterwards held the offices of chancellor of the
exchequer, secretary at war, and treasurer of the navy, and died
February 1st, 1793.-D.)

(598) Sir Richard Corbett, of Leighton, in Montgomeryshire, the
fourth baronet of that family. He was member for
Shrewsbury, and died in 1774.-D.

(599) The Hon. Charles Hamilton, sixth son of James, sixth Earl
of Abercorn.  Member for Truro, comptroller of the green cloth to
the Prince of Wales, and subsequently receiver-general of the
Island of Minorca.  He died in 1787.-D.

(600) Sir William Middleton, Bart. of Belsay Castle,
Northumberland, the third baronet of the family.  He was
member for Northumberland, and died in 1767.-D.''

(601) Welbore Ellis, member of parliament for above half a
century; during which period he held the different offices of a
lord of the admiralty, secretary at war, treasurer of the navy,
vice-treasurer of Ireland, and secretary of state. He was created
Lord Mendip in 1794, with remainder to his nephew, Viscount
Clifden, and died February 2, 1802, at the age of
eighty-eight.-D.

(602) Sir Charles Mordaunt, of Massingham, in Norfolk, the sixth
baronet of the family.  He was member for the county of Warwick,
and died in 1778.-D.

(603) Robert, the second Lord Raymond, son of the lord chief
justice.  [On whose death, in 1753, without issue, the title
expired.]

(604) William Kent, of whom Walpole himself drew the following
just character:-"He was a painter, an architect, and the
father of modern gardening.  In the first character he was below
mediocrity; in the second, he was a restorer of the
science; in the last, an original, and the inventor of an art
that realizes painting and improves nature.  Mahomet imagined an
elysium, Kent created many."-The misfortune of Kent was, that his
fame and popularity in his own age were so great, that he was
employed to give designs for all things, even for those which he
could know nothing about-such as ladies'
birthday dresses, which he decorated with the five orders of
architecture.  These absurdities drew upon him the satire of
Hogarth.-D.  [Walpole further states of Kent, that Pope
undoubtedly contributed to form his taste.]

(605) Miss Edwards, an unmarried lady of great fortune, who
openly kept Lord Anne Hamilton.




260 Letter 70
To Sir Horace Mann.
London, June 3, 1742.

I have sent Mr. Chute all the news; I shall only say to you that
I have read your last letter about Lady W. to Sir R.  He was not
at all surprised at her thoughts of England, but told me that
last week my Lord Carteret had sent him a letter which she had
written to him, to demand his protection.  This you may tell
publicly; it will show her ladyship's credit.

Here is an epigram, which I believe will divert you: it is on
Lord Islay's garden upon Hounslow Heath.

"Old Islay, to show his fine delicate taste,(606)
In improving his gardens purloined from the waste,
Bade his gard'ner one day to open his views,
By cutting a couple of grand avenues:
No particular prospect his lordship intended,
But left it to chance how his walks should be ended.

With transport and joy he beheld his first view end
In a favourite prospects church that was ruin'd-
But alas! what a sight did the next cut exhibit!
At the end of the walk hung a rogue on a gibbet!
He beheld it and wept, for it caused him to muse on
Full many a Campbell that died with his shoes on.
All amazed and aghast at the ominous scene,
He order'd it quick to be closed up again
With a clump of Scotch firs that served for a Screen."

Sir Robert asked me yesterday about the Dominichini, but I did
not know what to answer: I said I would write to you about it.
Have you bought it? or did you quite put it off? I had forgot to
mention it again to you.  If you have not, I am still of opinion
that you should buy it for him.  Adieu!

(606) These lines were written by Bramston, author of
"The Art of Politics," and "The Man of Taste." [The Reverend
James Bramston, vicar of Starling, Sussex.  Pope took the line in
the Dunciad, "Shine in the dignity of F. R. S." from his Man of
Taste;-"A satire," says Warton, "in which the author has been
guilty of the absurdity of making his hero laugh at himself and
his own follies."  He died in 1744.]



261 Letter 71
To Sir Horace Mann.
June 10, the Pretender's birthday, which, by the way, I believe
he did not expect to keep at Rome this year, 1742.

Since I wrote you my last letter, I have received two from you of
the 27th May and 3d of June, N. S. I hope you will get my two
packets; that is, one of them was addressed to Mr. Chute, and in
them was all my fagot of compliments.

Is not poor SCUlly (607) vastly disappointed that we are not
arrived? But really, will that mad woman never have done! does
she still find credit for her extravagant histories.  I
carried her son with me to Vauxhall last night: he is a most
charming boy,(608) but grows excessively like her in the face.
I don't at all foresee how I shall make out this letter: every
body is gone out of town during the Whitsuntide, and many will
not return, at least not these six weeks; for so long they say it
will be before the Secret Committee make their Report, with which
they intend to finish.  We are, however, entertained with
pageants every day-reviews to gladden the heart of
David,(609) (609) and triumphs to Absalom! He,(610) and his wife
went in great parade yesterday through the city and the dust to
dine at Greenwich; they took water at the Tower, and trumpeting
away to Grace Tosier's,

"Like Cimon, triumph'd over land and wave"

I don't know whether it was my Lord of Bristol (611) or some of
the SaddlerS,((612) Company who had told him that this was the
way "to steal the hearts of the people." He is in a
quarrel with Lord Falmouth.(613)  There is just dead one
Hammond,(614) a disciple of Lord Chesterfield,
and equerry to his royal highness: he had parts, and was Just
come into parliament, strong of the Cobham faction, or
nepotism, as Sir Robert calls it.  The White Prince desired Lord
Falmouth to choose Dr. Lee, who, you know, has disobliged the
party by accepting a lordship of the admiralty.  Lord
Falmouth has absolutely refused, and insists upon choosing one of
his own brothers: his highness talks loudly of opposing him.  The
borough is a Cornish one.

There is arrived a courier from Lord Stair, with news of
Prince Lobkowitz having cut off five thousand French.  We are
hurrying away the rest of our troops to Flanders, and say that we
are in great spirits, and intend to be in greater when we have
defeated the French too.

For my own particular, I cannot say I am well; I am afraid I have
a little fever upon my spirits, or at least have nerves, which,
you know, every body has in England.  I begin the
cold-bath to-morrow, and talk of going to Tunbridge, if the
parliament rises soon.

Sir R. who begins to talk seriously of Houghton, has desired me
to go -with him thither;' but that is not all settled.  Now I
mention Houghton, you was in the right to miss a gallery there;
but there is one actually fitting up, where the
green-house was, and to be furnished with the spoils of
Downing-street.

I am quite sorry you have [)ad so much trouble with those
odious cats of Malta: dear child, fling them into the Arno, if
there is water enough at this season to drown them; or, I'll tell
you, give them to Stosch, to pay the postage he talked of.  I
have no ambition to make my court with them to the old wizard.

I think I have not said any thing lately to you from Patapan; he
is handsomer than ever, and crows fat: his eyes are
charming; they have that agreeable lustre which the vulgar
moderns call sore eyes, but the judicious ancients golden
eyes, ocellos Patapanicos.

The process is begun against her Grace of Beaufort,(615) and
articles exhibited in Doctors' Commons.  Lady Townshend has had
them copied, and lent them to me.  There is every thing proved to
your heart's content, to the birth of the child, and much
delectable reading.

Adieu! my dear child; you see I have eked out a letter: I hate
missing a post, and yet at this dead time I have almost been
tempted to invent a murder or a robbery.  But you are good, and
will be persuaded that I have used my eyes and ears for your
service; when, if it were not for you, I should let them lie by
in a drawer from week's end to week's end.  Good night!

(607) An Irish tailor at Florence, who let out ready-furnished
apartments to travelling English.  Lady W. had reported that Lord
Orford was flying from England and would come thither.
(608) George Walpole, afterwards the third Earl of Orford.  He
succeeded to the earldom in 1751, and was appointed
lord-lieutenant and custos rotulorum of the county of Norfolk Mr,
Pitt, in a letter, written in 1759, says, "Nothing could make a
better appearance than the two Norfolk battalions: Lord Orford,
with the port of Mars himself, and really the
genteelest figure under arms I ever saw, was the theme of
every tongue." Chatham Correspondence, vol. ii. p. 4.-E.

(609) George the Second.

(610) Frederic, Prince of Wales.

(611) Dr. Secker, afterwards Bishop of Oxford. (And eventually
Archbishop of Canterbury.  According to Walpole, he was bred a
man-midwife.-D.)  [Secker had committed in Walpole's eyes, the
unpardonable offence of having "procured a marriage between the
heiress of the Duke of Kent and the chancellor's
(Hardwicke's) son;" he, therefore, readily propagated the
charges of his being "a Presbyterian, a man-midwife, and
president of a very freethinking club," (Memoires, i. p. 56,)
when the fact is, the parents of Secker were Dissenters, and he
for a time pursued the study, though not the practice of medicine
and surgery.  The third charge is a mere falsehood.  See also
Quarterly Review, xxv'i. p. 187.]

(612) The Prince was a member of the Saddlers' company.

(613) Hugh Boscawen, second Viscount Falmouth, a great dealer in
boroughs.  It is of him that Lord Dodington tells the
story, that he went to the minister to ask a favour, which the
minister seemed unwilling to grant; upon which Lord Falmouth
said, "Remember, Sir, we are seven."-D.

(614) Author of Love Elegies. [See ant`e, p. 210.)

(615) Frances, daughter and heir of the last Lord Scudamore, wife
of Henry Somerset, Duke of Beaufort; from whom she was divorced
for adultery with Lord Talbot.  She was afterwards married to
Colonel Fitzroy, natural son of the Duke of
Grafton. [The duke Having clearly proved the incontinence of his
wife, obtained a divorce in March 1743-4.)



263 Letter 72
To Sir Horace Mann.
Downing Street, June 14, 1742.

We were surprised last Tuesday with the great good news of the
peace between the Queen and the King of Prussia.  it was so
unexpected and so welcome, that I believe he might get an act of
parliament to forbid any one thinking that he ever made a slip in
integrity.  Then, the reported accounts of the
successes of Prince Charles and Lobkowitz over the French have
put us into the greatest spirits.  Prince charles is extremely
commended for courage and conduct, and makes up a little for
other flaws in the family.

it is at last settled that Lords gower,(616) Cobham, and
Bathurst (617) are to come in.  The first is to be privy-seal,
and was to have kissed hands last Friday, but Lord Hervey had
carried the seal with him to Ickworth; but he must bring it back.
Lord Cobham is to be field-marshal, and to command all the forces
in England.  Bathurst was to have the
Gentleman-pensioners, but Lord Essex,(618) who is now the
Captain, and was to have had the Beef-eaters, will not change.
Bathurst is to have the Beef-eaters; the Duke of Bolton (619) who
has them, is to have the Isle of Wight, and Lord
lymington,(620) who has that, is to have--nothing!

The Secret Committee are in great perplexities about
Scrope:(621) he would not take the oath, but threatened the
Middlesex justices who tendered it to him "Gentlemen," said he,
"have you any complaint against Me?  if you have not,
don't you fear that I will prosecute you for enforcing oaths?"
However, one of them began to read the oath--"I, John
Scrope,"--"I John Scrope:"said he; "I did not say any such thing;
but come, however, let's hear the oath;"--"do promise that I will
faithfully and truly answer all such questions as shall be asked
me by the Committee of Secrecy, and--" they were going on, but
Scrope cried out, "Hold, hold! there is more than I can digest
already."  He then went before the
committee, and desired time to consider.  Pitt asked him
abruptly, if he wanted a quarter of an hour: he replied, "he did
not want to inform either his head or his heart, for both were
satisfied what to do; but that he would ask the King's leave."
He wants to fight Pitt.  He is a most testy little old gentleman,
and about eight years ago would have fought Alderman Perry.  It
was in the House, at the time of the
excise: he said we should carry it: Perry said he hoped to see
him hanged first. "You see me hanged, you dog, you!" said
Scrope, and pulled him by the nose.  The committee have tried all
ways to soften him, and have offered to let him swear to only
what part he pleased, or only with regard to money given to
members of parliament.  Pultney himself has tried to work on him;
but the old gentleman is inflexible, and answered, "that he was
fourscore years old, and did not care whether he spent the few
months he had to live (622) in the Tower or not; that the last
thing he would do should be to betray the King and next to him
the Earl of Orford." It remains in suspense.
The troops continue going to Flanders, but slowly enough.  Lady
Vane has taken a trip thither after a cousin (623) of Lord
Berkeley, who is as simple about her as her own husband is, and
has written to Mr. Knight at Paris to furnish her with what money
she wants.  He says she is vastly to blame; for he was trying to
get her a divorce from Lord Vane, and then would have married her
himself.  Her adventures(624 arc worthy to be bound up with those
of my good sister-in-law,
 as the German Princess, and Moll Flanders.

Whom should I meet in the Park last night but Ceretesi!  He told
me he was at a Bagne.  I will find out his bagnio; for though I
was not much acquainted with him, yet the obligations I had to
Florence make me eager to show any Florentine all the civilities
in my power; though I do not love them near so
well, since what you have told me of their late behaviour;
notwithstanding your letter of June 20th, which I have just
received.  I perceive that simple-hearted, good, unmeaning
Ituccilai is of the number of the false, though you do not
directly say so.

I was excessively diverted with your pompous account of the siege
of Lucca by a single Englishman.  I do believe that you and the
Chutes might put a certain city into as great a panic.  Adieu!

(616) John Leveson Gower, second Lord Gower; in 1746 created an
earl.  He died in 1754.-E.

(617) Allan, first Lord Bathurst, one of the twelve Tory peers
created by Queen Anne, in 1711.  He was the friend of Pope,
Congreve, Swift, Prior, and other men of letters.  He lived to
see his eldest son chancellor of England, and died at the
advanced age of ninety, in 1775; having been created an earl in
1772.-D.

(618) William Capel, third Earl of Essex; ambassador at the court
of Turin. he died in January 1743.  The Beef-eaters are otherwise
called the Yeomen of the Guard.-D.

(619) Charles Powlett, third Duke of Bolton.  His second wife was
Miss Lavinia Fenton, otherwise Mrs. Beswick, the actress; who
became celebrated in the character of Polly Peacham in the
Beggar's Opera.  By her the duke had three sons, born before
marriage.  With his first wife, the daughter and sole heiress of
John Vaughan, Earl of Carberry in Ireland, he never
cohabited.  He died in 1754.-D.

(620) John Wallop, first Viscount Lymington; in the following
April created Earl of Portsmouth.  He died in 1762.-E.

(621) John Scrope, secretary of the treasury.  He had been in
Monmouth's rebellion, when very young, and carried
intelligence to Holland in woman's clothes.

(622) He did not die till 1753.  Tindal states that, upon
giving this answer he was no further pressed.-E.

(623) Henry Berkeley; killed the next year at the battle of
Dettingen.

(624) Lady Vane's Memoirs, dictated by herself, were actually
published afterward,,; in a book, called "The Adventures of
Peregrine Pickle;" and she makes mention of Lady Orford. [See
ant`e, p. 189, Letter 42.  Sir Walter Scott says, that "she not
only furnished Smollett with the materials for recording her own
infamy, but rewarded him handsomely for the insertion of her
story."]




265 Letter 73
To sir Horace Mann.
Midsummer Day, 1742.

One begins every letter with an Io Paean! indeed our hymns are
not so tumultuous as they were some time ago, to the tune of
Admiral Vernon.  They say there came an express last night, of
the taking of Prague and the destruction of some thousand
French.  It is really amazing the fortune of the Queen! We expect
every day the news of the king of Poland having made his peace;
for it is affirmed that the Prussians left him but sixteen days
to think of it.  There is nothing could stop the King of Prussia,
if he should march to Dresden: how long his being at peace with
that king will stop him I look upon as very uncertain.

They say we expect the Report from the Secret Committee next
Tuesday, and then finish.  I preface all my news with "they say;"
for I am not at all in the secret, and I had rather that "they
say" should tell you a lie than myself.  They have sunk the
affair of Scrope: the Chancellor (625) and Sir John
Rushout spoke in the committee against persecuting him, for he is
secretary to the treasury.  I don't think there is so easy a
language as the ministerial in the world-one learns it in a week!
There are few members in town, and most of them no
friends to the committee; so that there is not the least
apprehension of any violence following the Report.  I dare say
there is not; for my uncle, who is my political weather-glass,
and whose quicksilver rises and falls with the least variation of
parliamentary weather, is in great spirits, and has spoken three
times in the House within this week; he had not opened his lips
before since the change.  Mr. Pultney has his warrant in his
pocket for Earl of Bath, and kisses hands as soon as the
parliament rises.  The promotions I mentioned to you are not yet
come to pass; but a
fortnight will settle things wonderfully.

The Italian, (626) who I told you is here, has let me into a
piece of secret history, which you never mentioned: perhaps it is
not true; but he says the mighty mystery of the
Count's (627) elopement from Florence, was occasioned by a letter
from Wachtendonck,(628) which was so impertinent as to talk of
satisfaction for some affront.  The great Count very wisely never
answered it-his life, to be sure, is of too great consequence to
be trusted at the end of a rash German's sword! however, the
General wrote again, and hinted at coming himself for an answer.
So it happened that when he arrived, the Count was gone to the
baths of Lucca-those waters
were reckoned better for his health, than steel in the
abstract-How oddly it happened!  He Just returned to Florence as
the General was dead!  Now was not this heroic lover worth
running after? I wonder, as the Count must have known my
lady's courage and genius for adventures, that he never
thought of putting her in men's clothes, and sending her to
answer the challenge. How pretty it would have been to have
fought for one's lover! and how great the obligation,
when he durst not fight for himself!

I heard the other day, that the Primate of Lorrain was dead of
the smallpox.  Will you make my compliments of condolence?
though I dare say they are little afflicted: he -was a 'most
worthless creature, and all his wit and parts, I believe little
comforted them for his brutality and other vices.

The fine Mr. Pit (629) is arrived: I dine with him
to-day at Lord Lincoln's, with the Pomfrets.  So now the old
partie quarr`ee is complete again.  The earl is not quite
cured,(630) and a partner in sentiments may help to open the
wound again.  My Lady Townshend dines with us too.  She flung the
broadest Wortley-eye (631) on Mr. Pitt, the other night, in the
park!

Adieu! my dear child; are you quite well? I trust the summer will
perfectly re-establish you.

(625) Mr. Sandys, chancellor of the exchequer.

(626) Ceretesi.

(627) Count Richcourt.

(628) General Wachtendonck, commander of the Queen
of Hungary's troops at Leghorn.

(629) George Pitt, of Strathfieldsea: he had
been in love with Lady Charlotte Fermor, second daughter of Lord
Pomfret, who was afterwards married to William Finch,
vice-chamberlain.  (Mr.  Pitt was created Lord Rivers in 1776.
In 1761 he was British envoy at Turin in 1770, ambassador
extraordinary to Spain.  He died in 1803.-D.)

(630) Of his love for lady Sophia Fermor.-D.

(631) Mr. Pitt was very handsome, and Lady Mary
Wortley Montagu had liked him extremely, when he was in Italy.



267 Letter 74
To Sir Horace Mann.
Downing Street, June 30, 1742.

It is about six o'clock, and I am come from the House, where, at
last, we have had another Report from the
Secret Committee.  They have been disputing this week among
themselves, whether this should be final or not.  The new
ministry, thanked them! were for finishing; but their arguments
were not so persuasive as dutiful, and we are to have yet
another.  This lasted two hours and a half in reading, though
confined to the affair of Burrel and Bristow, the Weymouth
election, and secret-service money.  They moved to print it; but
though they had fetched most of their members from Ale and the
country, they were not strong enough to divide.  Velters
Cornwall, whom I have mentioned to you, I believe, for odd
humour, said, "ie believed the somethingness of this report would
make amends for the nothingness of the last, and that he was for
printing it, if it was only from believing that the King would
not see it, unless it is printed." Perhaps it may be printed at
the conclusion; at least it will without authority-and so you
will see it.

I received yours of June 24, N. S. with
one from Mr. Chute, this morning, and I will now go answer it and
Your last.  You seem still to be uneasy about my letters, and
their being retarded.  I have not observed, lately, the same
signs of yours being opened; and for my own, I think it may very
often depend upon the packet-boat and winds.

You ask me if Pultney has lately received any new
disgusts.-How can one answer for a temper so hasty,
so unsettled!-not that I know, unless that he finds, what he has
been twenty years undoing, is not yet undone.

I must interrupt the thread of my answer, to tell you that I hear
news came last night that the States of Holland have voted
forty@seven thousand men for the Assistance of the Queen,(632)
and that it was not doubted but the
States--General would imitate this resolution.  This seems to be
the consequence of the King of Prussia's proceedings-but how can
they trust him so easily?

I am amazed that your leghorn ministry are so wavering; they are
very old style, above eleven days out of fashion, if they any
longer fear the French: my only apprehension is, lest
these successes should make Richcourt more impertinent.

You have no notion how I laughed at the man that "takes
nothing but Madeira."(633)  I told it to my Lady
Pomfret, concluding it would divert her too; and forgetting that
she repines when she should laugh, and reasons when she should be
diverted.  She asked gravely what language that was That Madeira
being subject to an European prince, to be sure they talk some
European dialect!" The grave personage!  It was a piece with her
saying, "that Swift would have written better, if he had never
written ludicrously."

I met a friend of yours the other day at an auction, and
though I knew him not the least, yet being your friend,
and so like you (for, do you know, he is excessively,) I had a
great need to speak to him-and did.  He says, "he has left off
writing to you, for he never could get an answer." I said, you
had never received 'but one from him in all the time I was with
you, and that I was witness to your having Answered it.  He was
with his mother, Lady Abercorn,(634) a most frightful
gentlewoman: Mr. Winnington
says, he one day overheard her and the Duchess of Devonshire
(635) talking of "hideous ugly women!"  By the way, I find I have
never told you that it was Lord Paisley;(636) but that you will
have perceived.

Amorevoli is gone to Dresden for the
summer; our directors are in great fear that he will serve them
like Farinelli, and not return for the winter.

I am writing to you in one of the charming rooms towards the
park: it is a delightful evening, and I am willing to enjoy this
sweet corner while I may, for we are soon to quit it.  Mrs.
Sandys came yesterday to give us warning; Lord Wilmington has
lent it to them.  Sir Robert might have had it for his own at
first, but would only take it as first lord of the
treasury.(637)  He goes into a small house of his own in
Arlington Street, opposite to where we formerly lived.
Whither I shall travel is yet uncertain: he is for my
living with him; but then I shall be cooped-and besides, I never
found that people loved one another the less for living asunder.

The drowsy Lord Mayor (638) is dead-so the
newspapers say.  I think he is not dead, but sleepeth.  Lord
Gower is laid up with the gout: this, they say, is the reason of
his not having the privy seal yet.  The town has talked of
nothing lately but a plot: I will tell you the circumstances.
last week the Scotch hero (639) sent his brother (640) two
papers, which he said had been left at his house by an Unknown
hand; that he believed it was by Colonel Cecil, agent for the
Pretender--though how could that be, for he had had no
conversation with Colonel Cecil for these two years!  He
desired Lord Islay to lay them before the ministry.  One of the
papers seemed a letter, though with no address or
subscription, written in true genuine Stuart characters.  It was
to thank Mr. Burnus (D. of A.) for his services, and that he
hoped he would answer the assurances given of him.  The other was
to command the Jacobites, and to exhort the patriots to continue
what they had mutually so well begun, and to say how pleased he
was with their having removed mr. Tench.  Lord Islay showed these
letters to Lord Orford, and then to the King, and told him he had
showed them to my father. "You did well."-Lord Islay, "Lord
Orford says one is of the Pretender's hand."-King, "He
(641) knows it: whenever any thing of this sort comes to your
hand, carry it to Walpole."  This private conversation you must
not repeat.  A few days afterwards, the Duke wrote to his
brother, "That upon recollection he thought it right to say, that
he had received those letters from Lord Barrimore"(642) who is as
well known for General to the Chevalier, as Montemar is to the
Queen of Spain-or as the Duke of A. would be to either of them.
Lord Islay asked Sir R. if he was against publishing this story,
which he thought was a justification both of his brother and Sir
R. The latter replied, he could certainly have no objection to
its being public-but pray, will his grace's sending these letters
to the secretaries of state Justify him from the assurances that
had been given of' him?(643)  However, the Pretender's being of
opinion that the dismission of Mr. Tench was for his service,
will scarce be an argument to the new ministry for making more
noise about these papers.

I am sorry the boy is so uneasy at being on the foot of a
servant.  I will send for his mother, and ask her why she did not
tell him the conditions to which we had agreed; at the same time,
I will tell her that she may send any letters for him to me.
Adieu! my dear child: I am going to write to Mr. Chute,
that is, to-morrow.  I never was more diverted than with his
letter.

(632) The Queen of Hungary, Maria Theresa.-D.

(633) The only daughter and heiress of the
Marquis Accianoli at Florence, was married to one of the same
name, who was born at Madeira.
'
(634) Anne Plummer, Countess of Abercorn, wife of
James, the seventh earl.  She died in 1756.-E.

(635) Catherine, daughter of John Hoskins, Esq.  She was
married to the third Duke of Devonshire in 171@, and died in
1777.-E.

(636) James Hamilton succeeded as eighth Earl of Abercorn, on the
death of his father in 1743.  He was created Viscount
Hamilton in England in 1786, and died unmarried in 1789.-D.

(637) This is the house, in Downing Street, which is still the
residence of the first lord of the treasury.  George the First
gave it to Baron Bothmar, the Hanoverian minister-, for life.  On
his death, George the Second offered to give it to Sir
Robert Walpole; who, however, refused it, and begged of the King
that it might be attached to the office of first lord of the
treasury.-D.

(638) Sir Robert Godschall.

(639) The Duke of Argyll.

(640) Earl of Islay.

(641) Besides intercepted letters, Sir R. Walpole had more than
once received letters from the Pretender, making him the greatest
offers, which Sir R. always carried to the King, and got him to
endorse, when he
returned them to Sir R.

(642) James Barry, fourth Earl of Barrymore, succeeded his
half-brother Lawrence in the family titles in 1699, and died in
1747, at the age of eighty.  James, Lord Barrymore, was an
adherent of the Pretender, whereas Lawrence had been so great a
supporter of the revolution, that he was attainted, and his
estates sequestered by James the Second's Irish parliament, in
1689.-D.

(643) The Duke of Argyll, in the latter part of his life, was
often melancholy and disordered in his understanding.
After this transaction, and it is supposed he had gone still
farther, he could with difficulty be brought even to write his
name.  The marriage of his eldest daughter with the Earl of
Dalkeith was deferred for some time, because the duke could not
be prevailed upon to sign the writings.




269 Letter 75
To Sir Horace Mann.

On the Death of Richard West, Esq.(644)

While surfeited with life, each hoary knave
Grows, here, immortal, and eludes the grave,
Thy virtues immaturely met their fate,
Cramp'd in the limit of too short a date!


Thy mind, not exercised so oft in vain,
In health was gentle, and composed in pain:
successive trials still refined thy soul,
And plastic Patience perfected the whole.

A friendly aspect, not suborn'd by art;
An eye, which look'd the meaning of thy heart;
A tongue, With simple truth and freedom fraught,
The faithful index of thy honest thought.

Thy pen disdain'd to seek the servile ways
Of partial censure, and more partial praise;
Through every tongue it flowed in nervous ease,
With sense to Polish , and With wit to please.

No lurking venom from thy pencil fell;
Thine was the kindest satire, living well:
The vain, the loose, the base, might blush to see
In what thou wert, what they themselves should be,

Let me not charge on Providence a crime,
Who snatch'd thee, blooming, to a better clime,
To raise those virtues to a higher sphere:
Virtues! which only could have starved thee here;


                         A Receipt To Make A Lord.
             Occasioned by a late report of a promotion.(645)

Take a man, who by nature's a true son of earth,'
By rapine enriched, though a beggar by birth;
In genius the lowest, ill-bred and obscene;
In morals most Wicked, most nasty in mien;
By none ever trusted, yet ever employed;
In blunders quite fertile, in merit quite void;
A scold in the Senate, abroad a buffoon,
The scorn and the jest of all courts but his own:
A slave to that wealth that ne'er made him a friend,
And proud of that cunning that ne'er gain'd an end;
A dupe in each treaty, a Swiss in each vote;
In manners and form, a complete Hottentot.
Such an one could you find, of all men you'd commend him;  But be
sure let the curse of each Briton attend him.
thus fully prepared, add the grace of the throne,
The folly of monarchs, and screen of a crown--
Take a prince for his purpose, without ears or eyes,
And a long parchment roll stuff'd brimful of lies:
These mingled together, a fiat shall pass,
and the thing be a Peer, that before was an ass.

The former copy I think you will like: it was written by one Mr.
Ashton (646) on Mr. West, two friends of mine, whom you have
heard me often mention.  The other copy was printed in the Common
Sense, I don't know by whom composed: the end of it is very bad,
and there are great falsities in it, but some strokes are
terribly like!

I have not a moment to thank the Grifona, nor to answer yours of
June 17, N. S. which I have this instant read.  Yours, in great
haste.

(644) See ante, pp. 121, (Letter 1), 251, (Letter 65).

(645) The report, mentioned in a preceding letter, that Horace
Walpole, brother to Sir Robert, was created a peer.

(646)Thomas Ashton, afterwards fellow of Eton College. [See
ant`e, p. 128, Letter 6, footnote 153.)

271 Letter 76
To Sir Horace Mann.
London, July 7, 1742.

Well! you may bid the Secret Committee good night.  The House
adjourns to-day till Tuesday, and on Thursday is to be
prorogued.  Yesterday we had a bill
of Pultney's, about returning officers and regulating
elections: the House was thin, and he carried it by 93 to 92.
Mr. Pelham was not there, and Winnington did not vote, for the
gentleman is testy still; when he saw how near he had been to
losing it, he said loud enough to be heard, "I will make the
gentlemen of that side feel me!" and, rising up, he said, "He
was astonished, that a bill so calculated for the freedom of
elections was so near being thrown out; that there was a
report on the table, which showed how necessary such a bill
was, and that though we had not time this year to consider
what was proper to be done in consequence of it, he hoped we
should next,"-with much to the same purpose; but all the
effect this notable speech had, was to
frighten my uncle, and make him give two or three shrugs
extraordinary to his breeches.  They now say,(647) that
Pultney will not take out the patent for his earldom, but
remain in the House of Commons in terrorem; however, all his
friends are to have places immediately, or, as the fashion of
expressing it is, they are to go to Court in
the Bath coach!"(648)

Your relation Guise (649) is arrived from Carthagena, madder
than ever.  As he was marching up to one of the forts, all his
men deserted him; his lieutenant advised him to
retire; he replied, "He never had turned his back yet, and
would not now," and stood all the fire.  When the pelicans
were flying over his head, he cried out, "What would Chloe
(650) give for some of these to make a
pelican pie!" When he is brave enough to perform such actions
as are really almost incredible, what pity it is that he
should for ever persist In saving things that are totally so!

Lord Annandale (651) is at last mad in all the forms: he has
long been an out-pensioner of Bedlam College.  Lord and Lady
Talbot,(652) are parted; he gives her three thousand pounds
a-year.  Is it not amazing, that in England people will not
find out that they can live separate without parting?  The
Duke of Beaufort says, "He pities Lord Talbot to have met with
two such tempers as their two wives!"

Sir Robert Rich (653) is going to Flanders, to try
to make up an affair for his son; who, having quarrelled with
a Captain Vane, as the commanding officer was trying to make
it up at the head of the regiment, Rich came behind Vane, "And
to show you," said he, "that I will not make it up, take
that," and gave him a box on the ear.  They were immediately
put in arrest; but the learned in the laws of honour say, they
must fight, for no German officer will serve with Vane, till
he has had satisfaction.

Mr. Harris,(654) who married Lady Walpole's mother, is to be
one of the peace-offerings on the new altar.  Bootle is
to be chief-justice; but the Lord Chancellor would not consent
to it, unless Lord Glenorchy,(655) whose daughter is married
to Mr. Yorke, had a place in lieu of the Admiralty, which he
has lost-he is to have Harris's.  Lord Edgecumbe's, in
Ireland, they say, is destined to Harry Vane,(656) Pultney's
toad-eater.

Monticelli lives in a manner at our house.  I tell my sister
that she is in love with him, and that I am glad it was not
Amorevoli.  Monticelli dines frequently with Sir Robert, which
diverts me extremely; you know how low his ideas are of music
and the virtuosi; he calls them all fiddlers.

I have not time now to write more, for I am going to a
masquerade at the Ranelagh amphitheatre: the King is fond of
it, and has pressed people to go; but I don't find that it
will be full.  Good night! All love to the Pope for his good
thing.


(647) Sir R. W. to defeat Pultney's ambition persuaded the
++King to insist on his going into the House of Lords: the
day he carried his patent thither, he flung it upon the floor
in a passion, and could scarce be prevailed on to have it
passed. ["I remember," says Horace Walpole, (Reminiscences),
"my father's action and words when he returned from court, and
told me what he had done - 'I have turned the key of the
closet on him!' making that motion with his
hand."]

(648) His title was to be Earl of Bath.

(649) General Guise, a, very brave officer, but apt to
romance; and a great connoisseur in pictures.  (He bequested
his collection of pictures, which is a very indifferent one,
to christ church College, Oxford.-D.)

(650) the duke of Newcastle's French cook.

(651) George Johnstone, third Marquis of
Annandale, in Scotland.  He was not declared a lunatic till
the year 1748.  Upon his death, in
1792, his titles became either extinct or dormant.-D.

(652) Mary, daughter of Adam de Cardonel,
secretary to John the great Duke of Marlborough, married to
William, second Lord Talbot, eldest son of Lord Chancellor
Talbot.-D.

(653) Sir Robert Rich, Bart., of Rose Hall, Suffolk.  At his
death, in 1768, he was colonel of the fourth regiment of
dragoons, governor of Chelsea Hospital, and field-marshal of
the forces.-E.

(654) This article did not prove true.  Mr. Harris was not
removed, nor Bootle made chief-justice.

(655) John Campbell, Lord Glenorchy, and, on his
father's death, in 1752, third Earl of Breadalbane.  His first
wife was Lady Amiable Grey, eldest daughter and coheir of the
Duke of Kent.  By her he had an only daughter,
Jemima, who, upon the death of her grandfather, became
Baroness Lucas of Crudwell, and Marchioness de Grey.  She
married Philip Yorke, eldest son of the Chancellor
Hardwicke, and eventually himself the second duke of that
title.-D.

(656) Henry Vane, eldest son of Gilbert, second
Lord Barnard, and one of the tribe who came into office upon
the breaking up of Sir Robert Walpole's administration.  He
was created Earl of Darlington in 1753, and died in
1758.-D.




273 Letter 77
To Sir Horace Mann.
Downing Street, July 14, 1742.

Sir Robert Brown(657) is displaced from being paymaster of
something, I forget what, for Sir Charles Gilmour, a friend of
Lord Tweedale.(658)  Nee Finch (659) is made groom
of the bedchamber, which was vacant; and Will Finch (660) vice
chamberlain, which was not vacant; but they have emptied it of
Lord Sidney Beauclerc.(661)  Boone is made commissary-general,
in Hurley's room, and JefFries(662) in Will Stuart's.  All
these have been kissing hands to-day, headed by the Earl of
Bath.  He went into the King the other day ",it this'long
list, but was told shortly, that unless he would take up his
patent and quit the House of Commons,
nothing should be done-he has consented.  I made some of them
very angry; for when they told me who had kissed hands, I
asked, if the Pretender had kissed hands too, for being King?  I
forgot to tell you, that Murray is to be solicitor-general,
in Sir John Strange's place, who is made chief justice, or
some such thing.(663)

I don't know who it was that said it, but it was a very good
answer to one who asked why Lord Gower had not kissed hands
sooner--"the Dispensation was not come
from Rome."(664)

I am writing to you up to the ears in packing: Lord Wilmington
has lent this house to Sandys, and he has given us instant
warning; we are moving as fast as possible to Siberia,-Sir
Robert has a house there, within a few mile,, of the Duke of
Courland; in short, child, we are all going to Norfolk,
till we can get a house ready in town: all the furniture is
taken down, and lying about in confusion.  I look like St.
John in the Isle of Patmos, writing revelations, and
prophesying "Woe! woe! woe! the kingdom of desolation is at
hand!" -indeed, I have prettier animals about me, than he ever
dreamed of: here is the dear Patapan, and a little Vandyke
cat, with black whiskers -ind boots; you would swear it was of
a very ancient family, in the West of England,
famous for their loyalty.

I told you I was going to the masquerade at Ranelagh gardens,
last week: it was miserable; there were but an hundred men,
six women, and two shepherdesses.  The King liked it,--and
that he might not be known, they had dressed him a box with
red damask!  Lady Pomfret and her three daughters were there,
all dressed alike, that they might not be known.  My Lady
said to Lady Bel Finch,(665) who was dressed like a nun, and
for coolness had cut off the nose of her mask, "Madam, you are
the first nun that ever I saw without a nose!"

As I came home last night, they told me there was a fire in
Downing Street; when I came to Whitehall, I could not get to
the end of the street in my chariot, for the crowd; when I got
out, the first thing I heard was a man enjoying himself:
"Well! if it lasts two hours longer, Sir Robert Walpole's
house will be burnt to the ground!"  it was a very comfortable
hearing! but I found the fire was on the opposite side of the
way, and at a good distance.  I stood in the crowd an hour to
hear their discourse: one man was relating at how many fires
he had happened to be present, and did not think himself at
all unlucky in passing by, just at this.  What diverted me
most, was a servant-maid, who was working, and carrying pails
of water, with the strength of half-a-dozen troopers, and
swearing the mob out of her way-the soft creature's name was
Phillis! When I arrived at our door, I found the house
full of goods, beds, women, and children, and three Scotch
members of parliament, who lodge in the row, and who had sent
in a saddle, a flitch of bacon, and a bottle of ink.  There
was no wind, and the house was saved, with the loss of only
its garret, and the furniture.

I forgot to mention the Dominichin last post, as I suppose I
had before, for I always was for buying it; it is one of the
most engaging pictures I ever saw.  I have no qualms about its
originality; and even if Sir Robert should not like
it when it comes, which is impossible, I think I would live
upon a flitch of bacon and a bottle of ink, rather than not
spare the money to buy it myself: so my dear Sir, buy it.

Your brother has this moment brought me a letter: I find by
it, that you are very old style with relation to the Prussian
peace.  Why, we have sent Robinson (666) and Lord Hyndford
(667) a green ribbon, for it, above a fortnight ago.  Muley,
(as Lord Lovel calls him,) Duke of Bedford, (668) is, they
say, to have a blue one, for making his own peace: you know we
always mind home-peaces more than foreign ones.

I am quite sorry for all the trouble you have had about the
Maltese cats; but you know they were for Lord Islay, not for
myself.  Adieu!  I have no more time.

(657) Sir Robert Brown had been a merchant at Venice, and
British resident there, for which he was created a baronet in
1732.  He held the place at this time of" "paymaster of his
Majesty's works, concerning the repairs, new buildings, and
well-keeping of any of his Majesty's houses of access, and
others, in time of progress."-D

(658) John Hay, fourth Marquis of Tweedale.  In 1748, he
married Frances, daughter of John Earl Granville, and died in
1762.-E.

(659) The Hon.  Edward Finch, fifth son of Daniel, sixth Earl
of Winchilsea and second Earl of Nottingham, and the direct
ancestor of the present Lord Winchilsea.  He assumed the name
of Hatton, in 1764, in consequence of inheriting the fortune
of William Viscount Hatton, his mother's brother.  He was
employed in diplomacy, and was made master of the robes in
1757.  He died in 1771.-D.

(660) The Hon. William Finch, second son of Daniel, sixth Earl of
Winchilsea, had been envoy in Sweden and in Holland.  He
continued to hold the office of vice-chamberlain of the
household till his death in 1766.  These two brothers, and
their elder brother Daniel, seventh Earl of Winchilsea, are
the persons whom Sir Charles Hanbury Williams, calls, on
account of the blackness of their complexions, "the dark,
funereal
Finches."  [His widow, Charlotte, daughter of the Earl of
Pomfret,
was appointed governess to the young princes and princesses.]

(661) Lord Sidney Beauclerk, fifth son of the first Duke of
St. Albans; a man of bad character.  Sir Charles Hanbury
Williams calls him "Worthless Sidney." He was notorious for
hunting after the fortunes of the old and childless.  Being
very handsome, he had almost persuaded Lady Betty Germain, in
her old age, to marry him; but she was dissuaded from it by
the Duke of Dorset and her relations.  He failed also in
obtaining
the fortune of Sir' Thomas Reeve, Chief Justice of the (common
Pleas, whom he used to attend on the circuit, with a view of
ingratiating himself with him.  At length he induced Mr.
Topham, of Windsor, to leave his estate to him.  He died in
1744, leaving one son, Topham Beauclerk,
Esq.-D. [This son, so celebrated for his conversational,
talents, and described by Dr. Jonson as uniting the eloquent
manners of a gentleman with the mental acccomplishments of a
scholar, married, in 1768, Lady Diana Spencer, daughter of the
Duke of Marlborough, and died in 1780.]

(662) John JefFries, secretary of the treasury.-D.


(663) Sir John Strange was made master of the rolls, but not
till some years afterwards; he died in 1754.

(664) From the Pretender.  Lord Gower had been, until he was
made privy-seal, one of the leading Jacobites; and was even
supposed to lean to that party, after he had accepted the
appointment.

(665) Lady Isabella Finch, third daughter of the sixth Earl of
Winchilsea, first lady of the bedchamber to the Princess
Amelia.  It was for her that Kent built the pretty and
singular house on the western side of Berkeley Square, with a
fine room in it, of which the ceiling is painted in arabesque
compartments, by Zucchi;-now the residence of C. B. Wall,
Esq.-D. [In this house her ladyship died unmarried, in 1771.)

(666) Sir Thomas Robinson, minister at Vienna; be was made
secretary of state in 1754.  (And a peer, by the title of Lord
Grantham, in 1761.-D.)

(667) John Carmichael, third Earl of Hyndford.  He had been
sent as envoy to the King of Prussia, during the first war of
Silesia.  He was afterwards sent ambassador to St. Petersburgh
and Vienna, and died in 1767.-D.

(668) The Duke of Bedford had not the
Garter till some years after this.



275 Letter 78
To Sir Horace Mann.

You scolded me so much about my little paper, that I dare not
venture upon it even now, when I have very little to say to
you.  The long session is over, and the Secret Committee
already forgotten.  Nobody remembers it but poor Paxton, who
has lost his place(669)  by it.  saw him the day after he came
out of Newgate: he came to Chelsea:(670) Lord Fitzwilliam was
there, and in the height of zeal, took him about the neck and
kissed him.  Lord Orford had been at Court that morning, and
with his usual spirits, said to the new ministers, "So! the
parliament is up, and Paxton, Bell, and I have got our
liberty!"  The King spoke in the kindest manner to him at his
levee, but did not call him into the closet, as the new
ministry feared he would, and as perhaps, the old ministry
expected he would.  The day before, when the King went to put
an end to the session, Lord Quarendon asked Winnington
"whether Bell would be let out time enough to hire a mob to
huzza him as he went to the House of Lords."

The few people that are left in town have been much diverted
with an adventure that has befallen the new ministers.  Last
Sunday the Duke of Newcastle gave them a dinner at Claremont,
where their servants got so drunk, that when they came to the
inn over against the gate of Newpark,(671) the coachman, who
was the only remaining fragment of their suite, tumbled off
the box, and there they were planted.  There were Lord Bath,
Lord Carteret, Lord Limerick, and Harry Furnese (672) in the
coach: they asked the innkeeper if he could contrive no way to
convey them to town. , No," he said, "not unless it was to get
Lord Orford's coachman to drive them." They demurred; but Lord
Carteret said "Oh, I dare say, Lord Orford will willingly let
us have him."  So they sent and he drove them home.(673)

Ceretesi had a mind to see this wonderful Lord Orford, of whom
he had heard so much; I carried him to dine at Chelsea.  You
know the earl don't speak a word of any language but English
and Latin,(674) and Ceretesi not a word of either; yet he
assured me that he was very happy to have made cosi bella
conascenza!  He whips out his pocket-book every moment, and
writes descriptions in issimo of every thing he sees: the
grotto alone took up three pages.  What volumes he will
publish at his return, in usum Serenissimi Pannom!(675)

There has lately been the most shocking scene of murder
imaginable; a parcel of drunken constables took it into their
heads to put the laws in execution against disorderly persons,
and so took up every woman they met, till they had collected
five and six or twenty, all of whom they thrust into St.
Martin's roundhouse, where they kept them all night, with
doors and windows closed.  The poor creatures, who could not
stir or breathe, screamed as long as they had any breath left,
begging at least for water: one poor wretch said she was worth
eighteen-pence, and would gladly give it for a draught of
water, but in vain! So well did they keep them there, that in
the morning four were found stifled to death, two died soon
after, and a dozen more are in a shocking way.  In short, it
is horrid to think what the poor creatures suffered: several
of them were beggars, who, from having no lodging, were
necessarily found in the street, and others honest labouring
women.  One of the dead was a poor washerwoman, big with
child, who was returning home late from washing.  One of the
constables is taken, and others absconded; but I question(676)
if any of them will suffer death, though the greatest
criminals in this town are the officers of justice; there is
no tyranny they do not exercise, no villainy of which they do
not partake.  These same men, the same night, broke into a
bagnio in Covent-Garden, and took up Jack Spencer,(677) Mr.
Stewart, and Lord George Graham,(678) and would have thrust
them into the round-house with the poor women, if they had not
been worth more than eighteen-pence!

I have just now received yours of the 15th of July, with a
married letter from both Prince and Princess:(679) but sure
nothing ever equalled the setting out of it! She says, "The
generosity of your friendship for me, Sir, leaves me nothing
to desire of all that is precious in England, China, and the
Indies!" Do you know, after such a testimony under the hand of
a princess, that I am determined, after the laudable example
of the house of Medici, to take the title of Horace the
Magnificent! I am only afraid it should be a dangerous example
for my posterity, who may ruin themselves in emulating the
magnificence of their ancestor.  It happens comically, for the
other day, in removing from Downing-street, Sir Robert found
an old account-book of his father, wherein he set down all
his, expenses.  In three months and ten days that he was in
London one winter as member of parliament, he spent-what do
you think?-sixty-four pounds seven shillings and five-pence!
There are many articles for Nottingham ale, eighteen-pences
for dinners, five shillings to Bob (now Earl of Orford), and
one memorandum of six shillings given in exchange to Mr.
Wilkins for his wig-and yet this old man, my grandfather, had
two thousand pounds a-year, Norfolk sterling!  He little
thought that what maintained him for a whole session, would
scarce serve one of his younger grandsons to buy japan and
fans for princesses at Florence!

Lord Orford has been at court again to-day: Lord Carteret came
up to thank him for his coachman; the Duke of Newcastle
standing by. My father said, "My lord, whenever the duke is
near overturning you, you have nothing to do but to send to
me, and I will save you." The duke said to Lord Carteret, "Do
you know, my lord, that the Venison you eat that day came out
of Newpark?"  Lord Orford laughed, and said, "So, you see I am
made to kill the fatted calf for the return of the prodigals!"
The King passed by all the new ministry to speak to him, and
afterwards only spoke to my Lord Carteret.

Should I answer the letters from the court of Petraria again?
there will be no end of our magnificent correspondence!-but
would it not be too haughty to let a princess write last?

Oh, the cats! I can never keep them, and yet It is barbarous
to send them all to Lord Islay: he will shut them up and
starve them, and then bury them under the stairs with his
wife.  Adieu!

(669) Solicitor to the treasury.  See ante, p. 246.

(670) Sir R. Walpole's house at Chelsea.-D.

(671) Lord Walpole was ranger of Newpark.  (Now called
Richmond Park.-D.)

(672) One of the band of incapables who obtained power and
place on the fall of Walpole.  Horace Walpole, in his
Memoires, calls him "that old rag of Lord Bath's quota to an
administration, the mute Harry Furnese."-D.

(673) This occurrence was celebrated in a ballad which is
inserted in C. Hanbury Williams's works, and begins thus.

"As Caleb and Carteret, two birds of a feather,
Went down to a feast at Newcastle's together."

Lord Bath is called "Caleb," in consequence of the name of
Caleb DAnvers having been used in The Craftsman, of which he
was the principal author.-D.

(674) It was very remarkable that Lord Orford could get and
keep such an ascendant with King George 1. when they had no
way of conversing but very imperfectly in Latin.

(675) The coffee-house at Florence where the nobility meet.

(676) The keeper of the round-house was tried but acquitted of
wilful murder. [The keeper, whose name was William Bird, was
tried at the Old Bailey in October, and received sentence of
death; which was afterwards transmuted to transportation.]

(677) The Honourable John Spencer, second son of Charles,
third Earl of Sunderland, by Anne his wife, second daughter of
the great Duke of Marlborough.  He was the favourite grandson
of old Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough who left him a vast
fortune, having disinherited, to the utmost of her power, his
eldest brother, Charles, Duke of Marlborough.  The condition
upon which she made this bequest was that neither he nor his
heirs should take any place or pension from any government,
except the rangership of Windsor Park.  He was the ancestor of
the present Earl Spencer, and died in 1746.- D.

(678) Lord George Graham, youngest son of the Duke of
Montrose, and a captain in the navy.  He died in 1747.-D.

(679) Prince and Princess Craon.




278 Letter 79
To Sir Horace Mann.
Chelsea, July 29, 1742.

I am quite out of humour; the whole town is melted away; you
never saw such a desert.  You know what Florence is in the
vintage-season, at least I remember what it was: London is
just as empty, nothing but half-a-dozen private gentlewomen
left, who live upon the scandal that they laid up in the
winter.  I am going too! this day se'nnight we set out for
Houghton, for three months; but I scarce think that I shall
allow thirty days apiece to them.  Next post I shall not be
able to write to you; and when I am there shall scarce find
any materials to furnish a letter above every other post.  I
beg, however, that you will write constantly to me: it will be
my only entertainment, for I neither hunt, brew, drink, nor
reap.  When I return in the winter, I will make amends for
this barren season of our correspondence.

I carried Sir Robert the other night to Ranelagh for the first
time: my uncle's prudence, or fear, would never let him go
before.  It was pretty full, and all its fulness flocked round
us: we walked with a train at our heels, like two chairmen
going to fight; but they were extremely civil, and did not
crowd him, or say the least impertinence--I think he grows
popular already!  The other day he got it asked, whether he
should be received if he went to Carleton House?-no,
truly!-but yesterday morning Lord Baltimore' came (680) to
soften it a little; that his royal highness -did not refuse to
see him, but that now the Court was out of town, and he had no
drawing-room, he did not see any body.

They have given Mrs. Pultney an admirable name, and one that
is likely to stick by her-instead of Lady Bath, they call her
the wife of Bath.(681)  Don't you figure her squabbling at the
gate with St. Peter for a halfpenny.

Cibber has published a little pamphlet against Pope, which has
a great deal of spirit, and, from some circumstances, will
notably vex him.(682)  I will send it to you by the first
opportunity, with a new pamphlet, said to be Doddington's,
called "A Comparison of the Old and New Ministry:" it is much
liked.  I have not forgot your magazines, but will send them
and these pamphlets together.  Adieu! I am at the end of my
tell.

P. S. Lord Edgecumbe is just made lord-lieutenant of Cornwall,
at which the Lord of Bath looks sour. He said, yesterday, that
the King would give orders for several other considerable
alterations; but gave no orders, except for this, which was
not asked by that earl.

(680) Lord of the bedchamber to the Prince.

(681) In allusion to the old ballad.

(682) This pamphlet, which was entitled "A Letter from Mr.
Cibber to Mr. Pope; inquiring into the motives that might
induce him, in his satirical works to be so frequently fond of
Mr. Cibber's name," so "notably vexed" the great poet, that,
in a new edition of the Dunciad, he dethroned Theobald from
his eminence as King of the dunces, and enthroned Cibber in
his stead.-E.




279 Letter 80
To Sir Horace Mann.
(From Houghton.)

Here are three new ballads,(683) and you must take them as a
plump part of a long letter.  Consider, I am in the barren
land of Norfolk, where news grows as slow as any thing green;
and besides, I am in the house of a fallen minister!  The
first song I fancy is Lord Edgcumbe's; at least he had reason
to write it.  The second I do not think so good as the real
Story that occasioned it.  The last is reckoned vastly the
best, and is much admired: I cannot say I see all those
beauties in it, nor am charmed with the poetry, which is cried
up. I don't find that any body knows whose it is.(684) Pultney
is very anoyed, especially as he pretends, about his wife, and
says, "it is too much to abuse ladies!"  You see, their twenty
years' satires come back home!  He is gone to the Bath in
great dudgeon: the day before he went, he went in to the King
to ask him to turn out Mr. Hill of the customs, for having
opposed him at Heydon.  "Sir," said the King, "was it not when
you was opposing me? I won't turn him out: I will part with no
more of my friends." Lord Wilmington was waiting to receive
orders accordingly, but the King gave him none.

We came hither last Saturday; as we passed through
Grosvenor-square, we met Sir Roger Newdigate, (685) with a
vast body of Tories, proceeding to his election at Brentford:
we might have expected some insult, but only one single fellow
hissed. and was not followed.  Lord Edgcumbe, Mr. Ellis, and
Mr. Hervey, in their way to Coke's,(686)
and Lord Chief Justice Wills (on the circuit) are the Only
company here yet.  My Lord invited nobody, but left it to
their charity.  The other night, as soon as he had gone
through showing Mr. Wills the house, Well," said he, "here I
am to enjoy  't, and my Lord of Bath may--."  I forgot to tell
you, in confirmation of what you see in the song of the wife
of Bath having shares of places, Sir Robert told me, that when
formerly she got a place for her own father, she took the
salary and left him only the perquisites!

It is much thought that the King will go abroad, if he can avoid
leaving the Prince in his place--.  Imagine all this!

I received to-day yours of July 21), and two from Mr. Chute
and Madame Pucci,(687) which I will answer very soon: where is
she now?  I delight in Mr. Villiers's, (688) modesty-in one
place you had written it villette's; I fancy on purpose, for
it would do for him.

Good night, my dear child! I have written myself threadbare.
I know you will hate my campaign, but what can one do!

(683) As these ballads are to be found in the edition of Sir
Charles Hanbury Williams's works, published in 1822, it has
been deemed better to omit them here.  They are called,
"Labour in Vain," "The Old Coachman," and "The Country
Girl."-D.

(684) it was written by Hanbury Williams.

(685) Sir Roger Newdigate, the fifth baronet of the family.
He was elected member for Middlesex, upon the vacancy
occasioned by Pultney's being created Earl of Bath.  He
belonged to the Tory or Jacobite party.-D. [Sir Roger
afterwards represented the University of Oxford in five
parliaments, and died in 1806, in his eighty-seventh year.
Among other benefactions to his Alma Mater, he gave the noble
candelabra in the Radcliffe library, and founded an annual
prize
 for English verses on ancient painting, sculpture, and
architecture.]

(686) Holkham.  Coke was the son of Lord Lovel, afterward
Viscount Coke, when his father was created Earl of
Leicester.-D.

(687) She was the daughter of the Conte di Valvasone, of
Friuli, sister of Madame Suares, and of the bedchamber to the
Duchess of Modena.

(688) Thomas Villiers a younger son of william, second Earl of
Jersey, at this time British minister at the court of Dresden,
and eventually created Lord Hyde, and Earl of clarendon.  Sir
H. Mann had alluded in one of his letters to a speech
attributed to Mr. Villiers, in which he took great credit to
himself for having induced the King of Poland to become a
party to the peace of Breslau, recently concluded between the
Queen of Hungary and the King, of Prussia; a course of
proceeding, which, in fact, his Polish Majesty had no
alternative but to adopt.  Villettes was an inferior
diplomatic agent from England to some of the Italian courts,
and was at this moment resident at the court of Turin.-D.




280 Letter 81
To Sir Horace Mann.
Houghton, Aug. 20, 1742


By the tediousness of the post, and distance of place, I am
still receiving letters from you about the Secret Committee,
which seems strange, for it is as much forgotten now, as if it
had happened in the last reign.  Thus much I must answer you
about it, that it is possible to resume the inquiry upon the
Report next session; but you may judge whether they will,
after all the late promotions.

We are willing to believe that there are no news in town, for
we hear none at all: Lord Lovel sent us word to-day, that he
heard, by a messenger from the post office, that Montemar
(689) is put under arrest.  I don't tell you this for news,
for you must know it long ago: but I expect the confirmation
of it from you next post.  Since we came hither I have heard
no more of the king's journey to Flanders: our troops are as
peaceable there as On Hounslow Heath, except some bickerings
and blows about beef with butchers, and about sacraments with
friars.  You know the English can eat no meat, nor be civil to
any God but their own.

As much as I am obliged to you for the description of your
Cocchiata,(690) I don't like to hear of it.  It is very
unpleasant, instead of being at it, to be prisoner, in a
melancholy, barren province, which would put one in mind of
the deluge, only that we have no water.  Do remember exactly
how your last was; for I intend that you shall give me just
such another Cocchiata next summer, if it pleases the kings
and queens of this world to let us be at peace For "it rests
that without fig-leaves," as my Lord Bacon says in one of his
letters , "I do ingenuously confess and acknowledge," (691)
that I like nothing so well as Italy.

I agree with you extremely about Tuscany for Prince
Charles,(692) but I can only agree with you on paper; for as
to knowing anything of it, I am sure Sir Robert himself knows
nothing of it: the Duke of Newcastle and my Lord Carteret keep
him in as great ignorance as possible, especially the latter;
and even in other times, you know how little he ever thought
on those things.  Believe me, he will every day know less.

Your last, which I have been answering, was the. 5th of
August; I this minute receive another of the 12th.  How I am
charmed with your spirit and usage of Richcourt!  Mais ce
n'est pas d'aujourdhui que je commence `a les m`epriser!  I am
so glad that you have quitted your calm, to treat them as they
deserve.  You don't tell me if his opposition in the council
hindered your intercession from taking place for the valet de
chambre.  I hope not! I could not bear his thwarting you!

I am now going to write to your brother, to get you the
overtures; and to desire he will send them with some pamphlets
and the magazines which I left in commission for you, at my
leaving London.  I am going to send him, too, des pleins
pouvoirs, for nominating a person to represent me at his new
babe's christening.

I am sorry Mrs. Goldsworthy is coming to England, though I
think it can be of no effect.  Sir Charles (692) has no sort
of interest with the new powers, and I don't think the
Richmonds have enough to remove foreign ministers.  However, I
will consult with Sir Robert about it, and see if he thinks
there is any danger for you, which I do not in the least; and
whatever can be done by me, I think you know, will.

P. S. I inclose an answer to Madame Pucci's letter.  Where is
she in all this Modenese desolation

(689) Montemar was the General of the King of Spain, who
commanded the troops of that sovereign against the
Imperialists in Italy.-D.

(690) A sort of serenade.  Sir H. Mann had mentioned, that he
was about to give an entertainment of this kind in his garden
to the society of Florence.-D.

(691) Prince Charles of Lorraine, younger brother of Francis,
who was now Grand Duke of Tuscany.  He was a general of some
abilities; but it was his misfortune to be so often opposed to
the superior talents of the King of Prussia.-D.

(692) Sir Charles Wager.



281 Letter 82
To Sir Horace Mann.
Houghton, August 28, 1742.

I did receive your letter of the 12th, as I think I mentioned
in my last; and to-day another of the 19th.  Had I been you,
instead of saying that I would have taken my lady's(693) woman
for my spy, I should have said, that I would hire Richcourt
himself: I dare to say that one might buy the count's own
secrets of himself.

I am sorry to hear that the Impressarii have sent for the
Chiaretta; I am not one of the managers; I should have
remonstrated against her, for she will not do on the same
stage with the Barbarina.  I don't know who will be glad of
her coming, but Mr. Blighe and Amorevoli.

'Tis amazing, but we hear not a syllable of Prague taken,(694)
it must be!  Indeed, Carthagena, too, was certain of being
taken! but it seems, Maillebois is to stop at Bavaria.  I hope
Belleisle (695) will be made prisoner?  I am indifferent about
the fate of the great Broglio-but Belleisle is able, and is
our most determined enemy: we need not have more, for to-day
it is confirmed that Cardinal Tencin (696) and M. d'Argenson
are declared of the prime ministry.  The first moment they
can, Tencin will be for transporting the Pretenders into
England.  Your advice about Naples was quite judicious: the
appearance of a bomb will have great weight in the councils of
the little king.

We don't talk now of any of the Royals passing into Flanders;
though the Champion (697) this morning had an admirable
quotation, on the supposition that the King would go himself:
it was this line from the Rehearsal:-

"Give us our fiddle; we ourselves will play."

The lesson for the Day (698) that I sent you, I gave to Mr.
Coke, who came in as I was writing it, and by his dispersing
it, it has got into print, with an additional one, which I
cannot say I am proud should go under my name.  Since that,
nothing but lessons are the fashion: first and second lessons,
morning and evening lessons, epistles, etc.  One of the Tory
papers published so abusive an one last week on the new
ministry, that three gentlemen called on the printer, to know
how he dared to publish it.  Don't you like these men who for
twenty years together led the way, and published every thing
that was scandalous, that they should wonder at any body's
daring to publish against them! Oh! it will come home to them!
Indeed, every body's fame now is published at length: last
week the Champion mentioned the Earl of Orford and his natural
daughter, Lady Mary, at length (for which he had a great mind
to prosecute the printer).  To-day, the London Evening Post
says, Mr. Pane, nephew of Mr. Scrope, is made first clerk of
the treasury, as a reward for his uncle's taciturnity before
the Secret Committee.  He is in the room of old Tilson, who
was so tormented by that Committee that it turned his brain,
and he is dead.

I am excessively shocked at Mr. Fane's (699) behaviour to you;
but Mr. Fane is an honourable man! he lets poor you pay him
his salary for eighteen months, without thinking of returning
it! But if he had lost that sum to Jansen,(700) or to any of
the honourable men at White's, he would think his honour
engaged to pay it.  There is nothing, sure, so whimsical as
modern honour! You may debauch a woman upon a promise of
marriage, and not marry her; you may ruin your tailor's or
your baker's family by not paying them; you may make Mr. Mann
maintain you for eighteen months, as a public minister, out of
his own pocket, and still be a man of honour! But, not to pay
a common sharper, or not to murder a man that has trod upon
your toe, is such a blot in your scutcheon, that you could
never recover your honour, though you had in your veins "all
the blood of all the Howards!"

My love to Mr. Chute: tell him, as he looks on the east front
of Houghton, to tap under the two windows in the left-hand
wing, up stairs, close to the colonnade-there are Patapan and
I, at this instant, writing to you; there we are almost every
morning, or in the library; the evenings, we walk till dark;
then Lady Mary, Miss Leneve, and I play at comet; the Earl,
Mrs. Leneve, and whosoever is here, discourse; car telle est
notre vie!  Adieu!

(693) Lady Walpole.  Richcourt, the Florentine minister, was
her lover, and both, as has been seen in the former part of
these letters, were enemies of Sir . H. Mann.-D.

(694) This means retaken by the Imperialists from the French,
who had obtained possession of it on the 25th of November,
1741.  The Austrian troops drove the French out of Prague, in
December, 1742.-D.

(695) This wish was gratified, though not in this year.
Marshal Belleisle was taken prisoner in 1745, by the
Hanoverian dragoons, was confined for some months in Windsor
Castle, and exchanged after the battle of Fontenoy.-D.

(696) A profligate ecclesiastic, who was deeply engaged in the
corrupt political intrigues of the day.  In these he was
assisted by his sister Madame Tencin, an unprincipled woman of
much ability, who had been the mistress of the still more
infamous Cardinal Dubois.  Voltaire boasts in his Memoirs, of
having killed the Cardinal Tencin from vexation, at a sort of
political hoax, which he played off upon him.-D. [The cardinal
was afterwards, made Archbishop of Lyons.  In 1752, he
entirely quitted the court, and retired to his diocese, where
he died in 1758, ,greatly esteemed," says the Biog. Univ.  for
his extensive charities." His sister died in 1749.  She was
mother of the celebrated D'Alembert by Destouches Canon, and
authoress of "Le Comte de Comminges," "Les Malheurs de
l'Amour," and other romances.]

(697) 'The Champion was an opposition Journal, written by
Fielding. [Assisted by Ralph, the historian.)

(698) Entitled " The Lessons for the Day, 1742." Published in
Sir Charles Hanbury Williams's works, but written by
Walpole.-D.

(699) Charles Fane, afterwards Lord Fane, had been minister at
Florence before Mr. Mann.

(700) A notorious gambler.  He is mentioned by Pope, in the
character of the young man of fashion, in the fourth canto of
the Dunciad,

"As much estate, and principle, and wit,
As Jansen, Fleetwood, Cibber, shall think fit."-D.




284 Letter 83
To Sir Horace Mann.
Houghton, Sept. 11, 1742.

I could not write     to you last week, for I was at
Woolterton,(701) and in a course of visits, that took up my
every moment.  I received one from you there, of August 26th,
but have had none at all this week.

You know I am not prejudiced in favour of the country, nor
like a place because it bears turnips well, or because you may
gallop over it without meeting a tree: but I really was
charmed with Woolterton; it is all wood and water! My uncle
and aunt may, without any expense, do what they have all their
lives avoided, wash themselves and make fires.(702)  Their
house is more than a         good one; if they had not saved
eighteen pence in every room, it would have been a fine one.
I saw several of my acquaintance,(703)  Volterra vases,
Grisoni landscapes, the four little bronzes, the
raffle-picture, etc.

We have printed about the expedition to Naples: the affair at
Elba, too, is in the papers, but we affect not to believe it.
 We are in great apprehensions of not taking Prague--the only
thing that has been taken on our side lately, I think, is my
Lord Stair's journey hither and back again-we don't know for
what-he is such an Orlando! The papers are full of the most
defending King'S Journey to Flanders;our private letters say
not a word of it-I say our, for at                  present I
think the earl's intelligences and mine are pretty equal as to
authority.

Here is a little thing which I think has humour in it.

A CATALOGUE OF NEW FRENCH BOOKS.

1. Jean-sans-terre, on l'Empereur en pet-en-l'air; imprim`e `a
Frankfort.

                  2. La France mourante d'une suppression
d'hommes et d'argent: dedi`e au public.

                  3. L'art de faire les Neutralit`es, invent`e
en Allemagne, et `ecrit en cette langue, par Un des Electeurs,
et nouvellement traduit en Napolitain; par le Chef d'Escadre
Martin.

4. Voyage d'Allemaune, par Monsieur de Maupertuis; avec un
t`elescope, invent`e pendant son voyage; `a l'usage des
H`eros, pour regarder leur victoires de loin.

5. M`ethode court et facile pour faire entrer les troupes
Fran`coies en Allemagne:-mais comment faire, pour les en faire
sortir?

6. Trait`e tr`es salutaire et tr`es utile sur la
reconnoissance envers les bienfaicteurs, par le Roy de
Pologne.  Folio, imprim`e `a Dresde.

7. Obligation sacr`ee des Trait`es, Promesses, et
Renonciations, par le Grand Turc; avec des Remarques
retractoires, par un Jesuite.

8. Probleme; combien il faut d'argent FranSois pour payer le
sang Su`edois circul`e par le Comte de Gyllembourg

9. Nouvelle m`ethode de friser les cheveux `a la Francoise;
par le Colonel Mentz et sa Confrairie.

10. Recueil de Dissertations sur la meilleure mani`ere de
faire la partition des successions, par le Cardinal de Fleury;
avec des notes, historiques et politiques, par la Reine
d'Espagne.

11. Nouveau Voyage de Madrid `a Antibes, par l'Infant Dom
Philippe.

12. Lart de chercher les ennemis sans lea trouver; par le
Marechal de Maillebois.

13. La fid`elit`e couronn`ee, par le G`en`eral Munich et le
Comte d'Osterman.

14. Le bal de Lintz et les amusements de DOnawert; pi`ece
pastorale et galante,
                           en un acte, par le Grand Duc.

15. l'Art de maitriser les Femmes, par sa Majest`e
Catliolique.

16. Avantures Boh`emiennes, tragi-comiques, tr`es curieuses,
tr`es int`erressantes, et charg`ees d'incidents.  Tom. i. ii.
iii.
N.B. Le dernier tome, qui fera le denouement, est sous presse.

Adieu! my dear child; if it was not for this secret of
transcribing, what should one do in the country to make out a
letter?



285 Letter 84
To Sir Horace Mann.
Houghton, Sept. 25th, 1742.

At last, my dear child, I have got two letters from you! I
have been in strange pain, between fear of your being ill, and
apprehensions of your letters being stopped; but I have
received that by Crew, and another since.  But you have been
ill! I am angry with Mr. Chute for not writing to let me know
it.  I fancied you worse than you say, or at least than you
own.  But I don't wonder you have fevers!  such a busy
politician as Villettes,(704) and such a blustering negotiator
as il Furibondo (705) are enough to put all your little
economy of health and spirits in confusion.  I agree with you,
that " they don't pique themselves upon understanding sense,
any more than Deutralities!"  The grand journey to
Flanders(706) is a little -it a stand: the expense has been
computed at two thousand pounds a day! Many dozen of
embroidered portmanteaus full of laurels and bays have been
prepared this fortnight.  The Regency has been settled and
unsettled twenty times: it is now said, that the weight of it
is not to be laid on the Prince.  The King is to return by his
birthday; but whether he is to bring back part of French
Flanders with him, or will only have time to fetch Dunkirk, is
uncertain.  In the mean time, Lord Carteret is gone to the
Hague; by which jaunt it seems that Lord Stair's journey was
not conclusive.  The converting of the siege of Prague into a
blockade makes no great figure in the journals on this side
the water and question-but it is the fashion not to take towns
that one was sure of taking.  I cannot pardon the Princess for
having thought of putting off her `epuisements and lassitudes
to take a trip to Leghorn, "pendant qu'on ne donnoit `a manger
`a Monsieur le Prince son fils, que de la chair de chevaux!"
Poor Prince Beauvau!(707)  I shall be glad to hear he is safe
from this siege.  Some of the French princes of the blood have
been stealing away a volunteering, but took care to be missed
in time.  Our Duke goes with his lord and father-they say, to
marry a princess of Prussia, whereof great preparations have
been making in his equipage and in his breeches.

Poor Prince Craon! where did De Sade get fifty sequins.  When
I was at Florence, you know all his clothes were in pawn to
his landlord; but he redeemed them by pawning his Modenese
bill of credit to his landlady! I delight in the style of the
neutrality maker(708)-his neutralities and his English arc
perfectly of a piece.

You have diverted me excessively with the history of the
Princess Eleonora's(709) posthumous issue-but how could the
woman have spirit enough to have five children by her footman,
and yet not have enough to own them.  Really, a woman so much
in the great world should have known better! Why, no yeoman's
dowager could have acted more prudishly! It always amazes me,
when I reflect on the women, who are the first to propagate
scandal of one another.  If they would but agree not to
censure what they all agree to do, there would be no more loss
of characters among them than amongst men.  A woman cannot
have an affair, but instantly all her sex travel about to
publish it, and leave her off: now, if a man cheats another of
his estate at play, forges a will, or marries a ward to his
own son, nobody thinks of leaving him off for such trifles.

The English parson at Stosch's, the archbishop on the chapter
of music, the Fanciulla's persisting in her mistake, and old
Count Galli's distress, are all admirable stories.(710)  But
what is the meaning of Montemar's writing to the Antinora?--I
thought he had left the Galia for my illustrissima,(711) her
sister.  lord! I am horridly tired of that romantic love and
correspondence! Must I answer her last letter?  there were but
six lines--what can I say? I perceive, by what you mention of
the cause of his disorder, that Rucellai does not turn out
that simple, honest man you thought him-come, own it

I just recollect a story, which perhaps will serve your
archbishop on his Don Pilogio(712)-the Tartuffe was meant for
the then archbishop of Paris, who, after the first night,
forbad its being acted.  Moliere came forth, and told the
audience, "Messieurs, on devoit vous donner le Tartuffe, mais
MOnSeigneur l'Archev`eque ne veut pas qu'on le joue."

My lord is very impatient for his Dominichin; so you will send
it by the first safe conveyance.  He is making a gallery, for
the ceiling of which I have given the design of that in the
little library of St. Mark at Venice: Mr. Chute will remember
how charming it was; and for the frieze, I have prevailed to
have that of the temple at Tivoli.  Naylor(713) came here the
other day with two coaches full of relations: as his
mother-in-law, who was one of the company is widow of Dr.
Hare, Sir Robert's old tutor at Cambridge, he made them stay
to dine: when they were gone, he said, "Ha, child! what is
that Mr. Naylor, Horace  ? he is the absurdest man I ever
saw!" I subscribed to his opinion; won't you?  I must tell you
a story of him.  When his father married this second wife,
Naylor said,"Father, they say you are to be married to-day,
are you?"  "Well," replied the bishop, "and what is that to
you?"  "Nay, nothing; only if you had told me, I would have
powdered my hair."

(704) Mr. Villettes was minister at Turin.

(705) Admiral Matthews; his ships having committed some
outrages on the coast of Italy, the Italians called him it
Furibondo.

(706) Of George the Second.-D.

(707) Afterwards a marshal of France. He was a man of some
ability, and the friend and patron of St. Lambert, and of
other men of letters of the time of Lewis XV.-D.  [He was made
a marshal in 1783 by the unfortunate Louis XVI. and in 1789 a
minister of state.  He died in 1793, a few weeks after the
murder of his royal master.]

(708) Admiral Matthews.

(709) Eleonora of Guastalla, widow of the last cardinal of
Medici, died at Venice. (The father of the children was a
French running footman.-D.) [Cosmo the Third was sixty-seven
years old at the period of the marriage: "une fois le marriage
conclu," says the Biog. Univ. "El`eonore refusa de la
consommer, rebut`ee par la figure, par l'age et surtout par
les d`esordres de son `epouse."  Cosmo died at the age of
eighty-one. A translation of his Travels through England, in
1669, was published in 1820.

(710) These are stories in a letter of Sir H. Mann's, which
are neither very decent nor very amusing.-D.

(711) Madame Grifoni.

(712) The Archbishop of Florence had forbid the acting of a
burlettae called Don Pilogio, a sort of imitation of Tartuffe.
When the Impresario of the Theatre remonstrated upon the
expense he had been put to in preparing the music for it, the
archbishop told him he might use it for some other opera.-D.

(713) He was the son of Dr. Here, Bishop of Chichester, and
changed his name for an estate.




                            287 Letter 85
          To Sir Horace Mann.
Houghton, Oct. 8th, 1742.

I have not heard from you this fortnight; if I don't receive a
letter to-morrow, I shall be quite out of humour.  It is true,
of late I have written to you but every other post; but then I
have been in the country, in Norfolk, in Siberia!  You were
still at Florence, in the midst of Kings of Sardinia,
Montemars, and Neapolitan neutralities; your letters are my
only diversion.  As to German news, it is all so simple that I
am peevish: the raising of the siege of Prague,((714) and
Prince Charles and Marechal Maillebois playing at hunt the
squirrel, have disgusted me from inquiring about the war.  The
earl laughs in his great chair, and sings a bit of an old
ballad,

"They both did fight, they both did beat, they both did run
     away,
They both strive again to meet, the quite contrary way."


Apropos! I see in the papers that a Marquis de Beauvau escaped
out of Prague with the Prince de Deuxpons and the Duc de
Brissac; was it our Prince Beauvau?

At last the mighty monarch does not go to Flanders, after
making the greatest preparations that ever were made but by
Harry the Eighth, and the authors of the grand Cyrus and the
illustrious Hassa: you may judge by the quantity of napkins,
which were to the amount of nine hundred dozen-indeed, I don't
recollect that ancient heroes were ever so provident of
necessaries, or thought how they were to wash their hands and
face after a victory.  Six hundred horses, under the care of
the Duke of Richmond, were even shipped; and the clothes and
furniture of his court magnificent enough for a bull-fight at
the conquest of Granada.  Felton Hervey's(715) war-horse,
besides having richer caparisons than any of the expedition,
had a gold net to keep off the flies-in winter!  Judge of the
clamours this expense to no purpose will produce! My Lord
Carteret is set out from the Hague, but was not landed when
the last letters came from London: there are no great
expectations from this trip; no more than followed from my
Lord Stair's.

I send you two more odes on Pultney,(716) I believe by the
same hand as the former, though none are equal to the Nova
Progenies, which has been more liked than almost ever any
thing was.  It is not at all known whose they are; I believe
Hanbury Williams's.  The note to the first was printed with
it: the advice to him to be privy seal has its foundation; for
when the consultation was held who were to have places, and my
Lord Gower was named to succeed Lord Hervey, Pultney said with
some warmth, "I designed to be privy seal myself!"

We expect some company next week from Newmarket: here is at
present only Mr. Keene and Pigwiggin,(717)-you never saw so
agreeable a creature!-oh yes! you have seen his parents!  I
must tell you a new story of them Sir Robert had given them a
little horse for Pigwiggin, and somebody had given them
another: both which, to save the charge of keeping, they sent
to grass in Newpark.  After three years that they had not used
them, my Lord Walpole let his own son ride them, while he was
at the park, in the holidays.  Do you know, that the woman
Horace sent to Sir Robert, and made him give her five guineas
for the two horses, because George had ridden them?  I give
you my word this is fact.

There has been a great fracas at Kensington: one of the
Mesdames(718) pulled the chair from under Countess
Deloraine(719) at cards, who, being provoked that her monarch
was diverted with her disgrace, with the malice of a
hobby-horse, gave him just such another fall.  But alas! the
Monarch, like Louis XIV. is mortal in the part that touched
the ground, and was so hurt and so angry, that the countess is
disgraced, and her German rival (720) remains in the sole and
quiet possession of her royal master's favour.

October 9th.

Well! I have waited till this morning, but have no letter from
you; what can be the meaning of it? Sure, if you was ill, Mr.
Chute would write to me!  Your brother protests he never lets
your letters lie at the office.

Sa Majest`e Patapanique(721) has had a dreadful
misfortune!-not lost his first minister, nor his purse--nor
had part of his camp equipage burned in the river, nor waited
for his secretary of state, who is perhaps blown to
Flanders--nay, nor had his chair pulled from under him-worse!
worse! quarrelling with a great pointer last night about their
countesses, he received a terrible shake by the back and a
bruise on the left eye--poor dear Pat! you never saw such
universal consternation! it was at supper.  Sir Robert, who
makes as much rout with him as I do, says, he never saw ten
people show so much real concern! Adieu! Yours, ever and
ever-but write to me.

(714) The Marshal de Maillebois and the Count de Saxe had been
sent with reinforcements from France, to deliver the Marshal
de Broglio and the Marshal de Belleisle, who, with their army,
were shut up in Prague, and surrounded by the superior forces
of the Queen of Hungary, commanded by Prince Charles of
Lorraine.  They succeeded in facilitating the escape of the
Marshal de Broglio, and of a portion of the French troops; but
the Marshal de Belleisle continued to be blockaded in Prague
with twenty-two thousand men, till December 1742, when he made
his escape to Egra.-D.

(715) Felton Hervey, tenth son of John, first Earl of Bristol;
in 1737, appointed groom of the bedchamber to the Duke of
Cumberland.  He died in 1775.-E.

(716) These are "The Capuchin," and the ode beginning, "'Great
Earl of Bath, your reign is o'er;"  As they have been
frequently published, they are omitted.  The "Nova Progenies"
is the well-known ode beginning, "See, a new progeny
descends."-D.

(717) Eldest son of old Horace Walpole. [Afterwards the second
Lord Walpole of Wolterton, and in 1806, at the age of
eighty-three created Earl of Orford.  He died in 1809.-E.]

(718) The Princesses, daughters of George II.-D.

(719) Elizabeth Fenwick, widow of Henry Scott, third Earl of
Deloraine.  She was a favourite of George II. and lived much
in his intimate society.  From the ironical epithets applied
to her in Lord Hervey's ballad in the subsequent letter, it
would appear, that her general conduct was not considered to
be very exemplary.  She died in 1794.-D.

(720) Lady Yarmouth.



289 Letter 86
                                        To Sir Horace Mann.
Houghton, Oct. 18, 1742.

I have received two letters from you since last post; I
suppose the wind stopped the packet-boat.

Well! was not I in the right to persist in buying the
Dominichin?  don't you laugh at those wise connoisseurs, who
pronounced it a copy? If it is one, where is the original? or
who was that so great master that could equal Dominichin? Your
brother has received the money for it, and Lord Orford is in
great impatience for it; yet he begs, if you can find any
opportunity, that it may be sent in a man-of-war.  I must
desire that the statue may be sent to Leghorn, to be shipped
with it, and that you will get Campagni and Libri to transact
the payment as they did for the picture, and I will pay your
brother.

Villettes' important despatches to you are as ridiculous as
good Mr. Matthews's devotion. - I fancy Mr. Matthews's own god
(722) would make as foolish a figure about a monkey's neck, as
a Roman Catholic one.  You know, Sir Francis Dashwood used to
say that Lord Shrewsbury's providence was an old angry man in
a blue cloak: another person-that I knew, believed providence
was like a mouse, because he is invisible.  I dare to say
Matthews believes, that providence lives upon beef and
pudding, loves prize-fighting and bull-baiting, and drinks fog
to the health of Old England.

I go to London in a week, and then will send you cart-loads of
news: I know none now, but that we hear to-day of the arrival
of Duc d'Aremberg-I suppose to return my Lord Carteret's
visit.  The latter was near being lost; he told the King that
being in a storm, he had thought it safest to put into
Yarmouth roads, at which he laughed, hoh! hoh! hoh!

For want of news, I live upon ballads to you; here is one that
has made a vast noise, and by Lord Hervey's taking great pains
to disperse it, has been thought his own-if it is,(723) he has
taken true care to disguise the niceness of his style.

1. O England, attend. while thy fate I deplore,
Rehearsing the schemes and the conduct of power.
And since only of those who have power I sing,
I am sure none can think that I hint at the King.

2. From the time his son made him old Robin depose,
All the power of a King he was well-known to lose;
But of all but the name and the badges bereft,
Like old women, his paraphernalia are left.

3. To tell how he shook in St. James's for fear,
When first these new Ministers bullied him there,
Makes my blood boil with rage, to think what a thing
They have made of a man We 'obey as a King.

4. Whom they pleas'd they put in, whom they pleas'd they put
out,
And just like a top they all lash'd him about,
Whilst he like a top with a murmuring noise,
Seem'd to grumble, but turn'd to these rude lashing boys.

5. At last Carteret arriving, spoke thus to his grief,
If you'll make me your Doctor, I'll bring you relief;
You see to your closet familiar I come,
And seem like my wife in the circle-at home."

6. Quoth the King, "My good Lord, perhaps you've been told,
That I used to abuse you a little of old;
'But now bring whom you will, and eke turn away,
But let me and my money, and Walmoden(724) stay."

7." For you and Walmoden, I freely consent,
But as for your money, I must have it spent;
I have promised your son (nay, no frowns,) shall have some,
Nor think 'tis for nothing we patriots are come.

8. "But, however, little King, since I find you so good,
Thus stooping below your high courage and blood,
Put yourself in my hands, and I'll do what I can,
To make you look yet like a King and a man.

9. "At your Admiralty and your Treasury-board,
To save one single man y; u shan't say a word,
For, by God! all your rubbish front both you shall shoot,
Walpole's ciphers and Gasherry'S(725) vassals to boot.

10. "And to guard Prince's ears, as all Statesmen take care,
So, long as yours are-not one man shall come near;
For of all your Court-crew we'll leave only those
Who we know never dare to say boh! to a goose.

11. "So your friend booby Grafton I'll e'en let you keep,
Awake he can't hurt, and is still half asleep;
Nor ever was dangerous, but to womankind,
And his body's as impotent now as his mind.

12. "There's another Court-booby, at once hot and dull,
Your pious pimp, Schutz, a mean, Hanover tool;
For your card-play at night he too shall remain,
With virtuous and sober, and wise Deloraine.(726)


13. "And for all your Court-nobles who can't write or read,
As of such titled ciphers all courts stand in need,
Who, like parliament-Swiss, vote and fight for their pay,
They're as good as a new set to cry yea and nay.

14. "Though Newcastle's as false, as he's silly, I know,
By betraying old Robin to me long ago,
As well as all those who employed him before,
Yet I leave him in place, but I leave him no power.

15. "For granting his heart is as black as his hat,
With no more truth in this, than there's sense beneath that;
Yet as he's a coward, he'll shake when I frown;
You call'd him a rascal, I'll use him like one,

16. "And since his estate at elections he'll spend,
And beggar himself, without making a friend;
So whilst the extravagant fool has a sous,
As his brains I can't fear, so his fortune I'll use,

17. "And as miser Hardwicke, with all courts will draw,
He too may remain, but shall stick to his law;
For of foreign affairs, when he talks like a fool,
I'll laugh in his face,, and will cry 'Go to school!'

18. "The Countess of Wilmington, excellent nurse,
I'll trust with the Treasury, not with its purse,
For nothing by her I've resolved shall be done,
She shall sit at that board, as you sit on the throne.

19. "Perhaps now, you expect that I should begin
To tell you the men I design to bring in;
But we're not yet determined on all their demands
-And you'll know soon enough, when they come to kiss hands.

20. "All that weathercock Pultney shall ask, we must grant,
For to make him a great noble nothing, I want;
And to cheat such a man, demands all my arts,
For though he's a fool, he's a fool with great parts,

21. "And as popular Clodius, the Pultney of Rome,
>From a noble, for power did plebeian become,
So this Clodius to be a Patrician shall choose,
Till what one got by changing, the other shall lose.

22. "Thus flatter'd and courted, and gaz'd at by all,
Like Phaeton, rais'd for a day, he shall fall,
Put the world in a flame, and show he did strive
To get reins in his hand, though 'tis plain he can't drive.

23. "For your foreign affairs, howe'er they turn out,
At least I'll take care you shall make a great rout:
Then cock your great hat, strut, bounce, and look bluff,
For though kick'd and cuffd here, you shall there kick and
cuff.

24. "That Walpole did nothing they all used to say,
So I'll do enough, but I'll make the dogs pay;
Great fleets I'll provide, and great armies engage,
Whate'er debts we make, or whate'er wars we wage."

25. With cordials like these the Monarch's new guest
Revived his sunk spirits and gladden'd his heart;
Till in raptures he cried, " y dear Lord, you shall do
Whatever you will, give me troops to review.

26. "But oh! my dear England, since this is thy state,
Who is there that loves thee but weeps at thy fate?
Since in changing thy masters, thou art just like old Rome,
Whilst Faction, Oppression, and Slavery's thy doom.

27. "For though you have made that rogue Walpole retire,
You're out of the frying-pan into the fire!
But since to the Protestant line I'm a friend,
I tremble to think where these changes may end!"

This has not been printed.  You see the burthen of all the
songs Is the rogue Walpole, which he has observed himself, but
I believe is content, as long as they pay off his arrears to
those that began the tune.  Adieu!

(722) Admiral Matthews's crew having disturbed some Roman
Catholic ceremonies in a little island on the coast of Italy,
hung a crucifix about a monkey's neck.

(723) It was certainly written by Lord Hervey.

(724) Lady Yarmouth.

(725) Sir Charles Wager's nephew, and Secretary to the
Admiralty.

(726) Countess Dowager of Deloraine, governess to the young
Princesses.



293 Letter 87
To Sir Horace Mann.
Houghton, Oct. 23, 1742.

At last I see an end of my pilgrimage; the day after tomorrow
I am affirming it to you as earnestly as if' you had been
doubting of it like myself: but both my brothers are here, and
Sir Robert will let me go.  He must follow himself soon: the
Parliament meets the 16th of November, that the King may go
abroad the first of March: but if all threats prove true
prophecies, he will scarce enter upon heroism so soon, for we
are promised a winter just like the last-new Secret Committees
to be tried for, and impeachments actually put into execution.
It is horrid to have a prospect of a session like the last.

In the meantime, my Lord of Bath and Lord Hervey, who seem
deserted by every body else, are grown the greatest friends in
the world at Bath; and to make a complete triumvirate, my Lord
Gower is always of their party: how they must love one
another, the late, the present, and the would-be Privy Seal!

Lord Hyndford has had great honours in Prussia: that King
bespoke for him a service of plate to the value of three
thousand pounds.  He asked leave for his Majesty's arms to be
put upon it: the King replied, "they should, with the arms of
Silesia added to his paternal coat for ever." I will tell you
Sir ]Robert's remark on this: "He is rewarded thus for having
obtained Silesia for the King of Prussia, which he was sent to
preserve to the Queen of Hungary!"  Her affairs begin to take
a little better turn again; Broglio is prevented from joining
Maillebois, who, they affirm, can never bring his army off, as
the King of Poland is guarding all the avenues of Saxony, to
prevent his passing through that country.

I wrote to you in my last to desire that the Dominichin and my
statue might come by a man-of-war.  Now.  Sir Robert, who is
impatient for his picture, would have it sent in a Dutch ship,
as he says he can easily get it from Holland.  If you think
this conveyance quite safe, I beg my statue may bear it
company.

Tell me if you are tired of ballads on my Lord Bath; if you
are not, here is another admirable one,(727) I believe by the
same hand as the others; but by the conclusion certainly ought
not to be Williams's.  I only send you the good ones, for the
newspapers are every day full of bad ones on this famous earl.

My compliments to the Princess; I dreamed last night that she
was come to Houghton, and not at all `epuis`ee with her
journey.  Adieu!

P.S. I must add a postscript, to mention a thing I have often
designed to ask you to do for me.  Since I came to England I
have been buying drawings, (the time is well chosen, when I
had neglected it in Italy!)  I saw at Florence two books that
I should now be very glad to have, if you could get them
tolerably reasonable; one was at an English painter's; I think
his name was Huckford, over against your house in via Bardi;
they were of Holbein: the other was of Guercino, and brought
to me to see by the Abb`e Bonducci; my dear child, you will
oblige me much if you can get them.

(727) Sir Charles Hanbury Williams's ode, beginning "What
Statesman, what Hero, what King-." It is to be found in all
editions of his poems.-D.



294 Letter 88
             To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, Nov. 1, 1742.

I have not felt so pleasantly these three months as I do at
present, though I have a great cold with coming into an
unaired house, and have been forced to carry that cold to the
King's levee and the drawing-room.  There were so many new
faces that I scarce knew where I was; I should have taken 'it
for Carlton House, or my Lady Mayoress's visiting-day, only
the people did not seem enough at home, but rather as admitted
to see the King dine in public.  'Tis quite ridiculous to see
the numbers of old ladies, who, from having been wives of
patriots, have not been dressed these twenty years; out they
come, in all the accoutrements that were in use in Queen
Anne's days.  Then the joy and awkward jollity of them is
inexpressible!  They titter, and, wherever you meet them, are
always going to court, and looking at their watches an hour
before the time.  I met several on the birthday, (for I did
not arrive time enough to make clothes,) and they were dressed
in all the colours of the rainbow: they seem to have said to
themselves twenty years ago, ,Well, if ever I do go to court
again, I will have a pink and silver, or a blue and silver,"
and they keep their resolutions.- But here's a letter from
you, sent to me back from Houghton; I must stop to read
it.-Well, I have read it, and am diverted with Madame
Grifoni's being with child; I hope she was too.  I don't
wonder that she hates the country; I dare to say her child
does not owe its existence to the Villeggiatura.  When you
wrote, it seems you had not heard what a speedy determination
was put to Don Philip's reign in Savoy.  I suppose he will
retain the title: you know great princes are fond of titles,
which proves they are not so great as they once were.

I find a very different face of things from what we had
conceived in the country.  There are, indeed, thoughts of
renewing attacks on Lord Orford, and Of stepping the supplies;
but the new ministry laugh at these threats, having secured a
vast majority in the House: the Opposition themselves own that
the Court will have upwards of a hundred majority: I don't,
indeed, conceive how; but they are confident of carrying every
thing.  They talk of Lord Gower's not keeping the privy seal;
that he will either resign it, or have it taken away: Lord
Bath, who is entering into all the court measures, is most
likely to succeed him.  The late Lord Privy Seal(728) has had
a most ridiculous accident at Bath: he used to play in a
little inner room; but one night some ladies had got it, and
he was reduced to the public room; but being extremely absent
and deep in politics, he walked through the little room to a
convenience behind the curtain, from whence (still absent) he
produced himself in a situation extremely diverting to the
women: imagine his delicacy, and the passion he was in at
their laughing!

I laughed at myself prodigiously the other day for a piece of
absence; I was writing on the King's birthday, and being
disturbed with the mob in the street, I rang for the porter,
and, with an air of grandeur, as if I was still at Downing
Street, cried, "Pray send away those marrowbones and
cleavers!" The poor fellow with the most mortified air in the
world, replied, "Sir, they are not at our door, but over the
way at my Lord Carteret's." "Oh," said I, "then let them
alone; may be he does not dislike the noise!" I pity the poor
porter, who sees all his old customers going over the way too.

Our operas begin to-morrow with a pasticcio, full of most of
my favourite songs: the Fumagalli has disappointed us; she had
received an hundred ducats, and then wrote word that she had
spent them, and was afraid of coming through the Spanish
quarters; but if they would send her an hundred more, she
would come next year.  Villettes has what been written to in
the strongest manner to have her forced hither (for she is at
Turin.) I tell you this by way of key, in case you should
receive a mysterious letter in cipher from him about this
important business.

I have not seen Due d'Aremberg; but I hear that all the
entertainments for him are suppers, for he -will dine at his
own hour, eleven in the morning.  He proposed it to the
Duchess of Richmond when she invited him; but she said she did
not know where to find company to dine with him at that hour.

I must advise YOU to be cautious how you refuse humouring our
captains (729) in any of their foolish schemes; for they are
popular, and I should be very sorry to have them out of humour
with you when they come home, lest it should give any handle
to your enemies.  Think of it, my dear child! The officers in
Flanders, that are members of parliament, have had
intimations, that if they asked leave to come on their private
affairs, and drop in, not all together, they will be very well
received; this is decorum.  Little Brook's little wife is a
little with child.  Adieu!

(728) Lord Hervey.

(729) The captains of ships in the English fleet at Leghorn.



296 Letter 89
To Sir Horace Mann.
London, Nov. 15, 1742.

I have not written to you lately, expecting letters from you;
last I have received two.  I still send mine through France,
as I am afraid they would get to you with still more
difficulty through Holland.

Our army is just now ordered to march to Mayence, at the
repeated instances of the Queen of Hungary; Lord Stair goes
with them, but almost all the officers that arc in parliament
arc come over, for the troops are only to be in garrison till
March, when, it is said, the King will take the field with
them.  This step makes a great noise, for the old remains of
the Opposition are determined to persist, and have termed this
a H(inoverian measure.  They begin to-morrow, with opposing
the address on the King's speech: Pitt is to be the leading
mail; there are none but he and Lyttelton of the Prince's
court, who do not join with the ministry: the Prince has told
them, that he will follow the advice they long ago gave him,
"turning out all his people who do not vote as he would have
them."

Lord Orford is come to town, and was at the King's levee
to-day; the joy the latter showed to see him was very visible:
all the new ministry came and spoke to him; and he had a long,
laughing conversation with my Lord Chesterfield, who is still
in Opposition.

You have heard, I suppose, of the revolution in the French
Court; Madame de Mailly is disgraced, and her handsome sister
De la Tournelle(730) succeeds: the latter insisted on three
conditions; first, that the Mailly should quit the palace
before she entered it; next, that she should be declared
mistress, to which post, they pretend, there is a large salary
annexed, (but that is not probable,) and lastly, that she may
always have her own parties at supper: the last article would
very well explain what she proposes to do with her salary.

There are admirable instructions come up from Worcester to
Sandys and Winnington; they tell the latter how little hopes
they always had of him.  "But for you, Mr. Sandys, who have
always, etc., you to snatch at the first place you could get,"
etc.  In short, they charge him, who is in the Treasury and
Exchequer not to vote for any supplies.(731)

I write to you in a vast hurry, for I am going to the meeting
at the Cockpit, to hear the King's speech read to the members:
Mr. Pelham presides there.  They talk of a majority of
fourscore: we shall see to-morrow.

The Pomfrets stay in the country most part of the winter-.
Lord Lincoln and Mr. (George) Pitt have declared off in
form.(732)  So much for the schemes of my lady!  The Duke of
Grafton used to say that they put him in mind of a troop of
Italian comedians; Lord Lincoln was Valere, Lady Sophia,
Columbine, and my lady the old mother behind the scenes.

Our operas go on au plus miserable: all our hopes lie in a new
dancer, Sodi, who has performed but once, but seems to please
as much as the Fausan.  Did I tell you how well they had
chosen the plot of the first opera? There was a prince who
rebels against his father, who had before rebelled against
his.(733)  The Duke of Montagu says, there is to be an opera
of dancing, with singing between the acts.

My Lord Tyrawley(734) is come from Portugal, and has brought
three wives and fourteen children; one of the former is a
Portuguese, with long black hair plaited down to the bottom of
her back.  He was asked the other night at supper, what he
thought of England; whether he found much alteration from
fifteen years ago?  "No," he said, "not at all: why, there is
my Lord Bath, I don't see the least alteration in him; he is
just what he was: and then I found Lord Grantham (735) walking
on tiptoe, as if he was still afraid of waking the Queen."

Hanbury Williams is very ill at Bath, and his wife in the same
way in private lodgings in the city.  Mr. Doddington has at
last owned his match with his old mistress.(736)  I suppose he
wants a new one.

I commend your prudence about Leghorn; but, my dear child,
what pain I am in about you! Is it possible to be easy while
the Spaniards are at your gates! write me word every minute as
your apprehensions vanish or increase.  I ask every moment
what people think; but how can they tell here? You say nothing
of Mr. Chute, sure he is with You Still! When I am in such
uneasiness about you, I want you every post to mention your
friends being with you: I am sure you have none so good or
sensible as he is.  I am vastly obliged to you for the thought
of the book of shells, and shall like -it much; and thank you
too about my Scagliola table; but I am distressed about your
expenses.  Is there any way one could get your allowance
increased? You know how low my interest is now; but you know
too what a push I would make to be of any service to you-tell
me,, and adieu!

(730) Afterwards created Duchess of Chateauroux. (Mary Anne
(le Mailly, widow of the Marquis de la Tournelle.  She
succeeded her sister Madame de Mailly, as mistress of Louis
XV., as the latter had succeeded the other sister, Madame de
Vintimille, in the same situation.  Madame de Chateauroux was
sent away from the court during the illness of Louis at Metz;
but on his recovery he recalled her.  Shortly after which she
died, December 10, 1744, and on her deathbed accused M. de
Maurepas, the minister, of having poisoned her.  The intrigue,
by means of which she supplanted her sister, was conducted
principally by the Marshal de Richelieu.-D.

(731) "We earnestly entreat, insist, and require, that you
will postpone the supplies until you have renewed the secret
committee of inquiry."-E.


(732) An admirer of Lady Sophia Fermor.-D.

(733) This was a pasticcio, called "Mandane," another name for
Metastasio's drama of "Artaserse."-E.

(734) Lord Tyrawley was many years ambassador at Lisbon.  Pope
has mentioned his and another ambassador's seraglios in one of
his imitations of Horace, "Kinnoul's lewd cargo, or Tyrawley's
crew." [James O'Hara, second and last Lord Tyrawley of that
family, He died in 1773, at the age of eighty-five.]

(735) Henry Nassau d'Auverquerque, second Earl of Grantham.
He had been chamberlain to Queen Caroline.  He died in 1754,
when his titles became extinct.-E.

(736) Mrs. Beghan.




298 Letter 90
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, Dec. 2, 1742.,

You will wonder that it is above a fortnight Since I wrote to
you; but I have had an inflammation in one of my eyes, and
durst not meddle with a pen.  I have had two letters from you
of Nov. 6th and 13th, but I am in the utmost impatience for
another, to hear you are quite recovered of your Trinculos and
FuribOndos.  You tell me you was in a fever; I cannot be easy
till I hear from you again.  I hope this will come much too
late for a medicine, but it will always serve for sal volatile
to give you spirits.  Yesterday was appointed for considering
the army; but Mr. Lyttelton stood up and moved for another
Secret Committee, in the very words of last year; but the
whole debate ran, not upon Robert Earl of Orford, but Robert
Earl of Sandys:(737) he is the constant butt of the party;
indeed he bears it notably.  After five hours' haranguing, we
came to a division, and threw out the motion by a majority of
sixty-seven, 253 against 186.  The Prince had declared so
openly for union and agreement in all measures, that, except
the Nepotism,(738) all his servants but one were with us.  I
don't know whether they will attempt any thing else, but with
these majorities we must have an easy winter.  The union of
the Whigs has saved this parliament.  It is expected that Pitt
and Lyttelton will be dismissed by the Prince.  That faction
and Waller are the only Whigs of any note that do not join
with the Court.  I do not  count Doddington, who must now
always be with the minority, for no majority will accept him.
It is believed that Lord Gower will retire, or be desired to
do so.  I suppose you have heard from Rome,(739) that Murray
is made Solicitor-general, in the room of Sir John Strange,
who has resigned for his health.  This is the sum of politics;
we can't expect any winter, (I hope no winter will be) like
the last.  By the crowds that come hither, one should not know
that Sir Robert is out of place, only that now he is scarce
abused.

De reste, the town is wondrous dull; operas unfrequented,
plays not in fashion, amours as old as marriages-in short,
nothing but whist!  I have not yet learned to play, but I find
that I wait in vain for its being left off.

I agree with you about not sending home the Dominichin in an
English vessel; but what I mentioned to you of its coming in a
Dutch vessel, if you find an opportunity, I think will be very
safe, if you approve it; but manage that as you like.  I shall
hope for my statue at the same time; but till the conveyance
is absolutely safe, I know you will not venture them.  Now I
mention my statue, I must beg you will send me a full bill of
all my debts to you, which I am sure by this time must be
infinite; I beg to know the particulars, that I may pay your
brother.  Adieu, my dear Sir; take care of yourself, and
submit to popery and slavery rather than get colds with
sea-heroes.(740)

(737) Samuel Sandys, chancellor of the Exchequer, in the room
of Sir R. Walpole.

(738) Lord Cobham's nephews and cousins.-D.

(739) This alludes to the supposed Jacobite principles of
Murray, afterwards Lord Mansfield.-D.

(740) Sir H. Mann had complained, in one of his letters, of
the labours he had gone through in doing the honours of
Florence to some of Admiral Matthews's (il Furibondo)
officers.  The English fleet was now at Leghorn, upon the plea
of defending the Tuscan territories, in case of their being
attacked by the Spaniards.-D.




299 Letter 91
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, Dec. 9, 1742.

I shall have quite a partiality for the post of Holland; it
brought me two letters last week, and two more yesterday, of
November 20th and 27th; but I find you have your perpetual
headaches-how can you say that you shall tire me with talking
Of them? you may make me suffer by your pains, but I will hear
and insist upon your always telling me of your health.  Do you
think I only correspond with you to know the posture of the
Spaniards or the `epuisements of the Princess! I am anxious,
too, to know how poor Mr. Whithed does, and Mr. Chute's gout.
I shall look upon our sea captains with as much horror as the
King of Naples can, if they bring gouts, fits, and headaches.
You will have had a letter from me by this time, to give up
sending the Dominichin by a man-of-war, and to propose its
coming in a Dutch ship.  I believe that will be safe.


We have had another great day in the House on the army in
Flanders, which the Opposition were for disbanding; but we
carried 'it by a hundred and twenty.(741)  Murray spoke for
the first time, with the greatest applause; Pitt answered him
with all his force and art of language, but on an ill-founded
argument.  In all appearances, they will be great rivals.
Shippen was in great rage at Murray's apostacy;(742) if any
thing can really change his principles, possibly this
competition may.  To-morrow we shall have a tougher battle on
the sixteen thousand Hanoverians.  Hanover is the word given
out for this winter: there is a most bold pamphlet come out,
said to be Lord
Marchmont's,(743) which affirms that in every treaty made
since the accession of this family, England has been
sacrificed to the interest of Hanover, and consequently
insinuates the incompatibility of the two. Lord Chesterfield
says, "that if we have a mind effectually to prevent the
Pretender from ever obtaining this crown, we should make him
Elector of Hanover, for the people of England will never fetch
another king from thence."  Adieu! my dear child.  I am sensible
that I write you short letters, but I write you all I know.  I
don't know how it is, but the wonderful seems worn out.  In this
our day, we have no rabbit women-no elopements-no epic
poems,(744) finer than Milton's-no contest about harlequins and
Polly Peachems.  Jansen (745) has won no more estates, and the
Duchess of Queensberry is grown as tame as her neighbours.  Whist
has spread an universal opium over the whole nation; it makes
courtiers and patriots sit down to the same pack of cards.
The only thing extraordinary, and which yet did not seem to
surprise any body, was the Barberina's(746) being attacked by
four men masqued, the other night, as she came out of the
opera house, who would have forced her away, but she
screamed, and the guard came.  Nobody knows who set them on,
and I believe nobody inquired.

The Austrians in Flanders have separated from our troops a
little out of humour, because it was impracticable for them to
march without any preparatory provisions for their reception.
They will probably march in two months, if no peace prevents
it.  Adieu!

(741) Upon a motion, made by Sir William Yonge, that 534,763
pounds be granted for defraying the charge of 16,259 men, to
be employed in Flanders.  The numbers on the division were 280
against 160.-E.

(742) From Toryism.-D.


(743) Hugh Hume, third Earl of Marchmont.

(744) This alludes to the extravagant encomiums bestowed on
Glover's Leonidas by the young patriots.

(745) H. Jansen, a celebrated gamester, who cheated the late Duke
of Bedford of an immense sum: Pope hints at that affair in this
line, "Or when a duke to Jansen punts at White's."

(746) A famous dancer.




301 Letter 92
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, Dec. 23, 1742.

I have had no letter from you this fortnight, and I have heard
nothing this month: judge now how fit I am to write.  I hope
it is not another mark of growing old; but, I do assure you,
my writing begins to leave me.  Don't be frightened! I don't
mean this as an introduction towards having done with you-I
will write to you to the very stump of my pen, and as Pope
says,

"Squeeze out the last dull droppings of my sense."

But I declare, it is hard to sit spinning out one's brains by
the fireside, without having heard the least thing to set
one's hand a-going.  I am so put to it for something to say,
that I would make a memorandum of the most improbable lie that
could be invented by a viscountess-dowager; as the old Duchess
of Rutland (747) does when she is told of some strange
casualty, "Lucy, child, step into the next room and set that
down."-"Lord, Madam!" says Lady Lucy,(748) "it can't be
true!"-"Oh, no matter, child; it will do for news into the
country next post." But do you conceive that the kingdom of
the Dull is come upon earth-not with the forerunners and
prognostics of other to-come kingdoms? No, no; the sun and the
moon go on just as they used to do, without giving us any
hints: we see no knights come prancing upon pale horses, or
red horses; no stars, called wormwood, fall into the Thames,
and turn a third part into wormwood; no locusts, like horses,
with their hair as the hair of women-in short, no
thousand things, each of which destroys a third part of
mankind: the only token of this new kingdom is a woman riding
on a beast, which is the mother of abominations, and the name
in the forehead is whist: and the four-and-twenty elders, and
the woman, and the whole town, do nothing but play with this
beast.  Scandal itself is dead, or confined to a pack of
cards; for the only malicious whisper I have heard this
fortnight, is of an intrigue between the Queen of hearts and
the Knave of clubs.  Y
our friend Lady Sandwich (749) has got a son; if one may
believe the belly she wore, it is a brave one.  Lord
Holderness(750) has lately given a magnificent repast to
fifteen persons; there were three courses of ten, fifteen, and
fifteen, and a sumptuous dessert: a great saloon illuminated,
odours, and violins-and, who do you think were the
invited?-the Visconti, Giuletta, the Galli, Amorevoli,
Monticelli, Vanneschi and his wife, Weedemans the hautboy, the
prompter, etc. The bouquet was given to the Guiletta, who is
barely handsome.  How can one love magnificence and low
company at the same instant!  We are making great parties for
the Barberina and the Auretti, a charming French girl; and our
schemes succeed so well, that the opera begins to fill
surprisingly; for all those who don't love music, love noise
and party, and will any night give half-a-guinea for the
liberty of hissing-such is English harmony.

I have been in a round of dinners with Lord Stafford, and
Bussy the French minister, who tells one stories of Capuchins,
confessions, Henri Quatre, Louis XIV., Gascons, and the string
which all Frenchmen go through, without any connexion or
relation to the discourse.  These very stories, which I have
already heard four times, are only interrupted by English
puns, which old Churchill translates out of jest-books into
the mouth of my Lord Chesterfield, and into most execrable
French.

Adieu! I have scribbled, and blotted, and made nothing out,
and, in short, have nothing to say, so good night!


(747) Lady Lucinda Sherard, widow of John Manners, second Duke
of Rutland.  She died in 1751.-E.

(748) Lady Lucy Manners, married, in 1742, to William, second
Duke of Montrose.  She died in 1788.-E.

(749) Judith, sister of Lord Viscount Fane, wife of John
Montagu, fifth Earl of Sandwich.-E.

(750) Robert d'Arcy, fourth Earl of Holderness; subsequently
made secretary of State.  Upon his death his earldom
extinguished, and what remained of his estate, as well as the
Barony of Conyers, descended to his only daughter, who was
married to Francis Osborne, fifth Duke of Leeds, in 1773.-D.
[From whom she was divorced in 1779.  She afterwards married
Captain John Byron, son of Admiral Byron, and father of the
great poet.]



302 Letter 93
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, Jan. 6, 1743.

You will wonder that you have not heard from me, but I have
been too ill to write.  I have been confined these ten days
with a most violent cough, and they suspected an inflammation
on my lungs; but I am come off with the loss of my eyes and my
voice, both of which I am recovering, and would write to you
to-day.  I have received your long letter of December 11th,
and return you a thousand thanks for giving up so much of your
time; I wish I could make as long a letter for you, but we arc
in a neutrality of news.  The Elector Palatine (751) is dead;
but I have not heard what alterations that will make.  Lord
Wilmington's death, which is reckoned hard upon, is likely to
make more conversation here.  He is going to Bath, but that is
only to pass away the time until be dies.

The great Vernon is landed, but we have not been alarmed with
any bonfires or illuminations; he has outlived all his
popularity.  There is nothing new but the separation of a Mr.
and Mrs. French, whom it is impossible you should know.  She
has been fashionable these two winters; her husband has
commenced a suit in Doctors' Commons against her cat, and
will, they say, recover considerable damages: but the lawyers
are of opinion, that the kittens must inherit Mr. French's
estate, as they were born in lawful wedlock.

The parliament meets again on Monday, but I don't hear of any
fatigue that we are likely to have; in a little time, I
suppose, we shall hear what campaigning we are to make.

I must tell you of an admirable reply of your acquaintance the
Duchess of Queensberry:(752) old Lady Granville, Lord
Carteret's mother, whom they call the Queen-Mother, from
taking upon her to do the honours of her son's power, was
pressing the duchess to ask her for some place for herself or
friends, and assured her that she would procure it, be it what
it would.  Could she have picked out a fitter person to be
gracious to?  The duchess made her a most grave curtsey, and
said, "Indeed, there was one thing she had set her heart
on."-"Dear child, how you oblige me by asking, any thing! What
is it?  tell me."  "Only that you would speak to my Lord
Carteret to get me made lady of the bedchamber to the Queen of
Hungary."

I come now to your letter, and am not at all pleased to find
that the Princess absolutely intends to murder you with her
cold rooms.  I wish you could come on those cold nights and
sit by my fireside; I have the prettiest warm little
apartment, with all my baubles, and Patapans, and cats!
Patapan and I go to-morrow to New Park, to my lord, for the
air, and come back with him on Monday.

What an infamous story that affair of Nomis is! and how
different the ideas of honour among officers in your world and
ours!  Your history of cicisbeosm is more entertaining: I
figure the distress of a parcel of lovers who have so many
things to dread-the government in this world! purgatory in the
next! inquisitions, villeggiaturas, convents, etc.

Lord Essex is extremely bad, and has not strength enough to go
through the remedies that are necessary to his recovery.  He
now fancies that he does not exist, will not be persuaded to
walk or talk, because, as he sometimes says, "How should he do
any thing? he is not."  You say, "How came I not to see Duc
d'Aremberg?" I did once at the opera; but he went away soon
after: and here it is not the way to visit foreigners, unless
you are of the Court, or are particularly in a way of having
them at your house: consequently Sir R. never saw him
either-we are not of the Court! Next, as to Arlington Street:
Sir R. is in a middling kind of house, which has long been
his, and was let; he has taken a small one next to it for me,
and they are laid together.

I come now to speak to you of the affair of the Duke of
Newcastle; but absolutely, on considering it much myself, and
on talking of it with your brother, we both are against your
attempting any such thing.  In the first place, I never heard
a suspicion of the duke's taking presents, and should think he
would rather be affronted: in the next place, my dear child,
though you are fond of that coffee-pot, it would be thought
nothing among such wardrobes as he has, of the finest wrought
plate: why, he has- a set of gold plates that would make a
figure on any sideboard in the Arabian Tales;(753) and as to
Benvenuto cellini, if the duke could take it for his, people
in England understand all work too well to be deceived.
Lastly, as there has been no talk of alterations in the
foreign ministers, and as all changes seem at an end, why
should you be apprehensive?  As to Stone,(754) if any thing
was done, to be sure it should be to him though I really can't
advise even that.  These are my sentiments sincerely: by no
means think of the duke.  Adieu!

(751) Charles Philip of Neubourg, , Elector Palatine.  He died
December 31, 1742.  He was succeeded by Charles Theodore,
Prince of Sulzbach, descended from a younger branch of the
house of Neubourg, and who, in his old age, became Elector of
Bavaria.-D.

(752) Catherine Hyde, daughter of the Earl of Clarendon, and
wife of Charles Douglas, Duke of Queensberry; a famous beauty,
celebrated by Prior in that pretty poem which begins, "Kitty,
beautiful and young," and often mentioned in Swift and Pope's
letters, She was forbid the Court for promoting subscriptions
to the second part of the Beggar's Opera, when it had been
prohibited from being acted.  She and the duke erected the
monument to Gay in Westminster Abbey. [And to which Pope
supplied the epitaph, "the first eight lines of which," says
Dr. Johnson, "have no grammar; the adjectives without
substantives, and the epithets without a subject." The duchess
died in 1777, and her husband in the year following.]

(753) Walpole, in his Memoires, says that the duke's houses,
gardens, table, and equipages swallowed immense treasures, and
that the sums he owed were only exceeded by those he wasted.
He employed several physicians, without having had apparently
much need of them.  His gold plate appears to have been almost
as dear to him as his health; for he usually kept it in pawn,
except when he wished to display it on great occasions.

(754) Andrew Stone, at this time private secretary to the Duke
of Newcastle.  he subsequently filled the offices of under-
secretary of state, sub-governor to Prince George, keeper of
the state-paper office, and, on the marriage of George the
third, treasurer to the Queen.  he died in 1773.-E.



304 Letter 94
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, Jan. 13, 1743,

Your brother brought me two letters together this morning, and
at the same time showed me yours to your father. How should I
be ashamed, were I he, to receive such a letter! so dutiful,
so humble, and yet so expressive of the straits to which he
has let you be reduced! My dear child, it looks too much like
the son of a minister, when I am no longer so; but I can't
help repeating to you offers of any kind of service that you
think I can do for you any way.

I am quite happy at your thinking Tuscany so secure from
Spain, unless the wise head of Richcourt works against the
season; but how can I ever be easy while a provincial
Frenchman, Something half French, half German, instigated by a
mad Englishwoman is to govern an Italian dominion?

I laughed much at the magnificent presents made by one of the
first families in Florence to their young accouch`ee.  Do but
think if a Duke or Duchess of Somerset were to give a Lady
Hertford fifty pounds and twenty yards of velvet for bringing
an heir to the blood of Seymour!

It grieves me that my letters drop in so slowly to you: I have
never missed writing, but when I have been absolutely too much
out of order, or once or twice when I had no earthly thing to
tell you.  This winter is so quiet, that one must inquire much
to know any thing.  The parliament is met again, but we do not
hear of any intended opposition to any thing.  the tories have
dropped the affair of the Hanoverians in the House of Lords,
in compliment to Lord Gower.  there is a second pamphlet on
that subject which makes a great noise.(755)  The ministry are
much distressed on the ways and means for raising the money
for this year: there is to be a lottery, but that will not
supply a quarter of what they want.  They have talked of a new
duty on tea, to be paid by every housekeeper for all the
persons in their families; but it will scarce be proposed.
Tea is so universal, that it would make a greater clamour than
a duty on wine.  Nothing is determined; the new folks do not
shine at expedients.  Sir Robert's health is now drunk at all
the clubs in the city; there they are for having him made a
duke, and placed again at the head of the Treasury; but I
believe nothing could prevail on him to return thither.  He
says he will keep the 12th of February,.-the day he resigned,
with his family as long as he lives.  They talk of Sandys
being raised to the peerage, by way of getting rid of him; he
is so dull they can scarce draw him on.(756)

The English troops in Flanders march to-day, whither we don't
know, but "probably to Liege: from whence they imagine the
Hanoverians are going into Juliers and Bergue.(757)  The
ministry have been greatly alarmed with the King of Sardinia's
retreat, and suspected that it was a total one from the
Queen's interest; but it seems he sent for Villettes and the
Hungarian minister, and had their previous approbations of his
deserting Chamberry, etc.

Vernon is not yet got to town, we are impatient for what will
follow the arrival of this mad hero.  Wentworth will certainly
challenge him, but Vernon does not profess personal valour: he
was once knocked down by a merchant, who then offered him
satisfaction-but he was satisfied.

Lord Essex' is dead:(758) Lord Lincoln will have the
bedchamber; Lord Berkeley of Stratton(759) (a disciple of
Carteret's) the Pensioners; and Lord Carteret himself probably
the riband.

As to my Lady Walpole's dormant title,(760) it was in her
family; but being in the King's power to give to which sister
in equal claim he pleased, it was bestowed on Lord Clinton,
who descended from the younger sister of Lady W.'s
grandmother, or great grand-something.  My Lady Clifford,(761)
Coke's mother, got her barony so, in preference to Lady
Salisbury and Lady Sondes, her elder sisters, who had already
titles for their children.  It is called a title in abeyance.

Sir Robert has just bid me tell you to send the Dominichin by
the first safe conveyance to Matthews, who has had orders from
Lord Winchilsea (762) to send it by the first man-of-war to
England; or if you meet with a ship going to Port Mahon, then
you must send it thither to Anstruther, and write to him that
Lord Orford desires that he will take care of it, and send it
by the first ship that comes directly home.  He is so
impatient for it, that he will have it thus; but I own I
should not like to have my things tumbled out of one ship into
another, and beg mine may stay till they can come at once.
Adieu!

(755) Entitled "The Case of the Hanover Forces in the Pay of
Great Britain examined."  It was written by Lord Chesterfield,
and excited much attention.-E.

(756) In December he was created a peer, by the title of Lord
Sandys, Baron of Ombersley, and made cofferer of the
household.-E.

(757) The British troops began their march from Flanders at
the end of February, under the command of the Earl of Stair;
but were so tardy in their movements, that it was the middle
of May before they crossed the Rhine and fixed their station
at Hochst, between Mayence and Frankfort.-E.

(758) William Capel, third Earl of Essex. [A lord of the
bedchamber, knight of the garter, and captain of the yeomen of
the guard.)

(759) John, fifth and last Lord Berkeley of Stratton.  He died
in 1773.-D.

(760) The barony of Clinton in fee descended to the daughters
of Theophilus, Earl of Huntingdon, who died without male
issue.  One of those ladies died without children, by which
means the title lay between the families of Rolle and
Fortescue.  King George I. gave it to Hugh Fortescue,
afterwards Created an earl; on whose death it descended to his
only sister, a maiden lady, after whom, without issue, it
devolved on Lady Orford.

(761) Lady Margaret Tufton, third daughter of Thomas, sixth
Earl of Thanet.  the barony of De Clifford had descended to
Lord Thanet, from his mother, Lady Margaret Sackville,
daughter of Anne Clifford, Countess of Dorset, Pembroke, and
Montgomery.  Upon Lord Thanet's death, the barony of De
Clifford fell into abeyance between his five daughters.  These
were Lady Catherine, married to Edward Watson, Viscount
Sondus; Lady Anne, married to James Cecil, Earl of Salisbury;
Lady Margaret, before mentioned; Lady Mary, married first to
Anthony Grey, Earl of Harold, and secondly to John Earl Gower;
and Lady Isabella, married to Lord Nassau Powlett.-D.

(762) First lord of the admiralty.-]).



306 Letter 95
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, Jan. 27, 1743.

I could not write you last Thursday, I was so much out of
order with a cold; your brother came and found me in bed.
TO-night, that I can write, I have nothing to tell you; except
that yesterday the welcome news (to the ministry) came of the
accession of the Dutch to the King's measures.  They are in
great triumph; but till it Is clear what part his Prussian
Uprightness is acting, other people take the liberty to be
still in suspense.  So they are about all our domestic matters
too.  It is a general stare! the alteration that must soon
happen in the Treasury will put some end to the uncertainties
of this winter.  Mr. Pelham is universally named to the head
of it; but Messrs.  Prince,(263) Carteret, Pultney, and
Companies must be a little considered.  how they will like it:
the latter the least.

You will wonder, perhaps be peevish, when I protest I have not
another paragraph by me in the world.  I want even common
conversation; for I cannot persist, like the royal family, in
asking people the same questions, "Do you love walking?" "Do
you love music'!" "Was you at the opera?" "When do you go into
the country!"  I have nothing else to say: nothing happens;
scarce the common episodes of a newspaper, of a man falling
off a ladder and breaking his leg; or of a countryman cheated
out of his leather pouch, with fifty shillings in it.  We are
in such a state of sameness, that I shall begin to wonder at
the change of seasons, and talk of the spring as a strange
accident.  Lord Tyrawley, who has been fifteen years in
Portugal, is of my opinion; he says he finds nothing but a
fog, whist, and the House of Commons.

In this lamentable state, when I know not what to write even
to you, what can I do about my serene Princess Grifoni? Alas!
I owe her two letters, and where to find a beau sentiment, I
cannot tell! I believe I may have some by me in an old chest
of draws, with some exploded red-heel shoes and full-bottom
wigs; but they would come out so yellow and moth-eaten! Do bow
to her, in every superlative degree in the language, that my
eyes have been so bad, that as I wrote you word, over and
over, I have not been able to write a line.  That will move
her, when she hears what melancholy descriptions I write, of
my not being able to write-nay, indeed it will not be so
ridiculous as you think; for it is ten times worse for the
eyes to write in a language one don't much practise! I
remember a tutor at Cambridge, who had been examining some
lads in Latin, but in a little while excused himself, and said
he must speak English, for his mouth was very sore.

I had a letter from you yesterday of January 7th, N. S. which
has wonderfully excited my compassion for the necessities of
the princely family,(764) and the shifts the old Lady' is put
to for quadrille.(765)

I triumph much on my penetration about the honest
Rucellai(766)-we little people, who have no honesty, virtue,
nor shame, do so exult when a good neighbour, who was a
pattern, turns out as bad as oneself!  We are like the good
woman in the Gospel, who chuckled so much on finding her lost
bit; we have more joy on a saint's fall, than in ninety-nine
devils, who were always de nous autres! I am a little pleased
too, that Marquis BagneSi'(767) whom you know I always liked
much, has behaved so well; and am more pleased to hear what a
Beffana(768) the Electress(769) is-Pho! here am I sending you
back your own paragraphs, cut and turned! it is so silly to
think that you won't know them again! I will not spin myself
any longer; it is better to make a short letter.  I am going
to the masquerade, and will fancy myself in via della
Pergola.(770)  Adieu! "Do you know me?"-"That man there with
you, in the black domino, is Mr. Chute.,, Good night!

(763) Frederick, Prince of Wales.-D.

(764) Prince and Princess Craon.

(765) Madame Sarasin.

(766) Sir H. Mann says, in his letter of January 7, 1743, 11 I
must be so just as to tell you, @my friend, the Senator
Rucellai, is, as you always thought, a sad fellow.  He has
quite abandoned me for fear of offending."-D.

(767) "Apropos of duels, two of our young nobles, Marquis
BagneSi and Strozzi, have fought about a debt of' fifteen
shillings; the latter, the creditor and the occasion of the
fight, behaved ill."-Letter from Sir H. Mann, dated Jan. 7,
1743.-D.

(768) A Beffana was a puppet, which was carried about the town
on the evening of the Epiphany.  The word is derived from
Epifania.  It also means an ugly woman.  The Electress
happened to go out for the first time after an illness on the
Epiphany, and said in joke to Prince Craon, that the "Beffane
all went abroad on that day."-D.

(769) The Electress Palatine Dowager, the last of the House of
Medici.

(770) A street at Florence, in which the Opera house stands.



308 Letter 96
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, Feb. 2, 1743.

Last night at the Duchess of Richmond's I saw Madame
Goldsworthy: what a pert, little, unbred thing it is! The
duchess presented us to one another; but I cannot say that
either of us stepped a foot beyond the first civilities.  The
good duchess was for harbouring her and all her brood: how it
happened to her I don't conceive, but the thing had decency
enough to refuse it.  She is going to live with her father at
Plymouth-tant mieux!

The day before yesterday the lords had a great day: Earl
Stanhope(771) moved for an address to his Britannic Majesty,
in consideration of the heavy wars, taxes, etc. far exceeding
all that ever were known, to exonerate his people of foreign
troops, Hanoverians,) which are so expensive, and can In no
light answer the ends for which they were hired.  Lord
Sandwich seconded: extremely well, I hear, for I was not
there.  Lord Carteret answered, but was under great concern.
Lord Bath spoke too, and would fain have persuaded that this
measure was not Solely Of one minister, but that himself and
all the council were equally concerned in it.  The late Privy
Seal(772) Spoke for an hour and a half, with the greatest
applause, against the Hanoverians: and my Lord Chancellor
extremely well for them.  The division was, 90 for the Court,
35 against it  The present Privy Seal(773) voted with the
Opposition: so there will soon be another.  Lord Halifax, the
Prince's new Lord, was with the minority too; the other, Lord
Darnley,(774) with the Court.  After the division, Lord
Scarborough, his Royal Highness's Treasurer, moved an address
of approbation of the measure, which was carried by 78 to the
former 35.  Lord Orford was ill, and could not be there, but
sent his proxy: he has got a great cold and slow fever, but
does not keep his room.  If Lord Gower loses the Privy Seal,
(as it is taken for granted he does not design to keep it,)
and Lord Bath refuses it, Lord Cholmondeley stands the fairest
for it.

I will conclude abruptly, for you will be tired of my telling
you that I have nothing to tell you-but so it is literally-
oh! yes, you will want to know what the Duke of Argyle did-he
was not there; he is every thing but superannuated.  Adieu!

(771) Philip, second Earl Stanhope, born in 1714.  He
succeeded his father when he was only seven years old, and
died in 1786.  His character is thus sketched by his great-
grandson, Viscount Mahon, in his History of England, vol. iii.
p. 242.-"He had great talents, but fitter for speculation than
for practical objects of action.  He made himself one of the
best-Lalande used to say the best-mathematicians in England of
his day, and was likewise deeply skilled in other branches of
science and philosophy.  The Greek language was as familiar to
him as the English; he was said to know every line of Homer by
heart.  In public life, on the contrary, he was shy, ungainly,
and embarrassed.  From his first onset in Parliament, he took
part with vehemence against the administration of Sir Robert
Walpole."  Bishop Secker says, that Lord Stanhope "spoke a
precomposed speech, which he held in his hand, with great
tremblings and agitations, and hesitated frequently in the
midst of great vehemence."-E.

(772) Lord Hervey.


(773) Lord Gower.

(774) Edward Bligh, second Earl of Darnley, in Ireland, and
Lord of the Bedchamber to Frederic Prince of Wales.-D.



 309 Letter 97
To Sir Horace Mann.
Feb. 13, 1743.

Ceretesi tells me that Madame Galli is dead: I have had two
letters from you this week; but the last mentions only the
death of old Strozzi.  I am quite sorry for Madame Galli,
because I proposed seeing her again, on my return to Florence,
which I have firmly in my intention: I hope it will be a
little before Ceretesi's, for he seems to be planted here.  I
don't conceive who -waters him! Here are two noble Venetians
that have carried him about lately to Oxford and Blenheim: I
am literally waiting for him now, to introduce him to Lady
Brown's sunday night; it is the great mart for all travelling
and travelled calves-pho! here he is.

Monday morning.-Here is your brother: he tells me you never
hear from me; how can that be? I receive yours, and you
generally mention having got one of mine, though long after
the time you should.  I never miss above one post, and that
but very seldom.  I am longer receiving yours, though you have
never missed; but then-I frequently receive two at once.  I am
delighted with Goldsworthy's mystery about King Theodore! If
you will promise me not to tell him, I will tell you@a secret,
which is, that if that person is not King Theodore, I assure
you it is not Sir Robert Walpole.

I have nothing to tell you but that Lord Effingham Howard(775)
is dead, and Lord Litchfield(776) at the point of death; he
was struck with a palsy last Thursday.  Adieu!

(775) Francis, first Earl of Effingham, and seventh Lord
Howard of Effingham.  He died February 12, 1743.-D.

(776) George Henry Lee, second Earl of Lichfield.  He died
February 15, 1743.-D.



309 Letter 98
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, Feb. 24, 1743.

I write to you in the greatest hurry in the world, but write I
will.  Besides, I must wish you joy; you are warriors; nay,
conquerors;(777) two things quite novel in this war, for
hitherto it has been armies without fighting, and deaths
without killing.  We talk of this battle as of a comet; "Have
you heard of the battle?" it Is so strange a thing, that
numbers imagine you may go (ind see it at Charing Cross.
Indeed, our officers, who are going to Flanders, don't quite
like it; they are afraid it should grow the fashion to fight,
and that a pair of colours should be no longer a sinecure.  I
am quite unhappy about poor Mr. Chute: besides, it is cruel to
find that abstinence is not a drug.  If mortification ever
ceases to be a medicine, or virtue to be a passport to
carnivals in the other world, who will be a self-tormentor any
longer-not, my child, that I am one; but, tell me, is he quite
recovered?

I thank you for King Theodore's declaration,(778) and wish Him
success with all my soul.  I hate the Genoese; they make a
commonwealth the most devilish of all tyrannies!

We have every now and then motions for disbanding Hessians and
Hanoverians, alias mercenaries; but they come to nothing.
To-day the party have declared that they have done for this
session; so you will hear little more but of fine equipages
for Flanders: our troops are actually marched, and the
officers begin to follow them-1 hopes they know whither! You
know in the last war in Spain, Lord Peterborough rode
galloping about to inquire for his army.

But to come to more real contests; Handel has set up an
oratorio against the opera @ind succeeds.  He has hired all
the goddesses from farces and the singers of Roast Beef(779)
from between the acts at both theatres, with a man with one
note in his voice, and a girl without ever an one; and so they
sing, and make brave hallelujahs; and the good company encore
the recitative, if it happens to have any cadence like what
they call a tune.  I was much diverted the other night at the
opera; two gentlewoman sat before my sister, and not knowing
her, discoursed at their ease.  Says one, "Lord! how fine Mr.
W. is!" "Yes," replied the other, with a tone of saying
sentences, "some men love to be particularly so, your
petit-maitres-but they are not always the brightest of their
sex.'@-Do thank me for this period! I am sure you will enjoy
it as much as we did.

I shall be very glad of my things, and approve entirely of
your precautions; Sir R. will be quite happy, for there is no
telling YOU how impatient he is for his Dominichin.  Adieu!

(777) This alludes to an engagement, which took place on the
8th of February, near Bologna, between the Spaniards under M.
de Gages, and the Austrians under General Traun, in which the
latter were successful.-D.

(778) With regard to Corsica, of which he had declared himself
King.  By this declaration, which was dated January 30,
Theodore recalled, under pain of confiscation of their
estates, all the Corsicans in foreign service, except that of
the Queen of Hungary, and the Grand Duke of Tuscany.-E.

(779) It was customary at this time for the galleries to call
for a ballad called "The Roast Beef of Old England," between
the acts, or before or after the play.



310 Letter 99
To Sir Horace Mann.
March 3d, 1743.

So, she is dead at last, the old Electress!(780)-well, I have
nothing more to say about her and the Medici; they had
outlived all their acquaintance: indeed, her death makes the
battle very considerable -makes us call a victory what before
we did not look upon as very decided laurels.

Lord Hervey has entertained the town with another piece of
wisdom: on Sunday it was declared that he had married his
eldest daughter the night before to a Mr. Phipps,(781)
grandson of the Duchess of Buckingham.  They sent for the boy
but the day before from Oxford, and bedded them at a day's
notice.  But after all this mystery, it does not turn out that
there is any thing great in this match, but the greatness of
the secret.  Poor
Hervey,(782) the brother, is in fear and trembling, for he
apprehends being ravished to bed to some fortune or other with
as little ceremony.  The Oratorios thrive abundantly-for my
part, they give me an idea of heaven, where every body is to
sing whether they have voices or not.

The Board (the Jacobite Club) have chosen his Majesty's Lord
Privy Seal(783) for their President, in the room of Lord
Litchfield.  Don't you like the harmony of parties? We expect
the parliament will rise this month: I shall be sorry, for if
I am not hurried out of town, at least every body else
will-and who can look forward from April to November? Adieu!
though I write in defiance of having nothing to say, yet you
see I can't go a great way in this obstinacy; but you will
bear a short letter rather than none.

(780) Anna Maria of Medicis, daughter of Cosmo III. widow of
John William, Elector Palatine.  After her husband's death she
returned to Florence, where she died, Feb @ 7 1743, aged
seventy-five, being the last of that family.

(781) Constantine Phipps, in 1767, created Lord Mulgrave in
Ireland.  He married, on the 26th of February, Lepel, eldest
daughter of Lord Hervey, and died in 1775.  Her ladyship was
found dead in her bed, 9th March, 1780, at her son's house in
the Admiralty.-E.


(782) George William Hervey, afterwards second Earl of
Bristol.  He died unmarried, in 1775.-E.

(783) Lord Gower.



 311 Letter 100
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, March 14, 1743.

I don't at all know how to advise you about mourning; I always
think that the custom of a country, and what other foreign
ministers do, should be your rule.  But I had a private
scruple rose with me: that was, whether you should show so
much respect to the late woman (784) as other ministers do,
since she left that legacy to Quella a Roma.(785)  I mentioned
this to my lord, but he thinks that the tender manner of her
wording it, takes off that exception; however, he thinks it
better that you should write for advice to your commanding
officer.  That will be very late, and you will probably have
determined before.  You see what a casuist I am in ceremony; I
leave the question more perplexed than I found it.

Pray, Sir, congratulate me upon the new acquisition of glory
to my family! We have long been eminent statesmen; now that we
are out of employment we have betaken ourselves to war-and we
have made great proficiency in a short season.  We don't run,
like my Lord Stair, into Berg and Juliers, to seek battles
where we are sure of not finding them-we make shorter marches;
a step across the Court of Requests brings us to engagement.
But not to detain you any longer with flourishes, which will
probably be inserted in my uncle Horace's patent when he is
made a field-marshal; you must know that he has fought a duel,
and has scratched a scratch three inches long on the side of
his enemy-lo Paon! The circumstances of this memorable
engagement were, in short, that on some witness being to be
examined the other day in the House upon remittances to the
army, my uncle said, He hoped they would indemnify him, if he
told any thing that affected himself." Soon after he was
standing behind the Speaker's chair, and Will.  Chetwynd,(786)
an intimate of Bolingbroke, came up to him, What, Mr. Walpole,
are you for rubbing up old sores?" He replied, "I think I said
very little, considering that you and your friends would last
year have hanged up me and my brother at the lobby-door
without a trial."  Chetwynd answered, I would still have you
both have your deserts." The other said, If you and I had,
probably I should be here and you would be somewhere else."
This drew more words, and Chetwynd took him by the arm and led
him out.  In the lobby, Horace said, "We shall be-observed, we
had better put it off till to-morrow."  "No, no, now! now!"
When they came to the bottom of the stairs, Horace said, "I am
out of breath, let us draw here." They drew; Chetwynd hit him
on the breast, but was not near enough to pierce his coat.
Horace made a pass which the other put by with his hand, but
It glanced along his side-a clerk, who had observed them go
out together so arm-in-arm-ly, could not believe it amicable,
but followed them, and came up just time enough to beat down
their swords, as Horace had driven him against a post, and
would probably have run him through at the next thrust.
Chetwynd went away to a surgeon's, and kept his bed the next
day; he has not reappeared yet, but is in no danger.  My uncle
returned to the House, and was so little moved as to speak
immediately upon the Cambrick bill, which made Swinny say,
"That it was a sign he was not ruffled."(787)  Don't you
delight in this duel? I expect to see it daubed up by some
circuit-painter on the ceiling of the saloon at Woolterton.

I have no news to tell you, but that we hear King Theodore has
sent over proposals of his person and crown to Lady Lucy
Stanhope,(788) with whom he fell in love the last time he was
in England.

Princess Buckingham(789) is dead or dying: she has sent for
Mr. Anstis, and settled the ceremonial of her burial.  On
Saturday she was so ill that she feared dying before all the
pomp was come home: she said, "Why won't they send the canopy
for me to see? let them send it, though all the tassels are
not finished."  But yesterday was the greatest stroke of all!
She made her ladies vow to her, that if she should lie
senseless, they would not sit down in the room before she was
dead.  She has a great mind to be buried by her father at
Paris.  Mrs. Selwyn says, "She need not be carried out of
England, and yet be buried by her father." You know that Lady
Dorchester always told her, that old Graham(790) was her
father.

I am much obliged to you for the trouble you have taken about
the statue; do draw upon me for it immediately, and for all my
other debts to you: I am sure they must be numerous; pray
don't fail.

A thousand loves to the Chutes: a thousand compliments to the
Princess; and a thousand-what? to the Grifona.  Alas! what can
one do? I have forgot all my Italian.  Adieu!

(784) The Electress Palatine Dowager.

(785) She left a legacy to the Pretender, describing him only
by these words, To Him at Rome.

(786) William Chetwynd, brother of the Lord Viscount Chetwynd.
On the coalition he was made Master of the Mint.

(787) Coxe, in his Memoirs of Lord Walpole, gives the
following account of this duel: "A motion being made in the
House of Commons, which Mr. Walpole supported, he said to Mr.
Chetwynd, 'I hope we shall carry this question.' Mr. Chetwynd
replied, 'I hope to see you hanged first!'  'You see me hanged
first!' rejoined Mr. Walpole and instantly seized him by the
nose.  They went out and fought.  The account being conveyed
to Lord Orford, he sent his son to make inquiries; who, on
coming into the House of Commons, found his uncle speaking
with the same composure as if nothing had happened to ruffle
his tamper or endanger his life.  Mr. Chetwynd was wounded."
vol. ii. p. 68.-E.

(788) Sister of Philip, second Earl Stanhope.

(789) Catherine, Duchess of Buckingham, natural daughter of
King James II. by the Countess of Dorchester.  She was so
proud of her birth, that she would never go to Versailles,
because they would not give her the rank of Princess of the
Blood.  At Rome, whither she went two or three times to see
her brother, and to carry on negotiations with him for his
interest, she had a box at the Opera distinguished like those
of crowned heads.  She not only regulated the ceremony of her
own burial, and dressed up the waxen figure of herself for
Westminster Abbey, but had shown the same insensible pride on
the death of her only son, dressing his figure, and sending
messages to her friends, that if they had a mind to see him
lie in state, she would carry them in conveniently by a
back-door.  She sent to the old Duchess of Marlborough to
borrow the triumphal car that had carried the Duke's body.
Old Sarah, as mad and proud as herself, sent her word, "that
it had carried my Lord Marlborough, and should never be
profaned by any other corpse." The Buckingham retorted that,
"she had spoken to the undertaker, and he had engaged to make
a finer for twenty pounds." [See ant`e, p. 204.]

(790) Colonel Graham.  When the Duchess was young, and as
insolent as afterwards, her mother used to say, "You need not
be so proud, for you are not the King's but old Graham's
daughter." It is certain, that his legitimate daughter, the
Countess of Berkshire and  Suffolk, was extremely like the
Duchess, and that he often said with a sneer, "Well, well,
kings are great men, they make free with whom they please! All
I can say is, that I am sure the same man begot those two
women." The Duchess often went to weep over her father's body
at Paris: one of the monks seeing her tenderness, thought it a
proper opportunity to make her observe how ragged the pall is
that lies over the body, (which is kept unburied, to be some
time or other interred in England,)-but she would not buy a
new!



314 Letter 101
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, March 25, 1743.

Well! my dear Sir, the Genii, or whoever are to look after the
seasons, seem to me to change turns, and to wait instead of
one another, like lords of the bedchamber.  We have had loads
of sunshine all the winter; and within these ten days nothing
but snows, north-east winds, and blue plagues.  The last ships
have brought over all your epidemic distempers: not a family
in London has escaped under five or six ill: many people have
been forced to hire new labourers.  Guernier, the apothecary,
took two new apothecaries, and yet could not drug all his
patients.  It is a cold and fever.  I had one of the worst,
and was blooded on Saturday and Sunday, but it is quite gone:
my father was blooded last night: his is but slight.  The
physicians say that there has been nothing like it since the
year Thirty-three, and then not so bad: in short, our army
abroad would shudder to see what streams of blood have been
let out! Nobody has died of it, but old Mr. Eyres, of Chelsea,
through obstinacy of not bleeding; and his ancient Grace of
York:(791) Wilcox of Rochester(792) succeeds him, who is fit
for nothing in the world, but to die of this cold too.

They now talk of the King's not going abroad: I like to talk
on that side; because though it may not be true, one may at
least be able to give some sort of reason why he should not.
We go into mourning for your Electress on Sunday; I suppose
they will tack the Elector of Mentz to her, for he is just
dead.  I delight in Richcourt's calculation- I don't doubt but
it is the method he often uses in accounting with the Great
Duke.

I have had two letters from you of the 5th and 12th, with a
note of things coming by sea; but my dear child, you are
either run Roman Catholicly devout, or take me to be so; for
nothing but a religious fit of zeal could make you think of
sending me so many presents.  Why, there are Madonnas enough
in one case to furnish a more than common cathedral-I
absolutely will drive to Demetrius, the silversmith's, and
bespeak myself a pompous shrine! But indeed, seriously, how
can I, who have a conscience, and am no saint, take all these
things? You must either let me pay for them, or I will demand
my unfortunate coffee-pot again, which has put you upon
ruining yourself By the way, do let me have it again, for I
cannot trust it any longer in your hands at this rate; and
since I have found out its virtue, I will present it to
somebody, whom I shall have no scruple of letting send me
bales and cargoes, and ship-loads of Madonnas, perfumes,
prints, frankincense, etc.  You have not even drawn upon me
for my statue, my hermaphrodite, my gallery, and twenty other
things, for which I am lawfully your debtor.

I must tell you one thing, that I will not say a word to my
lord of this Argosie, as Shakspeare calls his costly ships,
till it is arrived, for he will tremble for his Dominichin,
and think it will not come safe in all this company-by the
way, will a captain of a man-of-war care to take all? We were
talking over Italy last night- my lord protests, that if he
thought he had strength, he would see Florence, Bologna, and
Rome, by way of Marseilles, to Leghorn.  You may imagine how I
gave in to such a jaunt.  I don't set my heart upon it,
because I think he cannot do it; but if he does, I promise
you, you shall be his Cicerone.  I delight in the gallantry of
the Princess's brother.(793) I will tell you what, if the
Italians don't take care, they will grow as brave and as
wrongheaded as their neighbours.  Oh! how shall I do about
writing to her? Well, if I can, I will be bold, and write to
her to-night.

I have no idea what the two minerals are that you mention, but
I will inquire, and if there are such, you shall have them;
and gold and silver, if they grow in this land; for I am sure
I am deep enough in your debt.  Adieu!  .

P. S. It won't do! I have tried to write, but you would bless
yourself to see what stuff I have been forging for half an
hour, and have not waded through three lines of paper. i have
totally forgot my Italian, and if she will but have prudence
enough to support the loss of a correspondence, which was long
since worn threadbare, we will come to as decent a silence as
may be.

(791) Doctor lancelot Blackburne.  Walpole, in his Memoires,
vol. i. p. 74, calls him "the jolly old archbishop, who had
the manners of a man of quality, though he had been a
buccaneer, and was a clergyman."  Noble, in his continuation
of Granger, treats these aspersions as the effect of malice.
"How is it possible!" he asks, ,that a buccaneer should be so
great a scholar as Blackburne certainly was? he who had so
perfect a knowledge of the classics, as to be able to read
them with the same ease as he could Shakspeare, must have
taken great pains to have acquired the learned languages, and
have had both leisure and good masters." He is allowed to have
been a remarkably pleasant man; and it was said of him, that
"he gained more hearts than souls."-E.

(792)  He was not succeeded by Dr. Wilcox, but by Dr. Herring,
who was elevated, in 1747, to the archbishopric of Canterbury,
and died in 1757.-E.

(793) a Signor Capponi, brother of Madame Grifoni.




315 Letter 102
To Sir Horace Mann.
Monday, April 4, 1743.

I had my pen in my hand all last Thursday morning to write to
you, but my pen had nothing to say.  I would make it do
something to-day though what will come of it, I don't
conceive.

They say, the King does not go abroad: we know nothing about
our army.  I suppose it is gone to blockade Egra, and to not
take Prague, as it has been the fashion for every body to send
their army to do these three years.  The officers in
parliament are not gone yet.  We have nothing to do, but I
believe the ministry have something for us to do, for we are
continually adjourned, but not prorogued.  They talk of
marrying Princess Caroline and Louisa to the future Kings of
Sweden and Denmark; but if the latter(794) is King of both, I
don't apprehend that he is to marry both the Princesses in his
double capacity.

Herring, Of Bangor, the youngest bishop, is named to the see
of York. it looks as if the bench thought the church going out
of fashion; for two or three(795) of them have refused this
mitre.

Next Thursday we are to be entertained with a pompous parade
for the burial of old Princess Buckingham.  They have invited
ten peeresses to walk: all somehow or other dashed with
blood-royal, and rather than not have King James's daughter
attended by princesses, they have fished out two or three
countesses descended from his competitor Monmouth.

There, I am at the end of my tell! If I write on, it must be
to ask questions.  I Would ask why Mr. Chute has left me off
but when he sees what a frippery correspondent I am, he will
scarce be in haste to renew with me again.  I really don't
know why I am so dry; mine used to be the pen of a ready
writer, but whist seems to have stretched its leaden wand over
me too, who have nothing to do with it. I am trying to set up
the noble game of bilboquet against it, and composing a
grammar in opposition to Mr. Hoyle's.  You will some day or
other see an advertisement in the papers, to tell you where it
may be bought, and that ladies may be waited upon by the
author at their houses, to receive any further directions.  I
am 'really ashamed to send this scantling of paper by the
post, over so many seas and mountains: it seems as impertinent
as the commission which Prior gave to the winds,

"Lybs must fly south, and Eurus east,
For jewels for her neck and breast."

Indeed, one would take you for my Chloe, when one looks on
this modicum of gilt paper, which resembles a billet-doux more
than a letter to a minister.  You must take it as the widow's
mite, and since the death of my spouse, poor Mr. News, I
cannot afford such large doles as formerly.  Adieu! my dear
child, I am yours ever, from a quire of the largest foolscap
to a vessel of the smallest gilt.

(794) There was a party at this time in Sweden, who tried to
choose the Prince Royal of Denmark for successor to King
Frederick of sweden.

(795) Dr. Wilcox, Bishop of Rochester, and Dr. Sherlock,
Bishop of Salisbury: the latter afterwards accepted the See of
London.



317 Letter 103
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, April 14, 1743.

This has been a noble week; I have received three letters at
once from you.  I am ashamed when I reflect on the poverty of
my own!  but what can one do? I don't sell you my news, and
therefore should not be excusable to invent.  I wish we don't
grow to have more news!  Our politics, which have not always
been the most in earnest, now begin to take a very serious
turn.  Our army is wading over the Rhine, up to their middles
in snow.  I hope they will be thawed before their return: but
they have gone through excessive hardships.  The King sends
six thousand more of his Hanoverians at his own expense: this
will be popular-and the six thousand Hessians march too.  All
this will compose an army considerable enough to be a great
loss if they miscarry.  The King certainly goes abroad in less
than a fortnight.  He takes the Duke with him to Hanover who
from thence goes directly to the army.  The Court will not be
great: the King takes only Lord Carteret, the Duke of
Richmond, master of the horse, and Lord Holderness and Lord
Harcourt,(796) for the bedchamber.  The Duchesses of Richmond
and Marlborough,(797) and plump Carteret,(798) go to the
Hague.

His Royal Highness is not Regent: there are to be fourteen.
The Earl of Bath and Mr. Pelham, neither of them in
regency-posts, are to be of the number.

I have read your letters about Mystery to Sir Robert.  He
denies absolutely having ever had transactions with King
Theodore, and is amazed Lord Carteret can; which he can't help
thinking but he must, by the intelligence about Lady W. Now I
can conceive all that affected friendship for Richcourt! She
must have meant to return to England by Richcourt's interest
with Touissant(799) and then where was her friendship? You are
quite in the right not to have engaged with King Theodore:
your character is not-Furibondo.  Sir R. entirely disapproves
all Mysterious dealings; he thinks Furibondo most bad and most
improper, and always did.  You mistook me about Lady W.'s
Lord-I meant Quarendon, who is now Earl of Litchfield, by his
father's death, which I mentioned.  I think her lucky in
Sturges's death, and him lucky in dying.  He had outlived
resentment; I think had almost lived to be pitied.

I forgot to thank you about the model, which I should have
been sorry to have missed.  I long for all the things, and my
Lord more. so.  Am I not to have a bill of lading, or how!


I never say any thing of the Pomfrets, because in the great
city of London the Countess's follies do not make the same
figure as they did in little Florence.  Besides, there are
such numbers here who have such equal pretensions to be
absurd, that one is scarce aware of particular ridicules.

I really don't know whether Vanneschi be dead; he married some
low English woman, who is kept by Amorevoli; so the Abbate
turned the opera every way to his profit.  As to
Bonducci,(200) I don't think I could serve him; for I have no
interest with the Lords Middlesex and Holderness, the two sole
managers.  Nor if I had, would I employ it, 'to bring over
more ruin to the operas.  Gentlemen directors, with favourite
abb`es and favourite mistresses, have almost overturned the
thing in England.  You will plead my want of interest to Mr.
Smith(801) too: besides, we had Bufos here once, and from not
understanding the language, people thought it a dull kind of
dumb-show.  We are next Tuesday to have the Miserere of Rome.
It must be curious! the finest piece of vocal music in the
world, to be performed by three good voices, and forty bad
ones, from Oxford, Canterbury, and the farces!  There is a new
subscription formed for an opera next year, to be carried on
by the Dilettanti, a club, for which the nominal qualification
is having been in Italy, and the real one, being drunk: the
two chiefs are Lord Middlesex and Sir Francis Dashwood, who
were seldom sober the whole time they were in Italy.

The parliament rises next week: every body is going out of
town.  My Lord goes the first week in May; but I shall
reprieve myself till towards August.  Dull as London is in
summer, there is always more company in it than in any one
place in the country.  I hate the country: I am past the
shepherdly age of groves and streams, and am not arrived at
that of hating every thing but what I do myself, as building
and planting.  Adieu!

(796) Simon, second Viscount Harcourt, created an earl in
1749; in 1768 appointed ambassador at Paris, and in 1769 Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland.  He was accidentally drowned in a well
in his park at Nuncham, in 1777; occasioned, it is believed,
by overreaching himself, in order to save the life of a
favourite dog.-E.

(797) Elizabeth Trevor, daughter of Thomas Lord Trevor, wife
of Charles Spencer, Duke of Marlborough.  She died in 1761.-E.

(798) Frances, only daughter of Sir Robert Worseley, first
wife of Lord Carteret.

(799) First minister of the Great Duke.

(800) Bonducci was a Florentine abb`e, who translated some of
Pope's works into Italian.

(801) The English Consul at Venice.



318 Letter 104
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, April 25, 1743.

Nay, but it is serious! the King is gone, and the Duke with
him.  The' latter actually to the army.  They must sow
laurels, if they design to reap any; for there are no
conquests forward enough for them to come just in time and
finish.  The French have relieved Egra and cut to pieces two
of the best Austrian regiments, the cuirassiers.  This is
ugly! We are sure, you know, of beating the French afterwards
in France and Flanders; but I don't hear that the heralds have
produced any precedents for our conquering them on the other
side the Rhine.(802)  We at home may be excused from trembling
at the arrival of every post; I am sure I shall.  If I were a
woman, should support my fears with more dignity; for if one
did lose a husband or a lover, there are those becoming
comforts, weeds and cypresses, jointures and weeping cupids;
but I have only a friend or two to lose, and there are no
ornamental substitutes settled, to be one's proxy for that
sort of grief.  One has not the satisfaction of fixing a day
for receiving visits of consolation from a thousand people
whom one don't love, because one has lost the only person one
did love.  This is a new situation, and I don't like it.

You will see the Regency in the newspapers.  I think the
Prince might have been of it when my Lord Gower is.  I don't
think the latter more Jacobite than his Royal Highness.

The Prince is to come to town every Sunday fortnight to hold
drawing-rooms; the Princesses stay all the summer at St.
James's-would I did! but I go in three weeks to Norfolk; the
only place that could make me wish to live at St. James's.  My
Lord has pressed me so much, that I could not with decency
refuse: he is going to furnish and hang his picture-gallery,
and wants me.  I can't help wishing that I had never known a
Guido from a Teniers: but who could ever suspect any connexion
between painting and the wilds of Norfolk.

Princess Louisa's contract with the Prince of Denmark was
signed the morning before the King Went; but I don't hear when
she goes.  Poor Caroline misses her man of Lubeck,(803) by his
missing the crown of Sweden.

I must tell you an odd thing that happened yesterday at
Leicester House.  The Prince's children were in the circle:
Lady Augusta(804) heard somebody call Sir Robert Rich by his
name.  She concluded there was but one Sir Robert in the
world, and taking him for Lord Orford, the child went staring
up to him, and said, "Pray, where is your blue string! and
pray what has become of your fat belly?" Did one ever hear of
a more royal education, than to have rung this mob cant in the
child's ears till it had made this impression on her!

Lord Stafford is come over to marry Miss Cantillon, a vast
fortune, of his own religion.  She is daughter of the
Cantillon who was robbed and murdered, and had his house
burned by his cook(805) a few years ago.  She is as ugly as
he; but when she comes to Paris, and wears a good deal of
rouge, and a separate apartment, who knows but she may be a
beauty! There is no telling what a woman is, while she is as
she is.  There is a great fracas in Ireland in a noble family
or two, heightened by a pretty strong circumstance of Iricism.
A Lord Belfield(806) married a very handsome daughter of a
Lord Molesworth.(807)  A certain Arthur Rochfort, who happened
to be acquainted in the family, by being Lord Belfield's own
brother, looked on this woman, and saw that she was fair.
These ingenious people, that their history might not be
discovered, corresponded under feigned names-And what names do
you think they chose?-Silvia and Philander! Only the very same
that Lord Grey(808) and his sister-in-law took upon a parallel
occasion, and which arc printed in their letters!

Patapan sits to Wootton to-morrow for his picture.  He is to
have a triumphal arch at a distance, to signify his Roman
birth, and his having barked at thousands of Frenchmen in the
very heart of Paris. If you can think of a good Italian motto
applicable to any part of his history send it to me.  If not,
he shall have this antique one-for I reckon him a senator of
Rome, while Rome survived,-"O, et Presidium et dulce decus
meum!"  He is writing an ode on the future campaign of this
summer; it is dated from his villa, where he never was, and
being truly in the classic style, "While you, great Sir," etc.
Adieu!

(802) Walpole seems to have forgotten the battle of
Blenheim.-D;

(803) Adolphus Frederick of Holstein, Bishop of Lubeck, was
elected successor, and did succeed to the crown of Sweden.  He
married the Princess Louisa Ulrica of Prussia.

(804) Afterwards Duchess of Brunswick.-D.

(805) Cantillon was a Paris wine-merchant and banker, who had
been engaged with Law in the Mississippi scheme.  He
afterwards brought his riches to England and settled in this
country.  In May 1734, some of his servants, headed by the
cook, conspired to murder him, knowing that he kept large sums
of money in his house.  They killed him, and then set fire to
the house; but the fire was extinguished, and the body, with
the wounds upon it, found.  The cook fled beyond sea; but in
December, three of his associates were tried at the Old Bailey
for the murder, and acquitted.-E.

(806) Robert Rochfort, created Lord Belfield in Ireland in
1737, Viscount Belfield in 1751, and Earl of Belvedere in
1756.  His second wife, whom be married in 1736, was the Hon.
Mary Molesworth.  D.

(807) Richard, third Viscount Molesworth, in Ireland.  He had
been aide-de-camp to the great Duke of Marlborough, and in
that capacity distinguished himself greatly at the battle of
Ramilies.  He became afterwards master-general of the ordnance
in Ireland, and commander of the forces in that kingdom, and a
field-marshal.  He died in 1758.-D.

(808) Fordo, the infamous Lord Grey of werke, and his
sister-in-law, Lady Henrietta Berkeley, whose "Love Letters,"
under these romantic names, were published in three small
volumes.  They are supposed to have been compiled by Mrs.
Behn.-D. [Lord Grey commanded the horse at Sedgmoor, and is
accused of flying at the first charge, and preserving his life
by giving evidence against his associates.  He married Lady
Mary, daughter of George, first Earl of Berkeley, and died in
1701.)



320 Letter 105
To Sir Horace Mann.
May 4, 1743.

The King was detained four or five days at Sheerness but
yesterday we heard that he was got to Helvoetsluys.  They
talk' of an interview between him and his nephew of Prussia-I
never knew any advantage result from such conferences.  We
expect to hear of the French attacking our army, though there
are accounts of their retiring, which would necessarily
produce a peace-I hope so! I don't like to be at the eve, even
of an Agincourt; that, you know, every Englishman is bound in
faith to expect: besides, they say my Lord Stair has in his
pocket, from the records of the Tower, the original patent,
empowering us always to conquer.  I am told that Marshal
Noailles is as mad as Marshal Stair.  Heavens! twice fifty
thousand men trusted to two mad captains, without one Dr.
Monroe(809) over
                          them!

I am sorry I could give you so little information about King
Theodore; but my lord knew nothing of him, and as little of
any connexion between Lord Carteret and him.  I am sorry you
have him on your
                          hands. He quite mistakes his
province: an adventurer should come hither;(810) this is the
soil for mobs and patriots              it is the country of
the world to make one's fortune - with parts never so scanty,
one's dulness is not discovered, nor one's dishonesty, till
one obtains the post one wanted-and then, if they do not come
to light-why, one slinks into one's green velvet bag,(811) and
lies so snug! I don't approve of your hinting at the
falsehoods(812)              of Stosch's intelligence; nobody
                          regards it but the King , it pleases
him-e basta.

I was not in the House at Vernon's frantic speech;(813) but I
know he made it, and have heard him pronounce several such:
but he has worn out even laughter, and did not make impression
enough on me to remember till the next post that he had
spoken.

I gave your brother the translated paper; he will take care of
it.  Ceretesi is gone to Flanders with Lord Holderness.  Poor
creature!
he was reduced, before he went, to borrow five guineas of Sir
Francis Dashwood.  How will he ever scramble back to Florence?

We are likely at last to have no opera next year: Handel has
had a palsy, and can't compose; and the Duke of Dorset has set
himself strenuously to oppose it, as Lord Middlesex is the
impresario, and must ruin the house of Sackville by a course
of these follies.  Besides what he will lose this year, he has
not paid his share to the losses of the last; and yet is
singly undertaking another for next season, with
                          the almost certainty of losing
between four or five thousand pounds, to which the
deficiencies of the opera generally amount now.  The
                          Duke of Dorset has desired the King
not to subscribe; but Lord Middlesex is so obstinate, that
this will probably only make him lose a
                          thousand pounds more.

The Freemasons are in so low repute now in England, that one
has scarce heard the proceedings at Vienna against them
mentioned.  I believe nothing but a persecution could bring
them into vogue again here.  You know, as great as our follies
are, we even grow tired of them, and are always changing.

(809) Physician of Bedlam-

"Those walls where Folly holds her throne,
And laughs to think Monroe would take her down."-E.

(810) He afterwards came to England, where he suffered much
from poverty and destitution, and was finally arrested by his
creditors and confined in the King,'s Bench prison.  He was
released from thence under the Insolvent Act, having
registered the kingdom of Corsica for the use of his
creditors.  Shortly after this event he died, December 11,
1756, and was buried in the churchyard of St. Anne's, Soho,
where Horace Walpole erected a marble slab to his memory.  He
was an adventurer, whose name was Theodore Anthony, Baron
Newhoff, and was born at Metz, in 1686.  Walpole, who had seen
him, describes him as "a comely, middle-sized man, very
reserved, and affecting much dignity,"-D.

(811) The secretaries of state and lord treasurer carry their
papers in a green velvet bag.

(812) Stosch used to pretend to send over an exact journal of
the life of the Pretender and his sons, though he had been
sent out of Rome at the Pretender's request, and must have
                          had very bad, or no intelligence, of
what passed in that family.

(813) The admiral had recently said, in the House of Commons,
that "there was not, on this side Hell, a nation so burthened
with taxes as England."-E.



322 Letter 106
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, May 12, 1743.

It is a fortnight since I got any of your letters, but I will
expect two at once.  I don't tell you by way of news, because
you will have had expresses, but I must talk of the great
Austrian victory!(814)  We have not heard the exact
particulars yet, nor whether it was Kevenhuller or lobkowitz
who beat the Bavarians; but their general, Minucci, is
prisoner.  At first, they said Seckendorffe was too; I am glad
he is not: poor man, he has suffered enough by the house of
Austria! But my joy is beyond the common, for I flatter myself
this victory will save us one: we talk of nothing, but its
producing a peace, and then one's friends will return.

The Duchess of Kendal(815) is dead-eighty-five years old: she
was a year older than her late King.  Her riches were immense;
but I believe my Lord Chesterfield will get nothing by her
death-but his wife: (816) she lived in the house with the
duchess, where he had played away all his credit.

Hough,(817) the good old Bishop of Worcester, is dead too.  I
have been looking at the "Fathers in God" that have been
flocking over the way this Morning to Mr. Pelham, who is just
come to his new house.  This is absolutely the ministerial
street Carteret has a house here too; and Lord Bath seems to
have lost his chance by quitting this street.  Old Marlborough
has made a good story of the latter; she says, that when he
found he could not get the privy seal, he begged that at least
they would offer it to him, and upon his honour he would not
accept it, but would plead his vow of never taking a place; in
which she says they humoured him.  The truth is, Lord Carteret
did hint an offer to him, upon which he went with a nolo
episcopari to the King-he bounced, and said, "Why I never
offered it to you:" upon which he recommended my Lord
Carlisle, with equal Success.

Just before the King went, he asked my Lord Carteret, " Well,
when am I to get rid of those fellows in the Treasury?" They
are on so low a foot, that somebody said Sandys had hired a
stand of hackney-coaches, to look like a levee.

Lord Conway has begged me to send you a commission, which you
will oblige me much by executing.  It is to send him three
Pistoia barrels for guns: two of them, of two feet and a half
in the barrel in length; the smallest of the inclosed buttons
to be the size of the bore, hole, or calibre, of the two guns.
The third barrel to be three feet and an inch in length; the
largest of these buttons to be the bore of it; these feet are
English measure.  You will be so good to let me know the price
of them.

There has happened a comical circumstance at Leicester House:
one of the Prince's coachmen, who used to drive the Maids of
Honour, was so sick of them, that he has left his son three
hundred pounds, upon condition that he never carries a Maid of
Honour!

Our journey to Houghton is fixed to Saturday se'nnight; 'tis
unpleasant, but I flatter myself that I shall get away in the
beginning of August.  Direct your letters as you have done all
this winter; your brother will take care to send them to me.
Adieu!

(814) There was no great victory this year till the battle of
Dettingen, which took place in June; but the Austrians
obtained many advantages during the spring over the Bavarians
and the French, and obliged the latter to recross the
Rhine.-D.

(815) Erangard Melusina Schulembergh, the mistress of George
I.  George I. created her Duchess of Munster and Marchioness
of Dungannon in Ireland in 1719; Ind Duchess of Kendal,
Countess of Feversham, and Baroness of Glastonbury. in
England, in 1723.  All these honours were for life only.  He
also persuaded the Emperor to create her Princess of eberstein
in the Roman empire in 1723.-D.

(816) Melusina Schulembergh, Countess of Walsingham, niece of
the Duchess of Kendal, and her heiress.

(817) Hough Was a man of piety, ability, and integrity, and
had distinguished himself early in his life by his resistance
to the arbitrary proceedings of James II. against Magdalen
College, Oxford, of which he was the president.  Pope, with
much justice, speaks of "Hough's unsullied mitre."-D. [He was
nominated Bishop of Oxford in 1690; and translated to
Worcester in 1717.]



323 Letter 107
To Sir Horace Mann.
May 19, 1743.

I am just come tired from a family dinner at the Master of the
Rolls;(818) but I have received two letters from you since my
last, and will write to you, though my head aches with maiden
sisters' healths, forms, and Devonshire and Norfolk.  With
yours I received one from Mr. Chute, for which I thank him a
thousand times, and will answer as soon as I get to Houghton.
Monday is fixed peremptorily, though we have had no rain this
month; but we travel by the day of the week, not by the day of
the sky.

We are in more confusion than we care to own.  There lately
came up a highland regiment from Scotland, to be sent abroad.
One heard of nothing but their good discipline and quiet
disposition.  When the day came for their going to the water
side, an hundred and nine of them mutinied, and marched away
in a body.  They did not care to go where it would not be
equivocal for what King they fought.  Three companies of
dragoons are sent after them.  If you happen to hear of any
rising don't be surprised-I shall not, I assure you.  Sir
Robert Monroe, their lieutenant-colonel, before their leaving
Scotland, asked some of the ministry, " "But suppose there
should be any rebellion in Scotland, what should we do for
these eight hundred men?"  It was answered, "Why, there would
be eight hundred fewer rebels there."

"Utor permisso, caudeque pilos ut equinae
Paulatim cello; demo unum, demo etiam unum,
Dum-"

My dear child, I am surprised to hear you enter so seriously
into earnest ideas of my lord's passing into Italy! Could you
think (however he, you, or I might wish it) that there could
be any probability of it? Can you think his age could endure
it, or him so indifferent, so totally disministered, as to
leave all thoughts of what he has been, and ramble like a boy,
after pictures and statues? Don't expect it.

We had heard of the Duke of Modena's command before I had your
letter.  I am glad, for the sake of the duchess, as she is to
return to France.  I never saw any body wish anything more!
and indeed, how can one figure any particle of pleasure
happening to the daughter of the Regent,(819) and a favourite
daughter too, full of wit and joy, buried in a dirty, dull
Italian duchy, with an ugly, formal object for a husband, and
two uncouth sister-princesses for eternal companions? I am so
near the eve of going into Norfolk, that I imagine myself
something in her situation, and married to some Hammond or
Hoste (820) who is Duke of Wootton or Darsingham.  I remember
in the fairy tales where a yellow dwarf steals a princess, and
shows her his duchy, of which he is very proud: among the
blessings of grandeur, of which he makes her mistress, there
is a most beautiful ass for her palfrey, a blooming meadow of
nettles and thistles to walk in, and a fine troubled ditch to
slake her thirst, after either of the above mentioned
exercises.

Adieu! My next will be dated from some of the doleful castles
in the principality of your forlorn friend, the duchy of
Reepham.

(818) William Fortescue, master of the rolls, a relation of
Margaret Lady Walpole. ffortescue was made master of the rolls
in 1741, and continued so until his death in 1749.  He was the
friend and correspondent of Pope, and assisted the poet in
drawing up the humorous report, "Stradling versus Stiles." He
was a man of great humour, talents, and integrity.]

(819) Mademoiselle de Valois, who had made herself notorious
during the regency of her father, by her intrigue with the
Duke of Richelieu.  She consented to marry the Duke of Modena,
in order to obtain the liberty of her lover, who was confined
in the Bastille, for conspiring against the Regent.  The Duke
of Richelieu, in return, followed her afterwards secretly to
Modena.-D.

(820) The Hammonds and Hostes are two Norfolk families, nearly
allied to the Walpoles.



324 letter 108
To Sir Horace Mann.
Houghton, Jan. 4, 1743.

I wrote, this week to Mr. Chute, addressed to you; I could not
afford two letters in one post from the country, and in the
dead of summer.  I have received one from you of May 21st,
since I came I must tell you a smart dialogue between your
father and me the morning we left London: he came to wish my
lord a good journey: I found him in the parlour. "Sir," said
he, "I may ask you how my son does; I think you hear from him
frequently: I never do."  I replied, "Sir, I write him kind
answers; pray do you do so?"  He coloured, and said with a
half mutter, "Perhaps I have lived too long for him!"  I
answered shortly, "Perhaps you have."  My dear child, I beg
your pardon, but I could not help this.  When one loves any
body, one can't help being warm for them at a fair
opportunity.  Bland and Mr. Legge were present-your father
could have stabbed me.  I told your brother Gal, who was glad.

We are as private here as if we were in devotion-. there is
nobody with us now but Lord Edgecumbe and his son.  The Duke
of Grafton and Mr. Pelham come next week, and I hope Lord
Lincoln with them.  Poor Lady Sophia is at the gasp of her
hopes; all is concluded for his match with Miss Pelham.  It is
not to be till the winter.  He is to have all Mr. Pelham and
the Duke of Newcastle can give or settle; unless Lady
Catherine should produce a son, or the duchess should die, and
the duke marry again.

Earl Poulett(821)  is dead, and makes vacant another riband.
I imagine Lord Carteret will have one; Lord Bath will ask it.
I think they should give Prince Charles(822) one of the two,
for all the trouble he saves us. The papers talk of nothing
but a suspension of arms: it seems toward, for at least we
hear of no battle, though there are so many armies looking at
one another.

Old Sir Charles Wager(823) is dead at last, and has left the
fairest character.  I can't help having a little private
comfort, to think that Goldsworthy-but there is no danger.

Madox of St. Asaph has wriggled himself into the see of
Worcester.  He makes haste; I remember him only domestic
chaplain to the late Bishop of Chichester.(824)  Durham is not
dead, as I believe I told you from a false report.

You tell me of dining with Madame de Modene,(824) but you
don't tell me of being charmed with her.  I like her
excessively-I don't mean her person, for she is as plump as
the late Queen; but, sure her face is fine; her eyes vastly
fine! and then she is as agreeable as one should expect the
Regent's daughter to be.  The Princess and she must have been
an admirable contrast; one has all the good breeding of a
French court, and the other all the ease of it.  I have almost
a mind to go to Paris to see her.  She was so excessively
civil to me.  You don't tell me if the Pucci goes into France
with her.

I like the Genoese selling Corsica! I think we should follow
their example and sell France; we have about as good a title,
and very near as much possession.  At how much may they value
Corsica?  at the rate of islands it can't go for much.
Charles the Second sold Great Britain and Ireland to Louis
XIV. for 300,000 pounds. a-year, and that was reckoned
extravagantly dear.  Lord Bolingbroke took a single hundred
thousand for them, when they were in much better repair.

We hear to-day that the King goes to the army on the 15th N.
S. that is, to-day; but I don't tell it you for certain.
There has been much said against his commanding it, as it is
only an army of succour, and not acting as principal in the
cause.  In my opinion, his commanding will depend upon the
more or less probability of its acting at all.  Adieu!

(821) John, first Earl of Poulett, knight of the garter.  He
died, aged upwards of eighty, on the 28th May 1743.-D.

(822) Prince Charles of Lorraine, the queen of Hungary's
general against the French.-D.

(823) This distinguished admiral died on the 24th of May, in
his seventy-seventh year; at which time he was member for West
looe.  A splendid monument was erected to his memory in
Westminster Abbey.-E.

(824) Dr. Waddington.

(825) It was not the Duchess of Modena, but the Duke's second
sister, who went to Florence.



326 letter 109
To Sir Horace Mann.
Houghton, June 10, 1743.

You must not expect me to write you a very composed, careless
letter; my spirits are all in agitation! I am at the eve of a
post that may bring me the most dreadful news! we expect
to-morrow the news of a decisive battle.  Oh! if you have any
friend there, think what apprehensions I (826) must have of
such a post!  By yesterday's letters, our army was within
eight miles of the French, who have had repeated orders to
attack them.  Lord Stair and Marshal Noailles both think
themselves superior, and have pressed for leave to fight.  The
latter call themselves fourscore thousand; ours sixty.  Mr.
Pelham and Lord Lincoln come to Houghton to-morrow, so we are
sure of hearing as soon as possible, if any thing has
happened.  By this time the King must be with them.- My fears
for one or two friends have spoiled me for any English hopes-I
cannot dwindle away the French army-every man in it appears to
my imagination as big as the sons of Anak! I am conjuring up
the ghosts of all who have perished by French ambition, and am
dealing out commissions to these spectres,

"-To sit heavy on their souls to-morrow!"

Alas! perhaps that glorious to-morrow was a dismal yesterday
at least, perhaps it was to me!  The genius of England might
be a mere mercenary man of the world, and employed all his
attention to turn aside cannonballs from my Lord Stair, to
give new edge to his new Marlborough's sword: was plotting
glory for my Lord Carteret, or was thinking of furnishing his
own apartment in Westminster Hall with a new set of
trophies-who would then take care of Mr. Conway? You, who are
a minister, will see all this in still another light, will
fear our defeat, and will foresee the train of
consequences.-Why, they may be wondrous ugly; but till I know
what I have to think about my own friends, I cannot be wise in
my generation.

I shall now only answer your letter; for till I have read
to-morrow's post, I have no thoughts but of a battle.

I am angry at your thinking that I can dislike to receive two
or three of your letters at once.  Do you take me for a child,
and imagine, that though I may like one plum-tart, two may
make me sick?  I now get them regularly; so I do but receive
them, I am easy.

You are mistaken about the gallery; so far from unfurnishing
any part of the house, there are several pictures undisposed
of, besides numbers at Lord Walpole's, at the Exchequer, at
Chelsea, and at New Park.  Lord Walpole has taken a dozen to
Stanno, a small house, about four miles from hence, where he
lives with my lady Walpole's vicegerent.(827)  You may imagine
that her deputies are no fitter than she is to come where
there is In a modest, unmarried girl.(828)

I will write to London for the life of Theodore, though you
may depend upon its being a Grub Street piece, without one
true fact.  Don't let it prevent your undertaking his Memoirs.
Yet I should say Mrs. Heywood,(829) or Mrs. Behn(830) were
fitter to write his history.

How slight you talk of Prince Charles's victory at Brunau! We
thought it of vast consequence; so it was.  He took three
posts afterwards, and has since beaten the Prince of Conti,
and killed two thousand men.  Prince Charles civilly returned
him his baggage.  The French in Bavaria are quite
dispirited-poor wretches! how one hates to wish so ill as one
does to fourscore thousand men!

There is yet no news of the Pembroke.  The Dominichin has a
post of honour reserved in the gallery.  My Lord says, as to
that Dalton's Raphael, he can say nothing without some
particular description of the picture and the size, and some
hint at the price, which you have promised to get.  I leave
the residue of my paper for tomorrow: I tremble, lest I should
be forced to finish it abruptly!  I forgot to tell you that I
left a particular commission with my brother Ned, who is at
Chelsea, to get some tea-seed from the physic-garden; and he
promised me to go to Lord Islay, to know what cobolt and
zingho(831) are, and where they are to be got.

Saturday morning.

The post is come: no battle! Just as they were marching
against the French, they received orders from Hanover not to
engage, for the Queen's generals thought they were inferior,
and were positive against fighting.  Lord Stair, with only the
English, proceeded, and drew out in order; but though the
French were then so vastly superior, they did not attack him.
The King is now at the army, and, they say, will endeavour to
make the Austrians fight.  It wilt make great confusion here
if they do not.  The French are evacuating Bavaria as fast as
possible, and seem to intend to join all their force together.
I shall still dread all the events of this campaign.  Adieu!

(826) Mr. Conway the most intimate friend of Horace Walpole,
was now serving in Lord Stair's army.

(827) Miss Norsa; she was a Jewess, and had been a singer.

(828) Lady Maria Walpole.

(829) Eliza Heywood, a voluminous writer of indifferent
novels; of which the best known is one called "Betsy
Thoughtless."  She was also authoress of a work entitled "The
Female Spectator." - Mrs. Heywood was born in 1693, and died
in 1756.-D.

(830) Mrs. Afra Behn, a woman whose character and writings
were equally incorrect.  Of her plays, which were seventeen in
number, Pope says,

"The stage how loosely does Astrea tread,
Who fairly puts all characters to bed."

Her novels and other productions were also marked with similar
characteristics.  She died in 1689-D.

(831) Cobalt and Zinc, two metallic substances; the former
composed of silver, copper, and arsenic, the latter of tin and
iron.-D.



328 letter 110
To Sir Horace Mann.
Houghton, June 20, 1743.

I have painted the    Raphael to my lord almost as fine as
Raphael himself could; but he will not think of it-. he will
not give a thousand guineas for what he never saw.  I wish I
could persuade him.  For the other hands, he has already fine
ones of every one of them.  There are yet no news of the
Pembroke: we row impatient.

I have made a short tour to Euston this week with the Duke of
Grafton, who came over from thence with Lord Lincoln and Mr.
Pelham.  Lord Lovel and Mr. Coke carried me and brought me
back.  It is one of the most admired seats in England-in my
opinion, because Kent has a most absolute disposition of it.
Kent is now so fashionable, that, like Addison's Liberty, he

"Can make bleak rocks and barren mountains smile."

I believe the duke wishes he could make them green too.  The
house is large and   bad; it was built by Lord Arlington, and
stands, as all old houses do for convenience of water and
shelter, in a hole; so it neither sees, nor is seen: he has no
money to build another.  The park is fine, the old woods
excessively so: they are much grander than Mr. Kent's passion
clumps-that is, sticking a dozen trees here and there, till a
lawn looks like the ten of spades.  Clumps have their beauty;
but in a great extent of country, how trifling to scatter
arbours, where you should spread forests! He is so unhappy in
his heir apparent,(832) that he checks his hand in almost
every thing he undertakes.  Last week he heard a new complaint
of his barbarity.  A tenant of Lord Euston, in
Northamptonshire, brought him his rent: the Lord said it
wanted three and sixpence: the tenant begged he would examine
the account, that it would prove exact-however, to content
him, he would willingly pay him the three and sixpence.  Lord
E. flew into
                            a rage, and vowed he would write
to the Duke to have him turned out of a little place he has in
the post-office of thirty pounds a-year.  The poor man, who
has six children, and knew nothing of my lord's
                            being upon no terms of power with
his father, went home and shot himself!

I know no syllable of news          '. but that my Lady
Carteret is dead at Hanover, and Lord Wilmington dying.  So
there will be to let a first
                            minister's ladyship and a first
lordship of the Treasury.  We have nothing from the army,
though the King has now been there some time.  As new a thing
as it is, we don't talk much about it.

Adieu! the family are gone a fishing: I thought I stayed at
home to write to you, but I have so little to say that I don't
believe you will think so.

(832) George, Earl of Euston, who died in the lifetime of his
father.  He seems to have been a man of the most odious
character.  He has been already mentioned in the course
                            of these letters, upon the
occasion of his marriage with the ill-fated lady Dorothy
Boyle, who died from his ill-treatment of her.  Upon a picture
of lady Dorothy at the Duke of Devonshire's at Chiswick, is
the following touching inscription, written by her mother,
which commemorates her virtues and her fate:-

"lady Dorothy Boyle,
Born May the 14th, 1724.
She was the comfort and joy of her parents, the delight of all
who knew her angelick of temper, and the admiration of all who
saw her beauty.  She was marry'd October the 10th, 1741, and
delivered (by death) from misery, May the 2nd, 1742.  This
picture was drawn seven weeks after her death (from memory) by
her most affectionate mother, Dorothy Burlington."-D.



329 letter 111
To Sir Horace Mann.
Friday noon, July 29, 1743.

I don't know what I write-I am all a flurry of thoughts-a
battle-a victory!  I dare not yet be glad-I know no
particulars of my friends.  This instant my lord has had a
messenger from the Duke of Newcastle, who has sent him a copy
of Lord Carteret's letter from the field of battle.  The King
was in all the heat of the fire, and safe--the Duke is wounded
in the calf of the leg, but slightly; Duc d'Aremberg in the
breast; General Clayton and Colonel Piers are the only
officers of note said to be killed-here is all my trust!  The
French passed the Mayne that morning with twenty-five thousand
men, and are driven back.  We have lost two thousand, and they
four-several of their general officers, and of the Maison du
Roi, are taken prisoners: the battle lasted from ten in the
morning till four.  The Hanoverians behaved admirably.  The
Imperialists(833) were the aggressors; in short, 'In all
public views, it is all that could be wished-the King in the
action, and his son wounded-the Hanoverians behaving well-the
French beaten: what obloquy will not all this wipe out!
Triumph, and write it to Rome! I don't know what our numbers
were; I believe about thirty thousand, for there were twelve
thousand Hessians and Hanoverians who had not joined them.  O!
in my hurry, I had forgot the place-you must talk of the
battle of Dettingen!

After dinner.  My child, I am calling together all my
thoughts, and rejoice in this victory as much as I dare; for
in the raptures of' conquest, how dare I think that my Lord
Carteret, or the rest of those who have written, thought just
of whom I thought? The post comes in tomorrow morning, but it
is not sure that we shall learn any particular certainties so
soon as that.  Well! how happy it is that the King has had
such an opportunity of distinguishing himself'!(834)  what a
figure he will make!  They talked of its being below his
dignity to command an auxiliary army: my lord says it will not
be thought below his dignity to have sought dangers These were
the flower of the French troops: I flatter myself they will
tempt no more battles.  such, and we might march from one end
of France to the other.  So we are in a French war, at least
well begun! My lord has been drinking the healths of Lord
Stair and Lord Carteret: he says, "since it was well done, he
does not care by whom it was done."  He thinks differently
from the rest of the world: he thought from the first, that
France never missed such an opportunity as when they undertook
the German war, instead of joining with Spain against us.  If
I hear any more tomorrow before the post goes out, I will let
you know.  Tell me if this is the first you hear of the
victory: I would fain be the first to give you so much
pleasure.

Saturday morning.

Well, my dear child, all is safe! I have not so much as an
acquaintance hurt.  The more we hear the greater it turns out.
Lord Cholmondeley writes my lord from London that we gained
the victory with only fifteen regiments, not eleven thousand
men, and SO not half in number to the French.  I fancy their
soldiery behaved ill, by the Gallantry of their officers; for
Ranby, the King'S private surgeon, writes that he alone has
150 officers of distinction desperately wounded under his
care.  Marquis Fenelon's son is among the prisoners, and says
Marshal Noailles is dangerously wounded; so is Duc d'Aremberg.
Honeywood's regiment sustained the attack, and are almost all
killed: his natural son has five wounds, and cannot live.  The
horse were pursuing when the letters came away, so there is no
certain account of the slaughter.  Lord Albemarle had his
horse shot under him.  In short, the victory is complete.
There is no describing what one hears of the spirits and
bravery of our men.  One of them dressed himself up in the
belts of three officers, and swore he would wear them as long
as he lived.  Another ran up to Lord Carteret, who was in a
coach near the action the whole time, and said, "Here, my
lord, do hold this watch for me; I have just killed a French
officer and taken it, and I will go take another."

Adieu! my dear Sir: May the rest of the war be as glorious as
the beginning!

(833) The Bavarians.

(834) Frederick the Great, in his "Histoire de mon Temps,"
gives the Following account of George the Second at the battle
of Dettingen.  "The King was on horseback, and rode forward to
reconnoitre the enemy: his horse, frightened at the
cannonading, ran away with his Majesty, and nearly carried him
into the midst of the French lines: fortunately, one of his
attendants succeeded in stopping him.  George then abandoned
his horse, and fought on foot, at the head of his Hanoverian
battalions.  With his sword drawn, and his body placed in the
attitude of a fencing-master, who is about to make a lunge in
carte, he continued to expose himself, without Circling, to
the enemy's fire."-D.

To Mr. Chute.

My dear Sir, I wish you joy, and you wish me joy, and Mr.
Whithed, and Mr. Mann, and Mrs. Bosville, etc.  Don't get
drunk and get the gout.  I expect to be drunk with hogsheads
of the Mayne-water, and with odes to his Majesty and the Duke,
and Te Deums.  Patapan begs you will get him a dispensation
from Rome to go and hear the thanksgiving at St. Paul's.  We
are all mad-drums, trumpets, bumpers, bonfires! The mob are
wild, and cry, "Long live King George and the Duke of
Cumberland, and Lord Stair and Lord Carteret, and General
Clayton that's dead!" My Lord Lovel says, "Thanks to the gods
that John(835) has done his duty!"

Adieu! my dear Dukes of Marlborough! I am ever your
JOHN DUKE OF MARLBOROUGh.

(835) John Bull.-D.





331 Letter 112
To Sir Horace Mann.
Houghton, July 4, 1743.

I hear no particular news here, and I don't pretend to send
you the common news; for as I must have it first from London,
you will have it from thence sooner in the papers than in my
letters.  There have been great rejoicings for the victory;
which I am convinced is very considerable by the pains the
Jacobites take to persuade it is not.  My Lord Carteret's
Hanoverian articles have much offended; his express has been
burlesqued a thousand ways.  By all the letters that arrive,
the loss of the French turns out more considerable than by the
first accounts: they have dressed up the battle into a victory
for themselves-I hope they will always have such! By their not
having declared war with us, one should think they intended a
peace.  It is allowed that our fine horse did us no honour -
the victory was gained by the foot. Two of their princes of
the blood, the Prince de Dombes, and the Count d'Eu(836) his
brother, were wounded, and several of their first nobility.
Our prisoners turn out but seventy-two officers, besides the
private men; and by the printed catalogue, I don't think of
great family.  Marshal Noailles's mortal wound is quite
vanished, and Duc d'Aremberg's shrunk to a very slight one.
The King's glory remains in its first bloom.

Lord Wilmington is dead.  I believe the civil battle for his
post will be tough.  Now we shall see what service Lord
Carteret's Hanoverians will do him.  You don't think the
crisis unlucky for him, do you?  If you wanted a treasury,
should you choose to have been in Arlington Street,(837) or
driving by the battle of Dettingen?  You may imagine our Court
wishes for Mr. Pelham.  I don't know any one who wishes for
Lord Bath but himself-I believe that is a pretty substantial
wish.

I have got the Life of King Theodore, but I don't know how to
convey it--I will inquire for some way.

We are quite alone.  You never saw any thing so unlike as
being here five months out of place, to the congresses of a
fortnight in place.  but you know the "Justum et tenacem
propositi virum" can amuse himself without the "Civium ardor!"
As I have not so much dignity of character to fill up my time,
I could like a little more company.  With all this leisure,
you may imagine that I might as well be writing an ode or so
upon the victory; but as I cannot build upon the Laureate's
place till I know whether Lord Carteret or Mr. Pelham will
carry the Treasury, I have vounded my compliments to a slender
collection of quotations against I should have any occasion
for them.  Here are some fine lines from Lord Halifax's (838)
poem on the battle of the Boyne-

"The King leads on, the King does all inflame,
The King!-and carries millions in the name."

Then follows a simile about a deluge, which you may imagine,
but the next lines are very good -

"So on the foe the firm battalions prest,
And he, like the tenth wave, drove on the rest.
Fierce, gallant, young, he shot through every place,
Urging their flight, and hurrying on the chase,
He hung upon their rear, or lighten'd in their face."

The next are a magnificent compliment, and, as far as verse
goes, to be sure very applicable.

"Stop, stop! brave Prince, allay that inner flame;
Enough is given to England and to fame.
Remember, Sir, you in the centre stand;
Europe's divided interests you command,
All their designs uniting in your hand.
Down from your throne descends the golden chain
Which does the fabric of our world sustain,
That once dissolved by any fatal stroke,
The scheme of all our happiness is broke."

Adieu! my dear Sir: pray for peace!

(836) The two sons of the Duke du Maine, a natural son, but
legitimated, of Lewis the Fourteenth, by Madame de
Montespan.-E.

(837) Where Mr. Pelham lived.

(838) Charles Montagu, Earl of Halifax, the "Bufo" of Pope

"Proud as Apollo, on his forked hill
Sate full-blown Bufo, I)uff'd by every quill;
Fed with soft dedication all day long,
Horace and he went hand in hand in song."-E.



333 Letter 113
To Sir Horace Mann.
Houghton, July 11, 1743.

The Pembroke is arrived! Your brother slipped a slice of paper
into a letter which he sent me from you the other day, with
those pleasant words, "The Pembroke is arrived." I am going to
receive it. I shall be in town the end of this week, only stay
there about ten days, and wait on the Dominichin hither.  Now
I tremble!  If it should not stand the trial among the number
of capital pictures here!  But it must; It will.

O, sweet lady!(839) What shall I do about her letter? I must
answer it-and where to find a penful of Italian in the world,
I know not.  Well, she must take what she can get: gold and
silver I have not, but what I have I give unto her.  Do you
say a vast deal of my concern for her illness, and that I
could not find decompounds and superlatives enough to express
myself.  You never tell me a syllable from my sovereign lady
the princess: has she forgot me? What is become of Prince
Beauvau?(840) is he warring against us? Shall I write to Mr.
Conway to be very civil to him for my sake, if he is taken
prisoner?  We expect another battle every day.  Broglio has
joined Noailles, and Prince Charles is on the Neckar.
Noailles says, "Qu'il a fait une folie, mais qu'il est pr`et
`a la r`eparer."  There is great blame thrown on Baron Ilton,
the Hanoverian General for having hindered the Guards from
en(,aging.  If they had, and the horse, who behaved
wretchedly, had done their duty, it is agreed that there would
be no second engagement.  The poor Duke is in a much worse way
than was at first apprehended: his wound proves a bad one; he
is gross, and has had a shivering fit, which is often the
forerunner of a mortification.  There has been much thought of
making knights-banneret, but I believe the scheme is laid
aside; for, in the first place, they are never made but on the
field of battle, and now it was not thought on till some days
after; and besides, the King intended to make some who were
not actually in the battle.

Adieu! Possibly I may hear something in town worth telling
you.

(839) Madame Grifoni.

(840) Son of Prince Craon.




334 letter 114
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, July 19.

Here am I come a-Dominichining! and the first thing, I hear
is, that the Pembroke must perform quarantine fourteen days
for coming from the Mediterranean, and a week airing.  It is
forty days, if they bring the plague from Sicily.  I will bear
this misfortune as heroically as I can; and considering I have
London to bear it in, may possibly support it well enough.

The private letters from the army all talk of the King's going
to Hanover, 2nd of August, N. S. If he should not, one shall
be no longer in pain for him; for the French have repassed the
Rhine, and think only of preparing against Prince Charles, who
is marching sixty-two thousand men, full of conquest and
revenge, to regain his own country.  I most cordially wish him
success, and that his bravery may recover what his abject
brother gave up so tamely, and which he takes as little
personal pains to regain.  It is not at all determined whether
we are to carry the war into France.  It is ridiculous enough!
we have the name of war with Spain, without the thing and war
with France, without the name!

The maiden heroes of the Guards are in great wrath with
General Ilton, who kept them out of harm's way.  They call him
"the Confectioner," because he says he preserved them.

The week before I left Houghton my father had a most dreadful
accident: it had near been fatal; but he escaped miraculously.
He dined abroad, and went up to sleep.  As he was coming down
again, not quite awakened, he was surprised at seeing the
company through a glass-door which he had not observed: his
foot slipped, and he, who is now entirely unwieldy and
helpless, fell at once down the stairs against the door,
which, had it not been there, he had dashed himself to pieces,
in a stone hall.  He cut his forehead two inches long to the
pericranium, and another gash upon his temple; but, most
luckily, did himself' no other hurt, and was quite well again
before I came away.

I find Lord Stafford (841) married to Miss Cantillon; they are
to live half the year in London, half in Paris.  Lord Lincoln
is soon to marry his cousin Miss Pelham: it will be great joy
to the whole house of Newcastle.

There is no determination yet come about the Treasury.  Most
people wish for Mr. Pelham; few for Lord Carteret; none for
Lord Bath.  My Lady TOWnshend said an admirable thing the
other day to this last: he was complaining much of a pain in
his side-"Oh!" said she, "that can't be; you have no side."

I have a new cabinet for my enamels and miniatures Just come
home, which I am sure you would like: it is of rosewood; the
doors inlaid with carvings in ivory.' I wish you could see
'It! Are you to be forever ministerial sans rel`ache?  Are you
never to have leave to come and "settle your private affairs,"
as the newspapers call it?

A thousand loves to the Chutes.  Does my sovereign lady yet
remember me, or has she lost with her eyes all thought of m!
Adieu!

P.S. Princess Louisa goes soon to her young Denmark: and
Princess Emily, it is now said, will have the man of Lubeck.
If he had missed the crown of Sweden, he was to have taken
Princess Caroline, because, in his private capacity, he was
not a competent match for the now-first daughter of England.
He is extremely handsome; it is fifteen years since Princess
Emily was so.

(841) William-Matthias, third Earl of Stafford.  He died in
1751 without issue.-E.




335 letter 115
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, July 31, 1743.

If I went by my last week's reason for not writing to you, I
should miss this post too, for I have no more to tell you than
I had then; but at that rate, there would be great vacuums in
our correspondence.  I am still here, waiting for the
Dominichin and the rest of the things.  I have incredibly
trouble about them, for they arrived just as the quarantine
was established.  Then they found out that the Pembroke had
left the fleet so long before the infection in Sicily began,
and had not touched at any port there, that the admiralty
absolved it.  Then the things were brought up; then they were
sent back to be aired; and still I am not to have them in a
week.  I tremble for the pictures; for they are to be aired at
the rough discretion of a master
of a hoy, for nobody I could send would be suffered to go
aboard.  The city is outrageous; for you know, to merchants
there is no plague so dreadful as a stoppage of their trade.
The regency are so temporizing and timid, especially in this
inter-ministerium, that I am in great apprehensions of our
having the plague an island, so many ports, no power absolute
or active enough to establish the necessary precautions, and
all are necessary! And now it is on the continent too! While
confined to Sicily there were hopes: but I scarce conceive
that it will stop in two or three villages in Calabria.  My
dear child, Heaven preserve you from it! I am in the utmost
pain on its being so near you.  What will you do! whither will
you go, if it reaches Tuscany? Never think of staying in
Florence: shall I get you permission to retire out of that
State, in case of danger? but sure you would not hesitate on
such a crisis!

We have no news from the army: the minister there communicates
nothing to those here.  No answer comes about the Treasury.
All is suspense: and clouds of breaches ready to burst.  now
strange is this jumble! France with an unsettled ministry;
England with an unsettled one; a victory just gained over
them, yet no war ensuing, or declared from either side; our
minister still at Paris, as if to settle an amicable
intelligence of the losses on both sides!  I think there was
Only wanting for Mr. Thompson to notify to them in form our
victory over them, and for Bussy(843) to have civil letters of
congratulation-'tis so well-bred an age!

I must tell you a bon-mot of Winnington.  I was at dinner with
him and Lord Lincoln and Lord Stafford last week, and it
happened to be a maigre day of which Stafford was talking,
though, you may believe, without any scruples; "Why," said
Winnington, "what a religion is yours! they let you eat
nothing, and vet make you swallow every thing!"

My dear child, you will think when I am going to give you a
new commission, that I ought to remember those you give me.
Indeed I have not forgot one, though I know not how to execute
them.  The Life of King Theodore is too big to send but by a
messenger; by the first that goes you shall have it.  For
cobolt and zingho, your brother and I have made all inquiries,
but almost in vain, except that one person has told him that
there Is some such thing in Lancashire; I have written thither
to inquire.  For the tea-trees, it is my brother-'s fault,
whom I desired, as he is at Chelsea, to get some from the
Physic-garden: he forgot it; but now I am in town myself, if
possible, you shall have some seed.  After this, I still know
not how to give you a commission, for you over-execute; but on
conditions uninfringeable, I will give you one.  I have begun
to collect drawings: now, if you will at any time buy me any
that you meet with at reasonable rates, for I will not give
great prices, I shall be much obliged to you.  I would not
have above one, to be sure, of any of the Florentine school,
nor above one of any master after the immediate scholars of
Carlo Maratti.  For the Bolognese school, I care not how many;
though I fear they will be too dear.  But Mr. Chute
understands them.  One condition is, that if he collects
drawings as well as prints, there is an end of the commission;
for you shall not buy me any, when he perhaps would like to
purchase them.  The other condition is, that you regularly set
down the prices you pay; otherwise, if you send me any without
the price, I instantly return them unopened to your brother:
this, upon my honour, I will most strictly perform.

Adieu! write me minutely the history of the plague.  If it
makes any progress towards you, I shall be a most unhappy man.
I am far from easy on our own account here.

(843) Mr. Thompson and the Abb`e de Bussy were the English and
French residents.



336 letter 117
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, Aug. 14, 1743.

I should write to Mr. Chute to-day, but I won't till next
post: I will tell you why presently.  Last week I did not
write at all; because I was every day waiting for the
Dominichin, etc. which I at last got last night-But oh!  that
etc.! It makes me write to you, but I must leave it etc. for I
can't undertake to develop it.  I can find no words to thank
you from my own fund; but Must apply an expression of the
Princess Craon's to myself, Which the number of charming
things you have sent me absolutely melts down from the
bombast, of which it consisted when she sent it me. "Monsieur,
votre g`en`erosit`e," (I am not sure it was not "votre
magnificence,") "ne me laisse rien `a d`esirer de tout ce qui
se trouve de pr`ecieux en Angleterre, dans la Chine, et aux
Indes." But still this don't express etc.  The charming Madame
S`evign`e, who was still handsomer than Madame de Craon, and
had infinite wit, condescended to pun on sending her daughter
an excessively fine pearl necklace-"Voil`a, ma fille, un
pr`esent passant tous les pr`esents pass`es et pr`esents!"  Do
you know that these words reduced to serious meaning, are not
sufficient for what you have sent me! If I were not afraid of
giving you all the trouble of airing and quarantine which I
have had with them, I would send them to you back again! It is
well our virtue is out of the ministry!  What reproach it
would undergo! Why, my dear child, here would be bribery in
folio! How would mortals stare at such a present as this to
the son of a fallen minister! I believe half of it would
reinstate us again though the vast box of essences would not
half sweeten the treasury after the dirty wretches that have
fouled it since.

The Dominichin is safe; so is every thing.  I cannot think it
of the same hand with the Sasso Ferrati you sent me.  This
last is not so manier`e as the Dominichin; for the more I look
at it, the more I am convinced it is of him.  It goes down
with me to-morrow to Houghton.  The Andrea del Sarto is
particularly fine! the Sasso Ferriti particularly graceful-oh!
I should have kept that word for the Magdalen's head, which is
beautiful beyond measure.  Indeed, my dear Sir, I am glad,
after my confusion is a little abated, that your part of the
things is so delightful; for I am very little satisfied with
my own purchases.  Donato Creti's(844) copy is a wretched, raw
daub; the beautiful Virgin of the original he has made
horrible.  Then for the statue, the face is not so broad as my
nail, and has not the turn of the antique.  Indeed, La Vall`ee
has done the drapery well, but I can't pardon him the head.
My table I like; though he has stuck in among the ornaments
two vile china jars, that look like the modern japanning by
ladies.  The Hermaphrodite, on my seeing it again, is too
sharp and hard-in short, your present has put me out of humour
with every thing of my own.  You shall hear next week how my
lord is satisfied with his Dominichin.  I have received the
letter and drawings by Crewe.  By the way, my drawings of the
gallery are as bad as any thing of my own ordering.  They gave
Crewe the letter for you at the-office, I believe, for I knew
nothing of his going, or I had sent you the Life of King
Theodore.

I was interrupted in my letter this morning by the Duke of
Devonshire, who called to see the Dominichin.  Nobody knows
pictures better: he was charmed with it, and did not doubt its
Dominichinality.

I find another letter from you to-night of August 6th, and
thank you a thousand times for your goodness about Mr. Conway:
but I believe I told you, that as he is in the Guards, he was
not engaged.  We hear nothing but that we are going to cross
the Rhine.  All we know is from private letters: the Ministry
hear nothing.  When the Hussars went to Kevenhuller for
orders, he said, "Messieurs, l'Alsace est
`a vous; je n'ai point d'autres ordres `a vous donner."  They
have accordingly taken up their residence in a fine chateau
belonging to the Cardinal de Rohan, as Bishop of Strasbourg.
We expect nothing but war; and that war expects nothing but
conquest.

Your account of our officers was very false; for, instead of
the soldiers going on without commanders, some of them were
ready to go without their soldiers.  I am sorry you have such
plague with your Neptune(845) and the Sardinian-we know not of
them scarce.

I really forget any thing of an Italian greyhound for the
Tesi.  I promised her, I remember, a black spaniel-but how to
send it! I did promise one of the former to Marquis Mari at
Genoa, which I absolutely have not been able to get yet,
though I have often tried; but since the last Lord Halifax
died, there is no meeting with any of the breed.  If I can, I
will get her one.  I am sorry you are engaged in the opera.  I
have found it a most dear undertaking.  I was not in the
management: Lord Middlesex was chief.  We were thirty
subscribers, at two hundred pounds each, which was to last
four years, and no other demands ever to be made.  Instead of
that, we have been made to pay fifty-six pounds over and above
the subscription in one winter.  I told the secretary in a
passion, that it was the last money I would ever pay for the
follies of directors.

I tremble at hearing that the plague is not over, as we
thought, but still spreading.  You will see in the papers That
Lord Hervey is dead-luckily, I think. for himself; for he had
outlived the last inch of character.  Adieu!

(844) A copy of a celebrated picture by Guido at Bologna, of
the Patron Saints of that city. VOL. 1. 29.-D.

(845) Admiral Matthews.



338 letter 117
To John Chute, Esq.(846)
Houghton, August 20, 1743.

Indeed, my dear Sir, you certainly did not use to be stupid,
and till you give me more substantial proof that you are so, I
shall not believe it.  As for your temperate diet and milk
bringing about such a metamorphosis, I hold it impossible.  I
have such lamentable proofs every day before my eyes of the
stupefying qualities of beef, ale, and wine, that I have
contracted a most religious veneration for your spiritual
nouriture.  Only imagine that I here every day see men, who
are mountains of roast beef, and only seem just roughly hewn
out into the outlines of human form, like the giant-rock at
Pratolino! I shudder when I see them brandish their knives in
act to carve, and look on them as savages that devour one
another.  I should not stare at all more than I do, if yonder
alderman at the lower end of the table was to stick his fork
into his neighbour's jolly cheek, and cut a brave slice of
brown and fat.  Why, I'll swear I see no difference between a
country gentleman and a sirloin; whenever the first laughs, or
the latter is cut, there runs out the same stream of gravy!
Indeed, the sirloin does not ask quite so many questions.  I
have an aunt here, a family piece of goods, an old remnant of
inquisitive hospitality and economy, who, to all intents and
purposes is as beefy as her neighbours.  She wore me so down
yesterday with interrogatories, that I dreamt all night she
was at my ear with who's and why's, and when's and where's,
till at last in my very sleep I cried out, For God in heaven's
sake, Madam, ask me no more questions!

Oh! my dear Sir, don't you find that nine parts in ten of the
world are of no use but to make you wish yourself with that
tenth part? I am so far from growing used to mankind by living
amongst them, that my natural ferocity and wildness does but
every day grow worse.  They tire me, they fatigue me; I don't
know what to do with them; I don't know what to say to them; I
fling open the windows and fancy I want air; and when I get by
myself, I undress myself, and seem to have had people in my
pockets, in my plaits, -and on my shoulders! I indeed find
this fatigue worse in the country than in town, because one
can avoid it there, and has more resources; but it is there
too.  I fear 'tis growing old; but I literally seem to have
murdered a man whose name was Ennui, for his ghost is ever
before me.  They say there is no English word for ennui;(847)
I think you may translate it most literally by what is called
"entertaining people," and "doing the honours:" that is, you
sit an hour with somebody you don't know, and don't care for,
talk about the wind and the weather, and ask a thousand
foolish questions, which all begin with, "I think you live a
good deal in the country," or, "I think you don't love this
thing or that."  Oh! 'tis dreadful!

I'll tell you what is delightful-the Dominichin!(848)  My dear
Sir, if ever there was a Dominichin, if ever there was an
original picture, this is one.  I am quite happy; for my
father is as much transported with it as I am.  It is hung in
the gallery, where are all his most capital pictures, and he
himself thinks it beats all but the two Guido'S.  That of the
Doctors and The Octagon-I don't know if you ever saw them?
What a chain of thought this leads me into! but why should I
not indulge it? I will flatter myself with your, some time or
other, passing a few days with me.  Why must I never expect to
see any thing but Beefs in a gallery which would not yield
even to the Colonna! If I do not most unlimitedly wish to see
you and Mr. Whithed in it this very moment, it is only because
I would not take you from our dear Mann.  Adieu! you charming
people all.  Is not Madam Bosville a Beef? Yours, most
sincerely.

(846) this very lively letter is the first of a series,
hitherto unpublished, addressed by Mr. Walpole to John Chute,
Esq. of the Vine, in the county of Hants.  Mr. Chute was the
grandson of Chaloner Chute, Esq.  Speaker of the House of
Commons to Richard Cromwell's parliament.  On the death of his
brother Anthony, in 1754, he succeeded to the family estates,
and died in 1776.-E.

(847) According to Lord Byron--

"Ennui is a growth of English root,
Though nameless in our language: we retort
The fact for words, and let the French translate
That awful yawn, which sleep cannot abate."

(848) Thus described by Walpole in his Description Of the
Pictures at Houghton Hall:-
"The Virgin and Child, a most beautiful, bright, and capital
picture, by Dominichino: bought out of the Zambeccari palace
at Bologna by Horace Walpole, junior."-E.




340 Letter 118
To Sir Horace Mann.
Houghton, Aug. 29, 1743.

You frighten me about the Spaniards entering Tuscany: it is so
probable, that I have no hopes against it but in their
weakness.  If all the accounts of their weakness and desertion
are true, it must be easy to repel them.  If their march to
Florence is to keep pace with Prince Charles's entering
Lorrain, it is not yet near: hitherto, he has not found the
passage of the Rhine practicable.  The French have assembled
greater armies to oppose it than was expected.  We are
marching to assist him: the King goes on with the army.  I am
extremely sorry for the Chevalier de Beauvau's(849) accident;
as sorry, perhaps, as the prince or princess; for you know he
was no favourite.  The release of the French prisoners
prevents the civilities which I would have taken care to have
had shown him.  You may tell the princess, that though it will
be so much honour to us to have any of her family it) our
power, vet I shall always be extremely concerned to have such
an opportunity of showing my attention to them.  there's a
period in her own style-"Comment! Monsieur des attentions:
qu'il est poli! qu'il s`cait tOUrner une civilit`e!"

"Ha!(850) la brave Angloise! e viva!"  What would I have given
to have overheard you breaking it to the gallant!  But of all,
commend me to the good man Nykin!  Why, Mamie (851) himself
could not have cuddled up an affair for his sovereign lady
better.

                         I have a commission from my lord to
send you ten thousand thanks for his bronze-. He admires it
beyond measure.  It came down last Friday, on his
birthday,(852) and was placed at the upper end of the gallery,
which was illuminated on the occasion: indeed, it is
incredible what a magnificent appearance it made.  There were
sixty-four candles, which showed all the pictures to great
advantage.  The Dominichin did itself and us honour.  There is
not the least question of its being original: one might as
well doubt the originality of King Patapan!  His patapanic
majesty is not one of the least curiosities of Houghton.  The
crowds that come to see the house stare at him, and ask what
creature it is.  As he does not speak one word of Norfolk,
there are strange conjectures made about him.  Some think that
he is a foreign prince come to marry Lady Mary.  The
disaffected say he is a Hanoverian: but the common people, who
observe my lord's vast fondness for him, take him for his good
genius, which they call his familiar.

You will have seen in the papers that Mr. Pelham is at last
first lord of the Treasury.  Lord Bath had sent over Sir John
Rushout's valet de chambre to Hanau to ask it.  It is a great
question now what side he will take; or rather, if any side
will take him.  It is not yet known what the good folks in the
Treasury will do-I believe, what they can.  Nothing farther
will be determined till the King's return.


(849) Third son of Prince Craon, and knight of Malta.

(850) This relates to an intrigue which was observed in a
church between an English gentleman and a lady who was at
Florence with her husband.  Mr. Mann was desired to speak to
the lover to choose more proper places.

(851) Prince Craon's name for the princess.  She was mistress
of Leopold, the last Duke of Lorrain, who married her to M. de
Beauvau, and prevailed on the Emperor to make him a prince of
the empire.  Leopold had twenty children by her, who all
resembled him; and he got his death by a cold which he
contracted in standing to sea a new house, which he had built
for her, furnished.  The duchess was extremely jealous, and
once retired to Paris, to complain to her brother the Regent;
but he was not a man to quarrel with his brother-in-law for
things of that nature, and sent his sister back.  Madame de
Craon gave into devotion after the Duke's death.

(852) August 26.



341 letter 119
To Sir Horace Mann.
Houghton, Sept. 7, 1743.

My letters are now at their ne plus ultra of nothingness so
you may hope they will grow better again.  I shall certainly
go to town soon, for my patience is worn out.  Yesterday, the
weather grew cold: I put on a new waistcoat for its being
winter's birthday-the season I am forced to love; for summer
has no charms for me when I pass it in the country.

We are expecting another battle, and a congress at the same
time.  Ministers seem to be flocking to Aix la Chapelle: and,
what will much surprise you, unless you have lived long enough
not to be surprised, is, that Lord Bolingbroke has hobbled the
same way too-you will suppose, as a minister for France; I
tell you, no.  My uncle, who is here, was yesterday stumping
along the gallery with a very political march: my lord asked
him whither he was going.  Oh, said he, to Aix la Chapelle.

You ask me about the marrying princesses.  I know not a
tittle.  Princess Louisa(853) seems to be going, her clothes
are bought; but marrying our daughters makes no conversation.
For either of the other two, all thoughts seem to be dropped
of it.  The senate of Sweden design themselves to choose a
wife for their man of Lubeck.  The city, and our supreme
governors, the mob, are very angry that there @is a troop of
French players at Clifden.(854)  One of them was lately
impertinent to a countryman, who thrashed him.  His Royal
Highness sent angrily to know the cause.  The fellow replied,
"he thought to have pleased his Highness in beating one of
them, who had tried to kill his father and had wounded his
brother." This was not easy to answer.

I delight in Prince Craon's exact intelligence!  For his
satisfaction, I can tell him that numbers, even here, would
believe any story full as absurd as that of the King and my
Lord Stair; or that very one, if any body will ever write it
over.  Our faith in politics will match any Neapolitan's in
religion.  A political missionary will make more converts in a
county progress than a Jesuit in the whole empire of China,
and will produce more preposterous miracles.  Sir Watkin
Williams, at the last Welsh races, convinced the whole
principality (by reading a letter that affirmed it), that the
King was not within two miles of the battle of Dettingen.  We
are not good at hitting off anti-miracles, the only way of
defending one's own religion.  I have read -,in admirable
story of the Duke of Buckingham, who, when James II. sent a
priest to him to persuade him to turn Papist, and was plied by
him with miracles, told the doctor, that if miracles were
proofs of a religion, the Protestant cause was as well
supplied as theirs.  We have lately had a very extraordinary
one near my estate in the country.  A very holy man, as you
might be, doctor, was travelling on foot, and was benighted.
He came to the cottage of a poor dowager, who had nothing in
the house for herself and daughter but a couple of eggs and a
slice of bacon.  However, as she was a pious widow, she made
the good man welcome.  In the morning, in taking leave, the
saint made her over to God for payment, and prayed that
whatever she should do as soon as he was gone she might
continue to do all day.  This was a very unlimited request,
and, unless the saint was a prophet too, might not have been
very pleasant retribution.  The good woman, who minded her
affairs, and was not to be put out of her way, went about her
business.  She had a piece of coarse cloth to make a couple of
shifts for herself and child.  She no sooner began to measure
it but the yard fell a-measuring, and there was no stopping
it.  It was sunset before the good woman had time to take
breath.  She was almost stifled, for she was up to her ears in
ten thousand yards of cloth.  She could have afforded to have
sold Lady Mary Wortley a clean shift' of the usual coarseness
she wears, for a groat halfpenny.

I wish you would tell the Princess this story.  Madame
Riccardi, or the little Countess d'Elbenino, will doat on it.
I don't think it will be out of Pandolfini's way, if you tell
it to the little Albizzi.  You see that I have not forgot the
tone of my Florentine acquaintance.  I know I should have
translated it to them: you remember what admirable work I used
to make of such stories in broken Italian.  I have heard old
Churchill tell Bussy English puns out of jest-books:
particularly a reply about eating hare, which he translated,
"j'ai mon ventre plein de poil." Adieu!

(853) Youngest daughter of George the Second.  She was married
in the following October, and died in 1751, at the age of
twenty-seven.-E.

(854) The residence of the Prince of Wales.  This noble
building was burnt to the ground in 1795, and nothing of its
furniture preserved but the tapestry that represents the Duke
of Marlborough's victories.-E.



343 letter 120
To sir Horace Mann.
Houghton, Sept. 17, 1743.

As much as we laughed at Prince Craon's history of the King
and Lord Stair, you see it was not absolutely without
foundation.  I don't just believe that he threatened his
master with the parliament.  They say he gives for reason of
his Quitting, their not having accepted one plan of operation
that he has offered.  There is a long memorial that he
presented to the King, with which I don't doubt but his
lordship will oblige the public.(856)  He has ordered all his
equipages to be sold by public auction in the camp.  This is
all I can tell you of this event, and this is more than has
been written to the ministry here.  They talk of great
uneasinesses among the English officers, all of which I don't
believe.  The army is put into commission.  Prince Charles has
not passed the Rhine, nor we any thing but our time.  The
papers of to-day tell us of a definitive treaty signed by us
and the Queen of Hungary with the King of Sardinia, which I
will flatter myself will tend to your defence.  I am not in
much less trepidation about Tuscany than Richcourt is, though
I scarce think my fears reasonable; but while you are
concerned, I fear every thing.

My lord does not admire the account of the lanfranc; thanks
you, and will let it alone.  I am going to town in ten days,
not a little tired of the country, and in the utmost
impatience for the winter; which I am sure from all political
prospects, must be entertaining to one who only intends to see
them at the length of the telescope.
I was lately diverted with an article in the Abecodario
Pittorico, in the article of William Dobson: it says, "Nacque
nel quartiere d'Holbrons in Inghilterra."(857)  Did the author
take Holborn for a city, or Inghilterra for the capital of the
island of London?  Adieu!

(856) In this memorial Lord Stair complained that his advice
had been slighted, hinted at Hanoverian partialities, and
asked permission to retire, as he expressed it, to his plough.
His resignation was accepted, with marks of the King's
displeasure at the language in which it was tendered.-E.

(857) Charles the First used to call Dobson the English
Tintoret.  He is said to have been the first painter who
introduced the practice of obliging persons who sat to him to
pay half the price in advance.-E.



344 letter 121
To Sir Horace Mann.
Newmarket, Oct. 3, 1743.

I am writing to you in an inn on the road to London.  What a
paradise should I have thought this when I was in the Italian
inns in a wide barn with four ample windows, which had nothing
more like glass than shutters and iron bars ' no tester to the
bed, and the saddles and portmanteaus heaped on me to keep off
the cold.  What a paradise did I think the inn at Dover when I
came back! and what magnificence Were twopenny prints,
saltcellars, and boxes to hold the knives: but the summum
bonum was small-beer and the newspaper.

"I bless'd my stars, and called it luxury!"

Who was the Neapolitan ambassadress (858) that could not live
at Paris, because there was no maccaroni?  Now am I relapsed
into all the dissatisfied repinement of a true English
grumbling voluptuary.  I could find in my heart to write a
Craftsman against the Government, because I am not quite so
much at my ease as on my own sofa.  I could persuade myself
that it is my Lord Carteret's fault that I am only sitting in
a common arm-chair, when I would be lolling in a
p`ech`e-mortel.  How dismal, how solitary, how scrub does this
town look and yet it has actually a street of houses better
than Parma or Modena.  Nay, the houses of the people of
fashion, who come hither for the races, are palaces to what
houses in London itself were fifteen years ago.  People do
begin to live again now, and I suppose in a term we shall
revert to York Houses, Clarendon Houses, etc.  But from that
grandeur all the nobility had contracted themselves to live in
coops of a dining-room, a dark back-room, with one eye in a
corner, and a closet.  Think what London would be, if the
chief houses were in it, as in the cities in other countries,
and not dispersed like great rarity-plums in a vast pudding of
country.  Well, it is a tolerable place as it is! Were I a
physician, I would prescribe nothing but recipe, CCCLXV
drachm.  Linden.  Would you know why I like London so much?
Why if the world must consist of so many fools as it does, I
choose to take them in the gross, and not made into separate
pills, as they are prepared in the country.  Besides, there is
no being alone but in a metropolis: the worst place in the
world to find solitude is in the country: questions grow
there, and that unpleasant Christian commodity, neighbours.
Oh! they are all good Samaritans, and do so pour balms and
nostrums upon one, if one has but the toothache, or a journey
to take, that they break one's head.  A journey to take-ay!
they talk over the miles to you, and tell you, you will be
late and My Lord Lovel says, John always goes two hours in the
dark in the morning, to avoid being One hour in the dark in
the evening.  I was pressed to set out to-day before seven: I
did before nine; and here am I arrived at a quarter past five,
for the rest of the night.

I am more convinced every day, that there is not only no
knowledge of the world out of a great city, but no decency, no
practicable society-I had almost said, not a virtue.  I will
only instance in modesty, which all old Englishmen are
persuaded cannot exist within the atmosphere of Middlesex.
Lady Mary has a remarkable taste and knowledge of music, and
can sing; I don't say, like your sister, but I am sure she
would be ready to die if obliged to sing before three people,
or before One with whom she is not intimate.  The other day
there came to see her a Norfolk heiress: the young gentlewoman
had not been three hours in the house, and that for the first
time of her life, before she notified her talent for singing,
and invited herself up-stairs, to Lady Mary's harpsichord;
where, with a voice
like thunder, and with as little harmony, she sang to nine or
ten people for an hour. "Was ever nymph like Rossvmonde?"-no,
d'honneur.  We told her, she had a very strong voice.  "Lord,
Sir! my master says it is nothing to what it was."  My dear
child, she brags abominably; if it had been a thousandth
degree louder, you must have heard it at Florence.

I did not write to you last post, being overwhelmed with this
sort of people - I will be more punctual in London.  Patapan
is in my lap: I had him wormed lately, which he took famously:
I made it up with him by tying a collar of rainbow-riband
about his neck, for a token that he is never to be wormed any
more.

I had your long letter of two sheets of Sept. 17th, and wonder
at your perseverance in telling me so much as you always do,
when I, dull creature, find so little for you.  I can only
tell you that the more you write, the happier you make me; and
I assure you, the more details the better: I so often lay
schemes for returning to you, that I am persuaded I shall, and
would keep up my stock of Florentine ideas.

I honour Matthew's punctilious observance of his Holiness's
dignity.  How incomprehensible Englishmen are! I should have
sworn that he would have piqued himself on calling the Pope
the w- of Babylon, and have begun his remonstrance, with "you
old d-d-."  What extremes of absurdities! to flounder from
Pope Joan to his Holiness!  I like your reflection, "that
every body can bully the Pope."  There was a humourist called
Sir James of the Peak, who had been beat by a felony, who
afterwards underwent the same operation from a third hand.
"Zound," said Sir James, "that I did not know this fellow
would take a beating!"  Nay, my dear child, I don't know that
Matthews would!

You know I always thought the Tesi comique, pendant que `ca
devroit, `etre tragique.  I am happy that my sovereign lady
expressed my opinion so well-by the way, is De Sade still with
you?  Is he still in pawn by the proxy of his clothes?  has
the Princess as constant retirements to her bedchamber with
the colique and Amenori?  Oh! I was struck the other day with
a resemblance of mine hostess at Brandon to old Sarah.  You
must know, the ladies of Norfolk universally wear periwigs,
and affirm that it is the fashion at London.  "lord! Mrs.
White, have you been ill, that you have shaved your head?"
Mrs. White, in all the days of my acquaintance with her, had a
professed head of red hair: to-day, she had no hair at all
before, and at a distance above her ears, I descried a smart
brown bob, from beneath which had escaped some long strands of
original scarlet--so like old Sarazin at two in the morning,
when she has been losing at Pharoah, and clawed her wig aside,
and her old trunk is shaded with the venerable white ivy of
her own locks.

i agree with you, that it would be too troublesome to send me
the things now the quarantine exists, except the gun-barrels
for Lord Conway, the length of which I know nothing about,
being, as you conceive, no sportsman.  I must send you, with
the Life of Theodore, a vast pamphlet (859) in defence of' the
new administration, which makes the greatest noise.  It is
written, as supposed, by Dr. Pearse,(860) of St. Martin's,
whom Lord Bath lately made a dean; the matter furnished by
him.  There is a good deal of useful ]Knowledge of the famous
change to be found in it, and much more impudence.  Some parts
are extremely fine; in particular, the answer to the
Hanoverian pamphlets, where he has collected the flower of all
that was said in defence of that measure.(861)  Had you those
pamphlets? I will make up a parcel: tell me what other books
you would have: I will send you nothing else, for if I give
you the least bauble, it puts you to infinite expense, which I
can't forgive, and indeed will never bear again: you would
ruin yourself, and there is nothing I wish so much as the
contrary.

Here is a good Ode, written on the supposition of that new
book being Lord Bath's; I believe by the same hand as those
charming ones which I sent you last year: the author is not
yet known.(862)

The Duke of Argyle is dead-a death of how little moment, and
of how much it would have been a year or two ago.(863)  It is
provoking, if one must die, that one can't even die a propos!

How does your friend Dr. Cocchi?  You never mention him: do
only knaves and fools deserve to be spoken of? Adieu!

(858) The Princess of Campoflorido.

(859) Called " Faction Detected."

(860) Mr. Pearse, afterwards Bishop of Bangor.  He was not the
author, but Lord Perceval, afterwards Earl of Egmont.

(861) Sir John Hawkins says, that Osborne the bookseller, held
out to Dr. Johnson a strong temptation to answer this
pamphlet; which he refused, being convinced that the charge
contained in it was unanswerable.-E.

(862) The Ode by Sir Charles Hanbury Williams, beginning,
"Your sheets I've perused."-D.

(863) "Leaving no male issue, Argyle was succeeded in his
titles and estates by his brother, and of late his bitter
enemy, the Earl of Islay.  With all his faults and follies,
Argyle was still brave, eloquent, and accomplished, a skilful
officer, and a princely nobleman."-lord Mahon, vol. iii. p.
271.



347 letter 122
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, Oct. 12, 1743.

They had sent your letter of Sept. 24th to Houghton the very
night I came to town.  I did not receive it back till
yesterday, and soon after another, with Mr. Chute's inclosed,
for which I will thank him presently.  But, my dear child, I
can, like you, think Of nothing but your bitter father's
letter.--! and that I should have contributed to it! how I
detest myself!(864)  My dearest Sir, you know all I ever said
to him:(865) indeed, I never do see him, and I assure you that
I would worship him as the Indians do the Devil, for fear-he
should hurt you: tempt you I find he will not.  He is so
avaricious, that I believe,
if you asked for a fish, he would think it even extravagance
to give you a stone: in these bad times, stones may come to be
dear, and if he loses his place and his lawsuit, who knows but
he may be reduced to turn paviour? Oh! the brute! and how
shocking, that, for your sake, one can't literally wish to see
him want bread! But how can you feel the least tenderness,
when the wretch talks of his bad health, and of not denying
himself comforts! It is weakness in you: whose health is
worse, yours or his? or when did he ever deny himself a
comfort to please any mortal? My dear child, what is it
possible to do for you? is there any thing in my power? What
would I not do for you? and, indeed, what ought I not, if I
have done you any disservice?  I don't think there is any
danger of your father's losing his place,(866) for whoever
succeeds Mr. Pelham is likely to be a friend
to this house, and would not turn out one so connected with
it.

I should be very glad to show my lord an account of those
statues you mention: they are much wanted in his hall, where,
except the Laocoon, he has nothing but busts.  For Gaburri's
drawings, I am extremely pleased with what you propose to me.
I should be well content with two of each master.  I can't
well fix any price; but would not the rate of a sequin apiece
be sufficient? to be sure he never gave any thing like that:
when one buys the quantity you mention to me, I can't but
think that full enough, one 'with another.  At
least, if I bought so many as two hundred, I would not venture
to go beyond that.

I am not at all easy from what you tell me of the Spaniards. I
have now no hopes but in the winter, and what it may produce.
I fear ours will be most ugly-the disgusts about Hanover swarm
and increase every day.  The King and Duke have left the army,
which is marching to winter-quarters in Flanders, He will not
be here by his birthday, but it will be kept when he comes.
The parliament meets the 22d of November.  All is distraction!
no union in the Court: no certainty about the House of
Commons: Lord Carteret making no friends, the King making
enemies: Mr. Pelham in vain courting Pitt, etc. Pultney
unresolved.  How will it end?  No joy but in the Jacobites.  I
know nothing more, so turn to Mr. Chute.

My dear Sir, how I am obliged to you for your poem! Patapan is
so vain with it, that he will read nothing else; I only
offered him a Martial to compare it with the original, and the
little coxcomb threw it into the fire, and told me, "He had
never heard of a lapdog's reading Latin; that it was very well
for house-dos and pointers that live in the country, and have
several hours upon their hands: for my part," said he,

"I am so nice, who ever saw
A Latin book on my sofa?
You'll find as soon a primer there
Or recipes for pastry ware.
Why do ye think I ever read
But Crebillon or Calpren`ede?
This very thing of Mr. Chute's
Scarce with my taste and fancy suits,
oh! had it but in French been writ,
'Twere the genteelest, sweetest bit!
One hates a vulgar English poet:
I vow t' ye, I should blush to show it
To women de ma connoissance,
Did not that agr`eable stance.
Cher double entendre! furnish means
Of making sweet Patapanins!"(867)

My dear Sir, your translation shall stand foremost in the
Patapaniana: I hope in time to have poems upon him, and
sayings of his own, enough to make a notable book.  En
attendant, I have sent you some pamphlets to amuse your
solitude; for, do you see, tramontane as I am, and as much as
I love Florence, and hate the country, while we make such a
figure in the world, or at least such a noise in it, one must
consider you other Florentines as country gentlemen.  Tell our
dear Miny that when he unfolds the enchanted carpet, which his
brother the wise Galfridus sends him, he will find all the
kingdoms of the earth portrayed in it.  In short, as much
history as was described on the ever-memorable and wonderful
piece of silk which the puissant White Cat(868) inclosed in a
nutshell, and presented to her paramour Prince.  In short, in
this carpet, which (filberts being out of season) I was
reduced to pack up in a walnut, he will find the following
immense library of political lore: Magazines for October,
November, December; with an Appendix for the year 1741; all
the Magazines for 1742, bound in one volume; and nine
Magazines for 17'43.  The Life of King Theodore, a certain
fairy monarch; with the Adventures of this Prince and the fair
Republic of Genoa.  The miscellaneous thoughts of the fairy
Hervey.  'The Question Stated.  Case of the Hanover Troops; and
the Vindication of the Case.  Faction Detected.  Congratulatory
Letter to Lord Bath.  The Mysterious Congress; and @our Old
England Journals.  Tell Mr. Mann, or Mr. Mann tell himself, that
I would send him nothing but this enchanted carpet, which he
can't pretend to return.  I will accept nothing under
enchantment.  Adieu all ! Continue to love the two Patapans.

(864) Sir Horace Mann in a letter to Walpole, dated Sept.
24th, 1743, gives an account of his father's refusal to give
him any money; and then quotes the following passage from
his father's letter-"He tells me he has been baited by you and
your uncle on my account, which was very disagreeable, and
believes he may charge it to me."-D.

(865) See ant`e, p.325. (letter 108)

 (866) Mr. Robert Mann, father of Sir Horace Mann, had a place
in Chelsea College, under the Paymaster of the Forces.

(867) Mr. Chute had sent Mr. Walpole the following imitation
of an epigram of Martial:

"Issa est passere nequior Catulli,
Issa est pUrior osculo columbae."
Martial, Lib. i, Ep. 110.

"Pata is frolicksome and smart,
As Geoffry once was-(Oh my heart!)
He's purer than a turtle's kiss,
And gentler than a little miss;
A jewel for a lady's ear,
And Mr. Walpole's pretty dear.
He laughs and cries with mirth or spleen;
He does not speak, but thinks, 'tis plain.
One knows his little Guai's as well
As if he'd little words to tell.
Coil'd in a heap, a plumy wreathe,
He sleeps, you hardly hear him breathe.
Then he's so nice, who ever saw
A drop that sullied his sofa?
His bended leg!-what's this but sense?-
Points out his little exigence.
He looks and points, and whisks about,
And says, pray, dear Sir, let me out.
Where shall we find a little wife,
To be the comfort of his life,
To frisk and skip, and furnish means
Of making sweet Patapanins?
England, alas! can boast no she,
Fit only for his cicisbee.
Must greedy Fate then have him all?-
No; Wootton to our aid we'll call-
The immortality's the same,
Built on a shadow, or a name.
He shall have one by Wootton's means,
The other Wootton for his pains."

(868) See the story of the White Cat in the fairy tales.



349 Letter 123
To Sir Horace Mann.
London, Nov. 17, 1743.

I would not write on Monday till I could tell you the King was
come.  He arrived at St. James's between five and six on
Tuesday.  We were in great fears of his coming through the
city, after the treason that has been publishing for these two
months; but it is incredible how well his reception was beyond
what it had ever been before: in short, you would have thought
it had not been a week after the victory at Dettingen.  They
almost carried him into -the palace on their shoulders; and at
night the whole town was illuminated and bonfired.  He looks
much better than he has for these five years, and is in great
spirits.  The Duke limps a little.  The King's reception of
the Prince, who was come to St. James's to wait for him, and
who met him on the stairs with his two sisters and the privy
councillors, was not so gracious-pas un mot-though the
Princess was brought to bed the day before, and Prince George
is ill of the small-pox.  It is very Unpopular!  You will
possibly, by next week, hear great things: hitherto, all is
silence, expectation, struggle, and ignorance.  The birthday
is kept on Tuesday, when the parliament was to have met; but
that can't be yet.

Lord Holderness has brought home a Dutch bride:(869) I have
not seen her.  The Duke of Richmond had a letter yesterday
from Lady Albemarle,(870) at Altona.  She says the Prince of
Denmark is not so tall as his bride, but. far from a bad
figure: he is thin, and not ugly, except having too wide a
mouth.  When she returns, as I know her particularly, I will
tell you more; for the present, I think I have very handsomely
despatched the chapter of royalties.  My lord comes to town
the day after to-morrow.

The opera is begun, but is not so well as last year.  The Rosa
Maricini, who is second woman, and whom I suppose you have
heard, is now old.  In the room of Amorevoli, they have got a
dreadful bass, who, the Duke of Montagu says he believes, was
organist at Aschaffenburgh.

DO you remember a tall Mr. Vernon,(871) who travelled with Mr.
Cotton?  He is going to be married to a sister of Lord
Strafford.

I have exhausted my news, and you shall excuse my being short
to-day.  For the future, I shall overflow with preferments,
alterations, and parliaments.

Your brother brought me yesterday two of yours together, of
Oct. 22 and 27, and I find you still overwhelmed with
Richcourt's folly and the Admiral's explanatory ignorance.  It
is unpleasant to have old Pucci (872) added to your
embarrassments.

Chevalier Ossorio (873) was with me the other morning, and we
were talking over the Hanoverians, as every body does.  I
complimented him very sincerely on his master's great bravery
and success: he answered very modestly and sensibly, that he
was glad amidst all the clamours, that there had been no cavil
to be found with the subsidy paid to his King.  Prince
Lobkowitz makes a great figure, and has all my wishes and
blessings for having put Tuscany out of the question.

There is no end of my giving you trouble with packing me up
cases: I shall pay the money to your brother.  Adieu! Embrace
the Chutes, who are heavenly good to you, and must have been
of great use in all your illness and disputes.

(869) Her name was Mademoiselle Doublette, and she is called
in the Peerages "the niece of M. Van Haaren, of the Province
of Holland."-D.

(870) Lady Anne Lennox, sister of the Duke of Richmond, and
wife of William Anne van Keppel, Earl of Albemarle: she had
been lady of the bedchamber to the Queen; and this year
conducted Princess Louisa to Altona, to be married to the
Prince Royal of Denmark.

(871) Henry Vernon, Esq. a nephew of Admiral Vernon, married
to Lady Henrietta Wentworth, daughter of Thomas, first Earl of
Strafford, of the second creation.-D.

(872) Signor Pucci was resident from Tuscany at the Court of
England.

(873) Chevalier Ossorio was several years minister in England
from the King of Sardinia, to whom he afterwards became first
minister.



 351 Letter 124
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, Nov. 30, 1743.

I have had two letters from you since I wrote myself This I
begin against to-morrow, for I should have little time to
write.  The parliament opens, and we are threatened with a
tight Opposition, though it must be vain, if the numbers turns
out as they are calculated; three hundred for the Court, two
hundred and five opponents; that is, in town; for, you know,
the whole amounts to five hundred and fifty-eight.  The
division of the ministry has been more violent than between
parties; though now, they tell you, it is all adjusted.  The
Secretary,(874) since his return, has carried all with a high
hand, and treated the rest as ciphers; but he has been so
beaten in the cabinet council, that in appearance he submits,
though the favour is most evidently with him.  All the old
ministers have flown hither as zealously as in former days;
and of the three lev`ees (875) in this street, the greatest is
in this house, as my Lord Carteret told them the other day; "I
know you all go to Lord Orford - he has more company than any
of us-- do you think I can't go to him too?" He is never
sober; his rants are amazing; so are his parts and spirits.
He has now made up with the Pelhams, though after naming to
two vacancies in the Admiralty without their knowledge; Sir
Charles Hardy and Mr. Philipson.  The other alterations are at
last fixed.  Winnington is to be paymaster; Sandys, cofferer,
on resigning the exchequer to Mr. Pelham; Sir John Rushout,
treasurer of the navy; and Harry Fox, lord of the treasury.
Mr. Compton,(876) and Gybbons remain at that board.  Wat.
Plumber, a known man, said, the other day, "Zounds! Mr.
Pultney took those old dishclouts to wipe out the 'treasury,
and now they are going to lace them and lay them up!" It is a
most just idea: to be sure, Sandys and Rushout, and their
fellows, are dishclouts, if dishclouts there are in the world:
and now to lace them!

The Duke of Marlborough has resigned every thing, to reinstate
himself in the old duchess's will.  She said the other day,
"It is very natural: he listed as soldiers do when they are
drunk, and repented when he was sober." So much for news: now
for your letters.

All joy to Mr. Whithed on the increase of his family! and joy
to you; for now he is established in so comfortable a way, I
trust you will not lose him soon-and la Dame s'appelle?

If my Lady Walpole has a mind once in her life to speak truth,
or to foretell,-the latter of which has as seldom any thing to
do with truth as her ladyship has,-why she may now about the
Tesi's dog, for I shall certainly forget what it would be in
vain to remember.  My dear Sir, how should one convey a dog to
Florence! There are no travelling Princes of Saxe Gotha or
Modena here at present, who would carry a little dog in a
nutshell.  The poor Maltese cats, to the tune of how many!
never arrived here; and how should one little dog ever find
its way to Florence! But tell me, and, if it is possible, I
will send it.  Was it to be a greyhound, or of King Charles's
breed?  It was to have been the latter; but I think you told
me that she rather had a mind to the other sort, which, by the
way, I don't think I could get for her.

Thursday, eight o'clock at night.

I am just come from the House, and dined.  Mr. Coke(877) moved
the address, seconded by Mr. Yorke, the lord chancellor's
son.(878)  The Opposition divided 149 against 278; which gives
a better prospect of carrying on the winter easily.  In the
lords' house there was no division.  Mr. Pitt called Lord
Carteret the execrable author of our measures, and sole
minister.(879)  Mr. Winnington replied, that he did not know
of any sole minister; but if my Lord Carteret was so, the
gentlemen of the other side had contributed more to make him
so than he had.

I am much pleased with the prospect you show me of the
Correggio.  My lord is so satisfied with the Dominichin, that
he will go as far as a thousand pounds for the Correggio.  Do
you really think we shall get it, and for that price?

You talk of the new couple, and of giving the sposa a
mantilla: What new couple! you don't say.  I suppose, some
Suares, by the raffle.  Adieu!

(874) Lord Carteret.

(875) Lord Carteret's, Mr. Pelham's, and Lord Orford's.

(876) The Hon.  George Compton, second son of George, fourth
Earl of Northampton.  He succeeded his elder brother James,
the fifth earl, in the family titles and estates in 1754, and
died in 1758.-D.

(877) The only son of Lord Lovel.-D.

(878) Philip Yorke, eldest son of Lord Hardwicke; and
afterwards the second earl of that title.-D.

(879) In Mr. Yorke's MS. parliamentary journal, the words are"an
execrable, a sole minister, who had renounced the British
nation, and seemed to have drunk of the potion described in
poetic fictions."-E.



352 Letter 125
To Sir Horace Mann.
Dec. 15, 1743.

I write in a great fright, lest this letter should come too
late.  My lord has been told by a Dr. Bragge, a virtuoso,
that, some ye(irs ago, the monks asked ten thousand pounds for
our Correggio,(880) and that there were two copies then made
of it: that afterwards, he is persuaded, the King of Portugal
bought the original; he does not know at what price.  Now, I
think it very possible that this doctor, hearing the picture
was to be come at, may have invented this Portuguese history;
but as there is a possibility, too, that it may be true, you
must take all imaginable precautions to be sure it is the very
original-a copy would do neither you nor me great honour.

We have entered upon the Hanoverian campaign.  Last Wednesday,
Waller moved in our House an address to the King, to continue
them no longer in our pay than to Christmas-day, the term for
which they were granted.  The debate lasted till half an hour
after eight at night.  Two young officers (881) told some very
trifling stories against the Hanoverians, which did not at all
add any weight to the arguments of the Opposition; but we
divided 231 to 181.  On Friday,' Lord Sandwich and Lord
Halifax, in good speeches, brought the same motion into the
Lords.  I was there, and heard Lord Chesterfield make the
finest oration I ever did hear.(882)  My father did not speak,
nor Lord Bath.  They threw out the motion by 71 to 36.  These
motions will determine the bringing on the demand for the
Hanoverians for another year in form; which was a doubtful
point, the old part of the ministry being against it, though
very contrary to my lord's advice.

Lord Gower, finding no more Tories were to be admitted,
resigned on Thursday; and Lord Cobham in the afternoon.  The
privy-seal was the next day given to Lord Cholmondeley.  Lord
Gower's resignation is one of the few points in which I am
content the prophecy in the old Jacobite ballad should be
fulfilled-"The King shall have his own again."

The changes are begun, but will not be completed till the
recess, as the preferments will occasion more re-elections
than they can spare just now in the House of Commons.  Sandys
has resigned the exchequer to Mr. Pelham; Sir John Rushout is
to be treasurer of the navy; Winnington, paymaster; Harry Fox,
lord of the treasury: Lord Edgcumbe, I believe, lord of the
treasury,(883) and Sandys, cofferer and a peer.  I am so
scandalized at this, that I will fill up my letter (having
told you all the news) with the first fruits of my
indignation.

VERSES ADDRESSED TO THE HOUSE OF LORDS
ON ITS RECEIVING A NEW PEER,

THou senseless Hall, whose injudicious space,
Like Death, confounds a various mismatched race,
Where kings and clowns, th' ambitious and the mean,
Compose th' inactive soporific scene,

Unfold thy doors!-and a promotion see
That must amaze even prostituted thee!
Shall not thy sons, incurious though they are,
Raise their dull lids, and meditate a stare?
Thy sons, who sleep in monumental state,
To show the spot where their great fathers sate.
Ambition first, and specious warlike worth,
Call'd our old peers and brave patricians forth;
And subject provinces produced to fame
Their lords with scarce a less than regal name.
Then blinded monarchs, flattery's fondled race,
Their favourite minions stamp'd with titled grace,
And bade the tools of power succeed to Virtue's place,
Hence Spensers, Gavestons, by crimes grown great,
Vaulted into degraded Honour's seat:
Hence dainty Villiers sits in high debate,
Where manly Beauchamps, Talbots, Cecils sate
Hence Wentworth,(884) perjured patriot, burst each tie,
Profaned each oath, and gave his life the lie:
Renounced whate'er he sacred held and dear,
Renounced his country's cause, and sank into a Peer.
Some have bought ermine, venal Honour's veil,
When set by bankrupt Majesty to sale
Or drew Nobility's coarse ductile thread
>From some distinguished harlot's titled bed.
Not thus ennobled Samuel!-no worth
from his mud the sluggish reptile forth;
No parts to flatter, and no grace to please,
With scarce an insect's impotence to tease,
He struts a Peer-though proved too dull to stay,
Whence (885) even poor Gybbons is not brush'd away.

Adieu! I am just going to Leicester House, where the Princess
sees company to-day and to-morrow, from seven to nine, on her
lying-in.  I mention this per amor del Signor Marchese Cosimo
Riccardi.(886)

(880) One of the most celebrated pictures of Correggio, with
the Madonna and Child, saints, and angels, in a convent at
Parma.

(881) Captain Ross and Lord Charles Hay.-E.

(882) "Lord Chesterfield's performance," says Mr. Yorke, "was
much cried up; but few of his admirers could distinguish the
faults of his eloquence from its beauties." MS.  Part.
Journal.-E.

(
883 This did not happen.

(884) Earl of Strafford; but it alludes to Lord Bath.

(885) The Treasury.

(886) A gossiping old Florentine nobleman, whose whole
employment was to inform himself of the state of marriages,
pregnancies, lyings-in, and such like histories.



354 Letter 126
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, Dec. 26, 1743.

I shall complain of        inflammations in my eyes till you
think it is                an excuse for not writing; but your
brother is@My Witness that I have been shut up in a dark room
for this week.  I got frequent colds, which fall upon my eyes;
and then I have bottles of sovereign eye- waters from all my
acquaintance; but as they are Only accidental colds, I never
use any thing but sage, which braces my eye-fibres again in a
few days.  I have had two letters since my last to you; One
Complaining of my silence, and the other acknowledging one
from me after a week's intermission: indeed, I never have been
so long without writing to you - I do sometimes miss two weeks
on any great dearth of news, which is all I have to fill a
letter; for living as I do among people, whom, from your long
absence, you cannot know, should  talk Hebrew to mention them
to you.  Those, that from eminent birth, folly, or parts, are
to be found in the chronicles of the times, I tell you of,
whenever necessity or the King puts them into new lights.  The
latter, for I cannot think the former had any hand in it, has
made
                    Sandys, as I told you, a lord and
cofferer! Lord Middlesex is one of the new treasury, not
ambassador as you heard.  So the Opera-house and White's have
contributed a commissioner and a secretary to the
                    treasury,(887) as their quota to the
government.  It is a period to make a figure in history.

There is a recess of both Houses for a fortnight; and we are
to meet again, with all the quotations and flowers that the
young orators can collect-,ind forcibly apply to the
Hanoverians; with all the malice which the disappointed Old
have hoarded against Carteret, and with all the impudence his
defenders can sell him - and when all that is
                    vented-what then?-why then, things will
just be where they were.

General Wade (888) is made field-marshal, and is to have
command of the army, as it is      supposed, on the King's not
going abroad; but that is not declared .   The French
preparations go on with much more vigour than ours; they not
having a House of Commons to combat all the winter; a campaign
that necessarily engages all the attention of ministers, who
have no great variety of apartments in their understandings.

I have paid your brother the bill I received from you, and
give you a thousand thanks for all the trouble you have had;
most particularly from the plague of hams,(889) from which you
have saved me.  Heavens!  how blank"I should have looked at
unpacking a great case of bacon and wine!  My dear child, be
my friend, and preserve me from heroic presents.  I cannot
possibly at this distance begin a new courtship of regalia;
for I suppose all those hams were to be converted into watches
and toys.  Now it would suit Sir Paul Methuen very well, who
is a knight-errant at seventy-three, to carry on an amour
between a Mrs. Chenevix's(890) shop and a noble collar in
Florence; but alas! I am neither old enough nor young enough
to be gallant, and should ill become the writing of heroic
epistles to a fair mistress in Italy-no, no: "ne sono uscito
con onore, mi pare, e non
voglio riprendere quel impegno pi`u"  You see how rustic I am
grown again!

I knew your new brother-in-law(891) at school, but have not
seen him since.  But your sister was in love, and must
consequently be happy to have him.  Yet I own, I cannot much
felicitate any body that marries for love.  It is bad enough
to marry; but to marry where one loves, ten times worse.
it is so charming at first, that the decay of inclination
renders it infinitely more disagreeable afterwards.  Your
sister has a thousand merits; but they don't count: but then
she has good sense enough to  make her happy, if her merit cannot
make him so.

Adieu! I rejoice for your sake that Madame Royale' is
recovered, as I saw in the papers.

(887) John JefFries.

(888)General George Wade, afterwards commander of the forces
in Scotland.  He died in 1748.  A fine monument, by Roubillac,
was erected to his memory in Westminster
                    Abbey.-E.

(889) Madame Grifoni was going to send Mr. W. a Present of
hams and Florence wine.

(890) The proprietress of a celebrated toy-shop.-D.

(891) Mr. Foote.

(892) The Duchess of Lorrain,   mother of the Great Duke: her
 death would have occasioned a long mourning  at Florence.
[Elizabeth of Orleans, only daughter of Philip, Duke of
Orleans
(Monsieur), by his second wife, the Princess Palatine.] -D.


To Sir Horace Mann.

Dear Sir,
I have been much desired by a very particular friend, to
recommend to you Sir William Maynard,(893) who is going to
Florence.  You will oblige me extremely by any civilities you
show him while he stays there; in particular, by introducing
him to the Prince and Princess de Craon, Madame Suares, and
the rest of my acquaintance there, who, I dare say, will
continue their goodness to me, by receiving him with the same
politeness that they received me.  I am, etc.

(893) Sir William Maynard, the fourth baronet of the family,
and a younger branch of the Lords Maynard.  His son, Sir
Charles Maynard, became Viscount Maynard in 1775, upon the
death of his cousin Charles, the first viscount, who had been
so created, with special remainder to him.-D.



356 Letter 127
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, Jan. 24, 1744.

Don't think me guilty of forgetting you a moment, though I
have missed two or three posts.  If you knew the incessant
hurry and fatigue in which I live, and how few 'moments I have
to myself, you would not suspect Me.  You know, I am naturally
indolent, and without application to any kind of business; yet
it is- impossible, in this country, to live in the world, and
be in parliament, and not find oneself every day more hooked
into politics and company, especially inhabiting a house that
is again become the centre of affairs.  My lord becomes the
last resource, to which they are all forced to apply.  One
part of the ministry, you may be sure, do; and for the other,
they affect to give themselves the honour of it too.

Last Thursday I would certainly have written to give you a
full answer to your letter of grief (894) but I was shut up in
the House till past ten at night; and the night before till
twelve.  But I must speak to you in private first.  I don't in
the least doubt but my Lady Walpole and Richcourt would
willingly be as mischievous as they are malicious, If they
could: but, my dear child, it is impossible.  Don't fear from
Carteret's silence to you; he never writes: if that were a
symptom of disgrace, the Duke of' Newcastle would have been
out long ere this: and when the regency were not thought
worthy of his notice, you could not expect it.  As to your
being attached to Lord Orford, that is your safety.  Carteret
told him the other day, "My Lord, I appeal to the Duke of
Newcastle, if I did not tell the King, that it was you who had
carried the Hanover troops." That, too, disproves the
accusation of Sir Robert's being no friend to the Queen of
Hungary.  That is now too stale and old.  However, I will
speak to my lord and Mr. Pelham-would I had no more cause to
tremble for you, than from little cabals! But, my dear child,
when we hear every day of the 'Toulon fleet sailing, can I be
easy for you? or can I not foresee where that must break,
unless Matthews and the wonderful fortune of England can
interpose effectually? We are not without our own fears; the
Brest fleet of twenty-two sail is out at sea; they talk, for
Barbadoes.  I believe we wish it may be thither destined?
Judge what I think; I cannot, nor may write: but I am in the
utmost anxiety for your situation.

The whole world, nay the Prince himself allows, that if Lord
Orford had not come to town, the Hanover troops had been
lost.(895)  They were in effect given up by all but Carteret.
We carried our own army in Flanders by a majority of 112.(896)
Last Wednesday was the great day of expectation: we sat in the
committee on the Hanover troops till twelve at night: the
numbers were 271 to 226.  The next day on the report we sat
again till past ten, the opposition having moved to adjourn
till Monday, on which we divided, 265 to 177.  Then the Tories
all went away in a body, and the troops were voted.

We have still tough work to do: there are the estimates on The
extraordinaries of the campaign, and the treaty of Worms (897)
to come;--I know who (898) thinks this last more difficult to
fight than the Hanover troops.  It is likely to turn out as
laborious a session as ever was.  All the comfort is, all the
abuse don't lie at your door nor mine; Lord Carteret has the
full perquisites of the ministry.  The other day, after Pitt
had called him "the Hanover troop-minister, a flagitious
taskmaster," and said, "that the sixteen thousand Hanoverians
were all the party he had, and were his placemen;" in short,
after he had exhausted invectives, he added, "But I have done:
if he were present, I would say ten times more."(899)  Murray
shines as bright as ever he did at the bar; which he seems to
decline, to push his fortune in the House of Commons under Mr.
Pelham.

This is the present state of our politics, which is our
present state; for nothing else is thought of.  We. fear the
King will again go abroad.

Lord Hartington has desired me to write to you for some
melon-seeds, which you will be so good to get the best, and
send to me for him.

I can't conclude without mentioning again the Toulon squadron:
we vapour and say, by this time Matthews has beaten them,
while I see them in the port of Leghorn!

My dear Mr. Chute, I trust to your friendship to comfort our
poor Miny: for my part, I am all apprehension! My dearest
child, if it turns out so, trust to my friendship for working
every engine to restore you to as good a situation as you will
lose, If my fears prove prophetic! The first peace would
reinstate you in your favourite Florence, whoever were
sovereign of it.  I wish you may be able to smile at the
vanity of my fears, as I did at yours about Richcourt.  Adieu!
adieu!

(894) Sir Horace Mann had written in great uneasiness, in
consequence of his having heard that Count Richcourt, the
Great Duke's minister; was using all his influence with the
English government, in conjunction with Lady Walpole, to have
Sir Horace removed from his situation at Florence.-D.

(895) "Lord Orford's personal credit with his friends was the
main reason that the question was so well disposed of: he
never laboured any point during his own administration with
more zeal, and at a dinner at Hanbury Williams's had a meeting
with such of the old court party as were thought most averse
to concurring in this measure; where he took great pains to
convince them of the necessity there was for repeating it."
Mr. P. Yorke's MS. Journal.-E.

(896) It appears from Mr. Philip Yorke's Parliamentary
Journal, that the letter-writer took a part in the
debate-"Young Mr. Walpole's speech," he says, "met with
deserved applause from every body: it was judicious and
elegant: he applied the verse which Lucan puts in Curia's
mouth to Caesar, to the King:-

"Livor edax tibi cuncta negat, Gallasque subactos,
Vix impune feres."-E.

(897) Between the King of England, the Queen of Hungary, and
the King of Sardinia, to whom were afterwards added Holland
and Saxony.  It is sometimes called "the triple alliance."-D.

(898) Lord Orford.

(899) "Pitt as usual," says Mr. Yorke, in his MS.
Parliamentary Journal, ,fell foul of Lord Carteret, called him
a Hanover troop-minister; that they were his party, his
placemen; that he had conquered the cabinet by their means,
and after being very lavish of his abuse, wished he was in the
House, that he might give him more of it." Tu the uncommon
accuracy of Mr. Walpole's reports of the proceedings in
Parliament, the above-quoted Journal bears strong evidence.-E.



358 Letter 128
To Sir Horace Mann.
Feb. 9, 1744.

I have scarce time to write, or to know what I write.  I live
in the  House of Commons.  We sat on Tuesday till ten at
night, on a Welsh election; and shall probably stay as long
to-day on the same.

I have received all your letters by the couriers and the post:
I am persuaded the Duke of Newcastle is much pleased with your
despatch; but I dare not enquire, for fear he should dislike
your having written the same to me.

I believe we should have heard more of the Brest squadron, if
their appearance off the Land's End on Friday was se'nnight,
steering towards Ireland, had occasioned greater
consternation.  It is incredible how little impression it
made: the stocks hardly fell: though it was then generally
believed that the Pretender's son was on board.  We expected
some invasion; but as they were probably disappointed on
finding no rising in their favour, it is now believed that
they are gone to the Mediterranean.  They narrowly missed
taking the Jamaica fleet, which was gone out convoyed by two
men-of-war.  The French pursued them, outsailed them, and
missed them by their own inexpertness.  Sir John Norris is at
Portsmouth, ready to sail with nineteen
                                men-of-war, and is to be
joined by two more from Plymouth.  We
                                hope to hear that Matthews has
beat the Toulon squadron before they can be joined by the
Brest.  This is the state of our situation.  "le have stopped
the embarkation of the six thousand men for Flanders; and I
hope the King's journey thither, The Opposition fight every
                                measure of supply, but very
unsuccessfully.  When this Welsh election is over, they will
probably go out of town, and leave the rest of the session at
ease.

I think you have nothing to apprehend from the new mine that
is preparing against you.  My lord is convinced it is an idle
attempt and it will always be in his power to prevent any such
thing from taking effect.  I am very unhappy for Mr. Chute's
gout, or for any thing that disturbs the peace of people I
love so much, and that I have such vast reason to love.  You
know my fears for you: pray Heaven they end well!

It is universally believed that the Pretender's son, who is at
Paris, will make the campaign in one of their armies.  I
suppose this will soon produce a declaration of war; and then
France, perhaps, will not find her account in having brought
him as near to England as ever he is like to be.  Adieu! My
Lord is hurrying me down to the House.  I must go!



359 Letter 129
To Sir Horace Mann.
House of Commons, Feb. 16, 1744.

We are come nearer to a crisis than indeed I expected! After
the various reports about the Brest squadron, it has proved
that they are sixteen ships of the line off Torbay; in all
probability to draw our fleet from Dunkirk, where they have
two men-of-war and sixteen large Indiamen to transport eight
thousand foot and two thousand horse, which are there in the
town.  There has been some difficulty to persuade people of
the imminence of our danger - but yesterday the King sent a
message to both Houses to acquaint us that he has certain
information of the young Pretender being in France, and of the
designed invasion from thence, in concert with the disaffected
here.(900)  Immediately the Duke of Marlborough, who most
handsomely and seasonably was come to town on purpose, moved
for an Address to assure the King of standing by him with
lives and fortunes.  Lord Hartington, seconded by Sir Charles
Windham,(901) the convert son of Sir William, moved the same
in our House.  To our amazement, and little sure to their own
honour, Waller and Doddington, supported in the most indecent
manner by Pitt, moved to add, that we would immediately
inquire into the state of the navy, the causes of our danger
by negligence, and the sailing of the Brest fleet.  They
insisted on this amendment, and debated it till seven at
night, not one (professed) Jacobite speaking.  The division
was 287 against 123.  In the Lords, Chesterfield moved the
same amendment, seconded by old dull Westmoreland; but they
did not divide.

All the troops have been sent for in the greatest haste to
London but we shall not have above eight thousand men together
at most.  An express is gone to Holland, and General Wentworth
followed it last night, to demand six thousand men, who will
probably be here by the end of next week.  Lord Stair (902)
has offered the King his service, and is to-day named
commander-in-chief.  This is very generous, and will be of
great use.  He is extremely beloved in the -army, and most
firm to this family.

I cannot say our situation is the most agreeable; we know not
whether Norris is gone after the Brest fleet or not.  We have
three ships in the Downs, but they cannot prevent a landing,
which will probably be in Essex or Suffolk.  Don't be
surprised if you hear that this crown is fought for on land.
As yet there is no rising; but we must expect it on the first
descent.

Don't be uneasy for me, when the whole is at stake.  I don't
feel as if my friends would have any reason to be concerned
for me: my warmth will carry me as far as any man; and I think
I can bear as I should the worst that can happen; though the
delays of the French, I don't know from what cause, have not
made that likely to happen.

The King keeps his bed with the rheumatism.  He is not less
obliged to Lord Orford for the defence of his crown, now he is
out of place, than when he was in the administration.  His
zeal, his courage, his attention, are indefatigable and
inconceivable.  He regards his own life no more than when it
was most his duty to expose it, and fears for every thing but
that.

I flatter myself that next post I shall write you a more
comfortable letter.  I would not have written this, if it were
a time to admit deceit.  Hope the best, and fear as little as
you would do if you were here in the danger.  My best love to
the Chutes; tell them -I never knew how little I was a
Jacobite till it was almost my interest to be one.  Adieu!

(900) "February 13.  Talking upon this subject with Horace
Walpole, he told me confidentially, that Admiral Matthews
intercepted, last summer, a felucca in her passage from Toulon
to Genoa, on board of which were found several papers of great
consequence relating to a French invasion in concert with the
Jacobites; one of them particularly was in the style of an
invitation from several of the nobility and gentry of England
to the Pretender. These papers, he thought had not been
sufficiently looked into and were not laid before the cabinet
council until the night before the message was sent to both
Houses."  Mr. P. York(,@'s Parliamentary Journal.-E.

(901) Afterwards Earl of Egmont.

(902) The Duke of Marlborough and Lord Stair had quitted the army
in disgust, after last campaign, on the King's showing such
unmeasurible preference to the Hanoverians.



361 Letter 130
To Sir Horace Mann.
Thursday, Feb. 23, 1744.

I write to you, in the greatest hurry, at eight o'clock at
night, whilst they are all at dinner round me.  I am this
moment come from the House, where we have carried a great
Welsh election against Sir Watkyn Williams by 26. I fear you
have not had my last, for the packet-boat has been stopped on
the French stopping our messenger at Calais.  There is no
doubt of the invasion: the young Pretender is at Calais, and
the Count de Saxe is to command the embarkation.  Hitherto the
spirit of the nation is with us.  Sir John Norris was to sail
yesterday to Dunkirk, to try to burn their transports; we are
in the utmost expectation of the news.  The Brest squadron was
yesterday on the coast of Sussex.  We have got two thousand
men from Ireland, and have sent for two more.  The Dutch are
coming: Lord Stair is general.  Nobody is yet taken up-God
knows why not! We have repeated news of Matthews having beaten
and sunk eight of the Toulon ships; but the French have so
stopped all communication that we don't yet know it certainly;
I hope you do.  Three hundred arms have been seized in a
French merchant's house at Plymouth.  Attempts have been made
to raise the clans in Scotland, but unsuccessfully.

My dear child, I write short, but it is much: and I could not
say more in ten thousand words.  All is at stake we have great
hopes, but they are but hopes!  I have no more time: I wait
with patience for the event, though to me it must and shall be
decisive.



361 Letter 131
To Sir Horace Mann.
March 1st, 1744.

I wish I could put you out of the pain my last letters must
have given you.  I don't know whether your situation, to be at
such a distance on so great a crisis, is not more disagreeable
than ours, who are expecting every moment to hear the French
are landed.  We had great ill-luck last week: Sir John Norris,
with four-and-twenty sail, came within a league of the Brest
squadron, which had but fourteen.  The coasts were covered
with people to see the engagement; but at seven in the evening
the wind changed, and they escaped.  There have been terrible
winds these four or five days . our fleet has not suffered
materially, but theirs less.  Ours lies in the Downs; five of
theirs at Torbay-the rest at La Hague.  We hope to hear that
these storms, which blew directly on Dunkirk, have done great
damage to their transports.  By the fortune of the winds,
which have detained them in port, we have had time to make
preparations; if they had been ready three weeks ago. when the
Brest squadron sailed, it had all been decided.  We expect the
Dutch in four or five days.  Ten battalions, which make seven
thousand men, are sent for from our army in Flanders, and four
thousand from Ireland, two of which are arrived.  If they
still attempt the invasion, it must be a bloody war!

The spirit of the nation has appeared extraordinarily in our
favour.  I wish I could say as much for that of' the ministry.
Addresses are come from all parts, but you know how little
they are to be depended on-King James had them.  The merchants
of London are most zealous: the French name will do more harm
to their cause than the Pretender's service.  One remarkable
circumstance happened to Colonel Cholmondeley's regiment on
their march to London: the public-houses on all the road would
not let them pay any thing, but treated them, and said, "You
are going to defend us against the French." There are no signs
of any rising.  Lord Barrymore,(903) the Pretender's general,
and Colonel Cecil, his secretary of state, are at last taken
up; the latter, who having removed his papers, had sent for
them back, thinking the danger over, is committed to the
Tower, on discoveries from them; but, alas! these discoveries
go on but lamely.(904)  One may perceive who is not minister,
rather than who is. The Opposition tried to put off the
suspension of the Habeas Corpus -feebly.  Vernon (905) and the
Grennvilles are the warmest: Pitt and Lyttelton went away
without voting.(906)  My father has exerted himself most
amazingly - the other day, on the King's laying some
information before the House, when the ministry had determined
to make no address on it, he rose up in the greatest
agitation, and made a long and fine speech On the present
situation.(907)  The Prince was so pleased with it, that he
has given him leave to go to his court, which he never would
before.  He went yesterday, and was most graciously received.

Lord Stair is at last appointed general.  General Oglethorpe
(908) is to have a commission for raising a regiment of
Hussars, to defend the coasts.  The Swiss servants in London
have offered to form themselves into a regiment; six hundred
are already clothed and armed, but no colonel or officers
appointed.  We flatter ourselves, that the divisions in the
French ministry will repair what the divisions in our own
undo.

The answer from the court of France to Mr. Thomson on the
subject of the boy (909) is most arrogant: "that when we have
given them satisfaction for the many complaints which they
have made on our infraction of treaties, then they will think
of giving us des `eclaircissements."

We have no authentic news yet from Matthews: the most credited
is a letter from Marseilles to a Jew, which says it was the
most bloody battle ever fought; that it lasted three days;
that the two first we had the worst, and the third, by a lucky
gale, totally defeated them.  Sir Charles Wager always said,
"that if a sea-fight lasted three days, he was sure the
English suffered the most for the two first, for no other
nation would stand beating for two days together."

Adieu! my dear child.  I have told you every circumstance I
know: I hope you receive my letters; I hope their accounts
will grow more favourable.  I never found my spirits so high,
for they never were so provoked.  hope the best, and believe
that, as long as I am, I shall always be yours sincerely.


P. S. My dear Chutes, I hope you will still return to your own
England.

(903) James Barry, fourth Earl of Barrymore.  He died in 1747.
See ant`e, p. 269. Letter 74.

(904) "Some treasonable papers of consequence were found in
Cecil's pockets, which gave occasion to the apprehending of
Lord Barrymore.  They were both concerned in the affair of
transmitting the Pretender's letter to the late Duke of
Argyle; which it was now lamented had not then undergone a
stricter examination.  I observed the Tories much struck with
the news of this being secured." Mr. P. Yorke's Parl.
Journal.-E.

(905) Admiral Vernon.

(906) "Lord Barrington's motion for deferring the suspension
was thrown out by 181 against 83.  Pitt and Lyttelton walked
down the House whilst Lord Barrington was speaking, and went
away; so did Mr. Crowne, though a Tory; but most of that party
voted with the Ayes.  Lord Chesterfield told the chancellor
there was no opposition to this bill intended amongst the
Lords; not even a disposition to it in any body; and greatly
approved the limiting it to so short a time." Mr. P. Yorke's
Parl. journal.-E.

(907) "Lord Orford, though he had never spoken in the House of
Lords, having remarked to his brother Horatio that he had left
his tongue in the House of Commons, yet on this occasion his
eloquent voice was once more raised, beseeching their
lordships to forget their cavils and divisions, and unite in
affection round the throne.  It was solely owing to him, that
the torrent of public opposition was braved and overcome."
Lord Mahon, Hist. vol. iii. p. 273.-E.

(908) General James Oglethorpe, born in 1698.  His activity in
settling the colony of Georgia obtained for him the friendship
and panegyric of Pope-

"One, driven by strong benevolence of soul,
Shall fly, like Oglethorpe, from pole to pole."

He was one of the earliest patrons of Johnson's "London," on
its first appearance, and the Doctor, throughout life,
acknowledged the kind and effectual support given to that
poem.  The General sat in five parliaments, and died in 1785,
at the age of eighty-seven.  For a striking pen-and-ink
whole.length sketch, taken a few months before that event,
while the General was attending the sale of Dr. Johnson's
library at Christie's auction-room, see "Johnsoniana," 8vo.
edit. p. 378.-E.

(909) Charles Edward, the young Pretender.  His person, at
this time, is thus described by Lord Mahon: "The Prince was
tall and well-formed; his limbs athletic and active.  He
excelled in all manly exercises, and was inured to every kind
of toil, especially long marches on foot, having applied
himself to field-sports in Italy, and become an expert walker.
His face was strikingly handsome, of a perfect oval, and a
fair complexion; his eyes light blue; his features high and
noble.  Contrary to the custom of the time, which prescribed
perukes, his own fair hair usually in long ringlets on his
neck.  This goodly person was enhanced by his graceful
manners; frequently condescending to the most familiar
kindness, yet always shielded by a regal dignity: he had a
peculiar talent to please and to persuade, and never failed to
adapt his conversation to the taste or to the station of those
whom he addressed." Hist. vol. iii. p. 280.-E.



363 Letter 132
To Sir Horace Mann.
March 5th, 1744, eight o'clock at night.

I have but time to write you a minute-line, but it will be a
comfortable one.  There is just come advice, that the great
storm on the 25th of last month, the very day the embarkation
was to have sailed from Dunkirk, destroyed twelve of their
transports, and obliged the whole number of troops, which were
fifteen thousand, to debark.  You may look upon the invasion
is at an end, at least for the present; though, as every thing
is coming to a crisis, one shall not be surprised to hear of
the attempt renewed.  We know nothing yet certain from
Matthews; his victory grows a great doubt.

As this must go away this instant, I cannot write more-but
what could be more?  Adieu!  I wish you all joy.



364 Letter 133
To Sir Horace Mann.
March 15th, 1744

I have nothing new to tell you: that great storm certainly
saved us from the invasion-then.(910)  Whether it has put an
end to the design is uncertain.  They say the embargo at
Dunkirk and Calais is taken off, but not a vessel of ours is
come in from thence.  They have, indeed, opened again the
communication with Ypres and Nieuport, etc. but we don't yet
hear whether they have renewed their embarkation.  However, we
take it for granted it is all over-from which, I suppose it
will not be over.  We expect the Dutch troops every hour.
That reinforcement, and four thousand men from Ireland, will
be all the advantage we shall have made of gaining time.

At last we have got some light into our Mediterranean affair,
for there is no calling it a victory.  Villettes has sent a
courier, by which it seems we sunk one great Spanish ship; the
rest escaped, and the French fled shamefully; that was, I
suppose, designedly, and artfully.  We can't account for
Lestock's not coming up with his seventeen ships, and we have
no mind to like it, which will not amaze you.  We flatter
ourselves that, as this was only the first day, we shall get
some more creditable history of some succeeding day.

The French are going to besiege Mons: I wish all the war may
take that turn; I don't desire to see England the theatre of
it. We talk no more of its becoming so, nor of the plot, than
of the gunpowder-treason.  Party is very silent; I believe,
because the Jacobites have better hopes than from
parliamentary divisions,-those in the ministry run very high,
and, I think, near some crisis.

I have enclosed a proposal from my bookseller to the
undertaker of the Museum Florentinum, or the concerners of it,
as the paper called them; but it was expressed in such
wonderfully-battered English, that it was impossible for
Dodsley or me to be sure of the meaning of it. He is a
fashionable author, and though that is no sign of perspicuity,
I hope, more intelligible.  Adieu!

(910) "The pious motto," says Mr. P. Yorke, "upon the medal
struck by Queen Elizabeth after the defeat of the Armada, may,
with as much propriety, be applied to this event-"Flavit
ventO, et dissipati sunt;' for, as Bishop Burnet somewhere
observes, 'our preservation at this juncture was one of those
providential events, for which we have much to answer."' MS.
Parl.  Journal.-E.



365 Letter 134
To Sir Horace Mann.
London, March 22, 1744.

               I am .sorry this letter must date the era of a
new correspondence, the topic of which must be blood!
Yesterday, came advice from Mr. Thompson,(911) that Monsieur
Amelot had sent for him and given him notice to be gone, for a
declaration of war with England was to be published in two
days.  Politically, I don't think it so bad; for the very name
of war, though in effect, on foot before,, must make
our governors take more precautions; and the French declaring
it will range the people more on our side than on the
Jacobite: besides, the latter will have their communication
with France cut off.  But, my dear child, what lives, what
misfortunes, must and may follow all this! As a man, I feel my
humanity more touched than my spirit-I feel myself more an
universal man than an Englishman! We have
already lost seven millions of money and thirty thousand men
in the Spanish war-and all the fruit of all this blood and
treasure is the glory of having Admiral Vernon's head on
alehouse signs! for my part, I would not purchase another Duke
of Marlborough at the expense of one life.  How I should be
shocked, were I a hero, when I looked on my own laurelled head
on a medal, the reverse of which would be widows and orphans.
How many such will our patriots have made!

The embarkation at Dunkirk does not seem to go on, though, to
be sure, not laid aside.  We received yesterday the
particulars of the Mediterranean engagement from Matthews.  We
conclude the French squadron retired designedly, to come up to
Brest, where we every day expect to hear of them.  If Matthews
does not follow them, adieu our triumphs in the Channel-and
then! Sir John Norris has desired leave to come back, as
little satisfied with the world as the world is with him.  He
is certainly very unfortunate;(912) but I can't say I think he
has tried to correct his fortune.  If England is ever more to
be England, this sure is the crisis to exert all her vigour.
We have all the disadvantage of Queen Elizabeth's prospect,
without one of her ministers.  Four thousand Dutch are landed,
and we hope to get eight or twelve ships from them.  Can we
now say, Quatuor maria vindico?"(913)

I will not talk any more politically, but turn to hymeneals,
with as much indifference as if I were a first minister.  Who
do you think is going to marry Lady Sophia Fermor?(914)-only
Lord Carteret!-this very week!-a drawing-room conquest.  Do
but imagine how many passions will be gratified in that
family! her own ambition, vanity, and resentment-love she
never had any; the politics, management, and pedantry of the
mother, who will think to govern her son-in-law out of
Froissart.(915)  Figure the instructions she will give her
daughter!  Lincoln is quite indifferent, and laughs.  My Lord
Chesterfield says, "It is only another of Carteret's vigorous
measures." I am really glad of it; for her beauty and
cleverness did deserve a better fate, than she was on the
point of having determined for her for ever,.  How graceful,
how charming, and how haughtily condescending she will be!
how, if Lincoln should ever hint past history, she will

"Stare upon the strange man's face,
As one she ne'er had known!"(916)

I wonder I forgot to tell you that Doddington had owned a
match of seventeen years' standing with Mrs. Behan, to whom
the one you mention is sister.

I have this moment received yours of March 10th, and thank you
much for the silver medal, which has already taken its place
in my museum.

I feel almost out of pain for your situation, as by the motion
of the fleets this way, I should think the expedition to Italy
abandoned.  We and you have had great escapes, but we have
still occasion for all Providence!

I am very sorry for the young Sposa Panciatici, and wish all
the other parents joy of the increase of their families.  Mr.
Whithed is en bon train; but the recruits he is raising will
scarce thrive fast enough to be of service this war.  My best
loves to him and Mr. Chute.  I except you three out of my want
of public spirit.  The other day, when the Jacobites and
patriots were carrying every thing to ruin, and had made me
warmer than I love to be, one of them said to me, "Why don't
you love your country?" I replied, "I should love my country
exceedingly,'If it were not for my countrymen."  Adieu!

(911) Chaplain to the late Lord Waldegrave; after whose death
he acted as minister at Paris, till the war, when he returned,
and was made a dean in Ireland.

(912) He was called by the seamen "Foul-weather Jack."

(913) Motto of a medal of Charles the Second.

(914) Eldest daughter of Thomas, Earl of Pomfret.

(915) lady Pomfret had translated Froissart.

(916) Verses in Congreve's Doris.



366 Letter 135
To Sir Horace Mann.
April 2, 1744.

I am afraid our correspondence will be extremely disjointed,
and the length of time before you get my letters will make you
very impatient, when all the world will be full of events; but
I flatter myself that you will hear every thing sooner than by
my letters; I mean, that whatever happens will be on the
Continent; for the danger from Dunkirk seems blown over.  We
declared war on Saturday: that is all I know, for every body
has been out of town for the Easter holidays.  To-morrow the
Houses meet again: the King goes, and is to make a speech.
The Dutch seem extremely in earnest, and I think we seem to
put all our strength in their preparations.

The town is persuaded that Lord Clinton (916) is gone to Paris
to make peace - he is certainly gone thither, nobody knows
why.  He has gone thither every year -all his life, when he
was in the Opposition; but, to be sure, this is a very strange
time to take that journey.  Lord Stafford, who came hither
just before the intended invasion, (no doubt for the defence
of the Protestant religion, especially as his father-in-law,
Bulkeley,(917), was colonel of one of the embarked regiments,)
is gone to carry his sister to be married to a Count de
Rohan,(918) and then returns, having a sign manual for leaving
his wife there.

We shall not be surprised to hear that the Electorate(919) has
got a new master; shall you? Our dear nephew of Prussia will
probably take it, to keep it safe for us.

I had written thus far on Monday, and then my lord came from
New Park: and I had no time the rest of the day to finish it.
We have made very loyal addresses to the King on his speech,
which I suppose they send you.  There is not the least news,
but that my Lord Carteret's wedding has been deferred on Lady
Sophia's falling dangerously ill of a scarlet fever; but they
say it is to be next Saturday.  She is to have sixteen hundred
pounds a-year jointure, four hundred pounds pin-money, and two
thousand of jewels.  Carteret says, he does not intend to
marry the mother and the whole family.  What do you think my
lady intends? Adieu! my dear Sir! Pray for peace.

(916) Hugh Fortescue, afterwards Earl of Clinton and Knight of
the Bath.  Not long after he received that order he went into
Opposition, and left off his riband and star for one day, but
thought better of it, and put them on the next. He was created
Lord Fortescue and Earl of Clinton in 1746, and died in 1751.)

(917) Mr. Bulkeley, an Irish Roman Catholic, married the widow
Cantillon, mother of the Countess of Stafford.  He rose high
in the French army, and had the cordon bleu: his
sister was second wife of the first Duke of Berwick.

(918)Afterwards Duke of Rohan Chabot.-D.

(919) Of Hanover.-D.



367 Letter 136
To Sir Horace Mann.
London, April 15, 1744.

I could tell you a great deal of news, but it would not be
what you would expect.  It is not of battles, sieges, and
declarations of war; nor of invasions, insurrections, and
addresses.  It is the god of love, not he of war, who reigns
in the newspapers.  The town has made up a list of six and
thirty weddings, which I shall not catalogue to you; for you
would know, them no more than you do Antilochum, fortemque
Gyan, fortemque Cloanthum.

But the chief entertainment has been the nuptials of our great
Quixote and the fair Sophia.  On the point of matrimony she
fell ill of a scarlet fever, and was given over, while he had
the gout, but heroically sent her word, that if she was well,
he would be so.  They corresponded every day, and he used to
plague the cabinet council with reading her letters to them.
Last night they were married; and as all he does must have a
particular air in it, they supped at Lord Pomfret's: at
twelve, Lady Granville, his mother, and all his family went to
bed, but the porter: then my lord went home, and waited for
her in the lodge: she came alone in a hackney-chair, met him
in the hall, and was led up the back stairs to bed.  What is
ridiculously lucky is, that Lord Lincoln goes into waiting,
to-day, and will be to present her!  On Tuesday she stands
godmother with the King to Lady Dysart's(920) child, her new
grand-daughter.  I am impatient to see the whole m`enage; it
will be admirable.  There is a wild young Venetian
ambassadress(921) come, who is reckoned very pretty.  I don't
think so; she is foolish and childish to a degree.  She said,
"Lord! the old secretary is going to be married!"  hey told
her he was but fifty-four. "But fifty-four! why," said she,
"my husband is but two-and-forty, and I think him the oldest
man in the world." Did I tell you that Lord Holderness(922)
goes to Venice with the compliments of accommodation, and
leaves Sir James Grey resident there?

The invasion from Dunkirk seems laid aside.  We talk little of
our fleets - Sir John Norris has resigned -. Lestock is coming
home, and sent before him great complaints of Matthews; so
that affair must be cleared up.  the King talks much of going
abroad, which will not be very prudent.  The campaign is not
opened yet, but I suppose will disclose at once with great
`eclat in several quarters.

I this instant receive your letter of March 31st, with the
simple Demetrius, for which, however, I thank you.  I hope by
this time you have received all my letters, and are at peace
about the invasion; which we think so much over, that the
Opposition are now breaking out about the Dutch troops, and
call it the worst measure ever taken.  Those terms so
generally dealt to every measure successively, will at least
soften the Hanoverian history.

Adieu!  I have nothing more to tell you: I flatter myself you
content yourself with news; I cannot write sentences nor
sentiments.  My best love to the Chutes, and now and then let
my friends the Prince and Princess and Florentines know that I
shall never forget their goodness to me.  What is become of
Prince Beauvau?

(920) Lady Grace Carteret, eldest daughter of Lord Carteret.
She was married in 1729 to Lionel Tollemache, third Earl of
Dysart; by whom she had fifteen children.-E.

(921) Wife of Signor Capello.

(922) Robert Darcy, Earl of Holderness, ambassador at Venice
and the Hague, and afterwards secretary of state.



369 Letter 137
To Sir Horace Mann.
London, May 8, 1744.

I begin to breathe a little at ease; we have done with the
Parliament for this year: it rises on Saturday.  We have had
but one material day lately, last Thursday.  The Opposition
had brought in a bill to make it treason to correspond with
the young Pretenders:(923) the Lords added a clause, after a
long debate, to make it a forfeiture of estates, as it is for
dealing with the father.  We sat till one in the morning, and
then carried it by 255 to 106.  It was the best debate I ever
heard.(924)  The King goes to Kensington to-morrow, and not
abroad.  We hear of great quarrels between Marshal Wade and
Duc d'Aremberg.  The French King is at Valenciennes with
Monsieur de Noailles, who is now looked upon as first
minister.  He is the least dangerous for us of all.  It is
affirmed that Cardinal Tencin is disgraced, who was the very
worst for us.  If he is, we shall at least have no invasion
this summer.  Successors of ministers seldom take up the
schemes of their predecessors; especially such as by failing
caused their ruin, which, I believe, was Tencin's case at
Dunkirk.

For a week we heard of the affair at Villafranca in a worse
light than was true: it certainly turns out ill for both
sides.  Though the French have had such a bloody loss, I
cannot but think they will carry their point, and force their
passage into Italy.


We have no domestic news, but Lord Lovel's being created Earl
of Leicester, on an old promise which my father had obtained
for him.  Earl Berkeley(925) is married to Miss Drax, a very
pretty maid of honour to the Princess; and the Viscount
Fitzwilliam(926) to Sir Matthew Decker's eldest daughter , but
these are people I am sure you don't know.

There is to be a great ball tomorrow at the Duchess of
Richmond's for my Lady Carteret: the Prince is to be there.
Carteret's court to pay her the highest honours, which she
receives with the highest state.  I have seen her but once,
and found her just what I expected, tr`es grande dame; full of
herself, and yet not with an air of happiness.  She looks ill
and is grown lean, but is still the finest figure in the
world.  The mother is not so exalted as I expected- I fancy
Carteret has kept his resolution, and does not marry her too.

My Lord does not talk of' going out of town yet; I don't
propose to be at Houghton till August.  Adieu!

(923) Charles Edward, and Henry his brother, afterwards the
Cardinal of York.-D.

(924) The Honourable Philip Yorke, in his MS.  Parliamentary
Journal, says, "it was a warm and long d(.-bate, in which I
think as much violence and dislike to the proposition was
shown by the opposers, as in any which had arisen during the
whole winter.  I thought neither Mr. Pelham's nor Pitt's
performances equal on this occasion to what they are on most
others.  Many of the Prince's friends were absent; for what
reason I cannot learn.  This was the parting blow of the
session; for the King came and dismissed us on the 12th, and
the Parliament broke up with a good deal of ill-humour and
discontent on the part of the Opposition, and little
expectation in those who knew the interior of the court, and
the unconnected state of the alliance abroad, that much would
be done in the ensuing campaign to allay it, or infuse a
better temper into the nation."-E.

(925) Augustus. fourth Earl Berkeley, Knight of the Thistle.
He married Elizabeth, daughter of Henry Drax, Esq, of
Charborough, in Dorsetshire; and died in 1755.-D.

(926) Richard, sixth Viscount Fitzwilliam in Ireland, married
Catherine, daughter and heiress of Sir Matthew Decker, Bart.,
and died in 1776.-E.




370 Letter 138
To Sir Horace Mann.
London, May 29, 1744.

Since I wrote I have received two from you of May 6th and
19th.  I am extremely sorry you get mine so late.  I have
desired your brother to complain to Mr. Preverau: I get yours
pretty regularly.

I have this morning had a letter from Mr. Conway at the army;
he says he hears just then that the French have declared war
against the Dutch: they had in effect before by besieging
Menin, which siege our army is in full march to raise.  They
have laid bridges over the Scheldt, and intend to force the
French to a battle.  The latter are almost double our number,
but their desertion is prodigious, and their troops extremely
bad.  Fourteen thousand more Dutch are ordered, and their six
thousand are going from hence with four more of ours; so we
seem to have no more apprehensions of an invasion.  All
thoughts of it are over! no inquiry made into it! The present
ministry fear the detection of conspiracies more than the
thing itself: that is, they fear every thing that they are to
do themselves.

My father has been extremely ill, from a cold he caught last
week at New-park.  Princess Emily came thither to fish, and
he, who is grown quite indolent, and has not been out of a hot
room this twelve- month, sat an hour and a half by the water
side.  He was in great danger one day, and more low-spirited
than ever I knew him, though I think that grows upon him with
his infirmities.  My sister was at his bedside; I came into
the room,-he burst into tears and could not speak to me - but
he is quite well now; though I cannot say I think he will
preserve his life long, as he has laid aside all exercise,
which has been of such vast service to him.  he talked the
other day of shutting himself up in the farthest wing at
Houghton; I said, "Dear, my Lord, you will be at a distance
from all the family there!" He replied, "So much the better!"

Pope is given over with a dropsy, which is mounted into his
head: in an evening he is not in his senses; the other day at
Chiswick, he said,- to my Lady Burlington, "Look at our
Saviour there! how ill they have crucified him!"(927)

There is a Prince of Ost-Frize(928) dead, which is likely to
occasion most unlucky broils: Holland, Prussia, and Denmark
have all pretensions to his succession; but Prussia is
determined to make his good.  If the Dutch don't dispute it,
he will be too near a neighbour; if they do, we lose his
neutrality, which is now so material.

The town has been in a great bustle about a private match; but
which, by the ingenuity of the ministry, has been made
politics.  Mr. Fox fell in love with Lady Caroline
Lennox;(929) asked her, was refused, and stole her.  His
father(930) was a footman; her great grandfather a king: hinc
illae, lachrymae! all the blood royal have been up in arms.
The Duke of Marlborough, who was a friend of the Richmonds,
gave her away.  If his Majesty's Princess Caroline had been
stolen, there could not have been more noise made.  The
Pelhams, who arc much attached to the Richmonds, but who have
tried to make Fox and all that set theirs, wisely entered into
the quarrel, and now don't know how to get out of it.  They
were for hindering Williams,(931) who is Fox's great friend,
and at whose house they were married, from having the red
riband; but he has got it, with four others, the Viscount
Fitzwilliam, Calthorpe, Whitmore, and Harbord.  Dashwood, Lady
Carteret's quondam lover, has stolen a great fortune, a Miss
Bateman; the marriage had been proposed, but the fathers could
not agree on the terms.

I am much obliged to you for all your Sardinian and Neapolitan
journals.  I am impatient for the conquest of Naples, and have
no notion of neglecting sure things, which may serve by way of
d`edommagement.

I am very sorry I recommended such a troublesome booby to you.
Indeed, dear Mr. Chute, I never saw him, but was pressed by
Mr. Selwyn, whose brother's friend he is, to give him that
letter to you.  I now hear that he is a warm Jacobite; I
suppose you somehow disobliged him politically.

We are now mad about tar-water, on the publication of a book
that I will send you, written by Dr. Berkeley, Bishop of
Cloyne.(932)  The book contains every subject from tar-water
to the Trinity; however, all the women read, and understand it
no more than they would if it were intelligible.  A man came
into an apothecary's shop the other day, "Do you sell
tar-water?"  "Tar-water!" replied the apothecary, "why, I sell
nothing else!" Adieu!

(927) Pope died the day after this letter was written; "in the
evening," says Spence, "but they did not know the exact time;
for his departure was so easy, that it was imperceptible even
to the standers by."

(928) The Prince of East Friesland.

(929) Eldest daughter of Charles Duke of Richmond, grandson of
King Charles II.

(930) Sir Stephen Fox.

(931) Sir C. Hanbury Williams.

(932) Having cured himself of a nervous colic by the use of
tar-water, the bishop this year published a book entitled
"Philosophical Reflections and Enquiries concerning the
Virtues of Tar-water.',-E.



372 Letter 139
To Sir Horace Mann.
June 11, 1744.

Perhaps you expect to hear of great triumphs and victories; of
General Wade grown into a Duke of Marlborough; or of the King
being in Flanders, with the second part of the battle of
Dettingen-why, ay: you are bound in conscience, as a good
Englishman, to expect all this -but what if all these 10
paeans should be played to the Dunkirk tune?  I must prepare
you for some such thing; for unless the French are as much
their own foes as we are our own, I don't see what should
hinder the festival to-day(933) being kept next year a day
sooner.  But I will draw no consequences; only sketch you out
our present situation: and if Cardinal Tencin can miss making
his use of it, we may burn our books and live hereafter upon
good fortune.

The French King's army is at least ninety thousand strong; has
taken Menin already, and Ypres almost.  Remains then only
Ostend; which you will look in the map and see does not lie in
the high road to the conquest of the Austrian Netherlands.
Ostend may be laid under water, and the taking it an affair of
time.  But there lies all our train of artillery Which cost
two hundred thousand pounds; and what becomes of our
communication with our army? Why, they may go round by
Williamstadt, and be in England just time enough to be some
other body's army! It turns out that the whole combined army,
English, Dutch, Austrians, and Hanoverians, does not amount to
above thirty-six thousand fighting men! and yet forty thousand
more French, under the Duc d'Harcourt are coming into
Flanders.  When their army is already so superior to ours, for
what can that reinforcement be intended, but to let them spare
a triumph to Dunkirk?  Now you will naturally ask me three
questions: where is Prince Charles?  where are the Dutch?
what force have you to defend England?  Prince Charles is
hovering about the Rhine to take Lorrain, which they seem not
to care whether he does or not, and leaves you to defend the
-Netherlands.  The Dutch seem indifferent, whether their
barrier is in the hands of the Queen or the Emperor and while
you are so mad, think it prudent not to be so themselves.  For
our own force, it is too melancholy to mention: six regiments
go away to-morrow to Ostend, with the six thousand Dutch.
Carteret and Botzlaer, the Dutch envoy extraordinary, would
have hurried them away without orders; but General Smitsart,
their commander, said, he was too old to be hanged.  This
reply was told to my father yesterday: "Ay," said he, "so I
thought I was, but I may live to be mistaken!"  When these
troops are gone, we shall not have in the whole island above
six thousand men, even when the regiments are complete; and
half of those pressed and new-listed men.  For our sea-force,
I wish it may be greater in proportion! Sir Charles Hardy,
whose name(934) at least is ill-favoured, is removed, and old
Balchen, a firm Whig, put at the head of the fleet.  Fifteen
ships are sent for from Matthews; but they may come as
opportunely as the army from Williamstadt-in short-but I won't
enter into reasonings-the King is not gone.  The Dutch have
sent word, that they can let us have but six of the twenty
ships we expected.  My father is going into Norfolk, quite
shocked at living to see how terribly his own conduct is
justified.  In the city the word is, "Old Sunderland'S(935)
game is acting over again."  Tell me if you receive this
letter: I believe you will scarce give it about in memorials.

Here are arrived two Florentines, not recommended to me, but I
have been very civil to them, Marquis Salviati and Conte
Delci; the latter remembers to have seen me at Madame
Grifoni's.  The Venetian ambassador met my father yesterday at
my Lady Brown's: you would have laughed to have seen how he
stared and @eccellenza'd him.  At last they fell into a broken
Latin chat, and there was no getting the ambassador away from
him.

If you have the least interest in any one Madonna in Florence,
pay her well for all the service she can do us.  If she can
work miracles, now is her time.  If she can't, I believe we
all shall be forced to adore her.  Adieu! Tell Mr. Chute I
fear we should not be quite so well received at the
conversazzioni, at Madame de Craon's, and the Casino,(936)
when we are but refugee heretics.  Well, we must hope! Yours I
am, and we will bear our wayward fate together.

(933) The 10th of June was the Pretender's birthday, and the 11th
the accession of George II.

(934) He was of a Jacobite family.

(935) Lord Sunderland, who betrayed James II.

(936) The Florentine coffee-house.



373 Letter 140
To Sir Horace Mann.
London, June 18, 1744.
I have not any immediate bad news to tell you in consequence
of my last.  The siege of Ypres does not advance so
expeditiously as was expected; a little time gained in sieges
goes a great way in a campaign.  The Brest squadron is making
just as great a figure in our channel as Matthews does before
Toulon and Marseilles.  I should be glad to be told by some
nice computers of national glory, how much the balance is on
our side.

Anson(937) is returned with vast fortune, substantial and
lucky.  He has brought the Acapulca ship into Portsmouth, and
its treasure is at least computed at five hundred thousand
pounds.  He escaped the Brest squadron by a mist.  You will
have all the particulars in a gazette.

I will not fail to make your compliments to the Pomfrets and
Carterets.  I see them seldom, but I am in favour; so I
conclude, for my Lady Pomfret told me the other night, that I
said better things than any body.  I was with them all at a
subscription-ball at Ranelagh last week, which my Lady
Carteret thought proper to look upon as given to her, and
thanked the gentlemen, who were not quite so well pleased at
her condescending to take it to herself.  My lord stayed with
her there till four in the morning.  They are all fondness
-walk together, and stop every five steps to kiss.  Madame de
Craon is a cypher to her for grandeur.  The ball was on an
excessively hot night: yet she was dressed in a magnificent
brocade, because it was new that morning for the
inauguration-day.  I did the honours of all her dress:-"How
charming your ladyship's cross is!  I am sure the design was
your own."-"No, indeed; my lord sent it me just as it
is."-"How fine your ear-rings are!"-"Oh! but they are very
heavy." Then as much to the mother.  Do you wonder I say
better things than any body?

I send you by a ship going to Leghorn the only new books at
all worth reading.  The Abuse(938) of Parliaments is by
Doddington and Waller, circumstantially scurrilous.  The
dedication of the Essay(939) to my father is fine; pray mind
the quotation from Milton.  There is Dr. Berkeley's mad book
on tar-water, which has made every body as mad as himself.

I have lately made a great antique purchase of all Dr.
Middleton's collection which he brought from Italy, and which
he is now publishing.  I will send you the book as soon as it
comes out.  I would not buy the things till the book was half
printed, for fear of an `e Museo Walpoliano.-Those honours are
mighty well for such known and learned men as Mr. Smith,(940)
the merchant of Venice.  My dear Mr. Chute, how we used to
enjoy the title-page(941) of his understanding! Do you
remember how angry he was when showing us a Guido, after
pompous roomsfull of Sebastian Riccis, which he had a mind to
establish for capital pictures, you told him he had now made
amends for all the rubbish he had showed us before?

My father has asked, and with some difficulty got, his pension
of four thousand pounds a-year, which the King gave him on his
resignation and which he dropped, by the wise fears of my
uncle and the Selwyns.  He has no reason to be satisfied with
the manner of obtaining it now, or with the manner of the
man(942) whom he employed to ask it - yet it was not a point
that required capacity-merely gratitude.  Adieu!

(937) The celebrated circumnavigator, afterwards a peer, and
first lord of the admiralty.-D.

(938) Detection of the Use and Abuse of Parliaments, by Ralph,
under the direction of Doddington and Waller.

(939) Essay on Wit, Humour, and Ridicule, by Corbyn Morris.

(940) Mr. Smith, consul at Venice, had a fine library" of
which he knew nothing at all but the title-pages.

(941) Expression of Mr. Chute.

(942) Mr. Pelham.




375 Letter 141

To The Hon.  H. S. Conway.(943)
Arlington Street, June 29, 1744.

My dearest Henry,
I don't know what made my last letter so long on the road:
yours got hither as soon as it could.  I don't attribute it to
any examination at the post-office.  God forbid I should
suspect any branch of the present administration of attempting
to know any one kind of thing!  I remember when I was at Eton,
and Mr. Bland(944) had set me an extraordinary task, I used
sometimes to pique myself upon not getting it, because it was
not immediately my school business.  What! learn more than I
was absolutely forced to learn! I felt the weight of learning
that; for I was a blockhead, and pushed up above my parts.

Lest you maliciously think I mean any application of this last
sentence any where in the world, I shall go and transcribe
some lines out of a new poem, that pretends to great
impartiality, but is evidently wrote by some secret friend of
the ministry.  It is called Pope's, but has no good lines but
the following.  The plan supposes him complaining of being put
to death by the blundering discord of his two physicians.
Burton and Thompson; and from thence makes a transition to
show that all the present misfortunes of the world flow from a
parallel disagreement; for instance, in politics:

"Ask you what cause this conduct can create?
The doctors differ that direct the state.
Craterus, wild as Thompson, rules and raves,
A slave himself yet proud of making slaves;
Fondly believing that his mighty parts
Can guide all councils and command all hearts;
Give shape and colour to discordant things,
Hide fraud in ministers and fear in kings.
Presuming on his power, such schemes he draws
For bribing Iron(945) and giving Europe laws,
That camps, and fleets, and treaties fill the news,
And succours unobtain'd and unaccomplish'd views.

"Like solemn Burton grave Plumbosus acts;
He thinks in method, argues all from facts;
Warm in his temper, yet affecting ice,
Protests his candour ere he gives advice;
Hints he dislikes the schemes he recommends,
And courts his foes-and hardly courts his friends;
Is fond of power, and yet concerned for fame-
>From different parties would dependents claim
Declares for war, but in an awkward way,
Loves peace at heart, which he's afraid to say;
His head perplex'd, altho' his hands are pure-
An honest man,-but not a hero sure!"

I beg you will never tell me any news till it has past every
impression of the Dutch gazette; for one is apt to mention
what is wrote to one: that gets about, comes at last to, the
ears of the ministry, puts them in a fright, and perhaps they
send to beg to see your letter.  Now, you know one should hate
to have one's private correspondence made grounds for a
measure,-especially for an absurd one, which is just possible.

If I was writing to any body but you, who know me so well, I
should be afraid this would be taken for pique and pride, and
be construed into my thinking all ministers inferior to my
father but, my dear Harry, you know it was never my foible to
think over-abundantly well of him.  Why I think as I do of the
great geniuses, answer for me, Admiral Matthews, great British
Neptune, bouncing in the Mediterranean, while the Brest
squadron is riding in the English Channel, and an invasion
from Dunkirk every moment threatening your coasts: against
which you send for six thousand Dutch troops, while you have
twenty thousand of your own in Flanders, which not being of
any use, you send these very six thousand Dutch to them, with
above half of the few of your own remaining in England; a
third part of which half of which few you countermand, because
you are again alarmed with the invasion, and yet let the six
Dutch go, who came for no other end but to protect you.  And
that our naval discretion may go hand-in-hand with our
military, we find we have no force at home; we send for
fifteen ships from the Mediterranean to guard our coasts, and
demand twenty from the Dutch.  The first fifteen will be here,
perhaps in three months.  Of the twenty Dutch, they excuse all
but six, of which six they send all but four; and your own
small domestic fleet, five are going to the West Indies and
twenty a hunting for some Spanish ships that are coming from
the Indies.  Don't it put you in mind of a trick that is done
by calculation: Think of a number: halve it-double it-and
ten-subtract twenty-add half the first number-take away all
you added: now, what remains?

That you may think I employ my time as idly as the great men I
have been talking of, you must be informed that every night
constantly I go to Ranelagh; which has totally beat Vauxhall.
Nobody goes any where else-every body goes there.  My Lord
Chesterfield is so fond of it, that he says he has ordered all
his letters to be directed thither.  If you had never seen it,
I would make you a most pompous description of it, and tell
you how the floor is all of beaten princes-you can't set your
foot without treading on a Prince of Wales or Duke of
Cumberland.  The company is universal: there is from his Grace
of Grafton down to Children out of the Foundling Hospital-
from my Lady Townshend to the kitten--from my Lord Sandys to
your humble cousin and sincere friend.

(943) Now first printed.

(944) Dr. Henry Bland, head-master, and from 1732 to his
death, in 1746, provost of Eton College.  In No. 628 of the
Spectator is a Latin version by him of Cato's soliloquy.-E.

(945) This is nonsense@H.  W.




377 Letter 142
To Sir Horace Mann.
London, June 29, 1744.

Well, at last this is not to be the year of our captivity!
There is a cluster of good packets come at once.  The Dutch
have marched twelve thousand men to join our army; the King of
Sardinia (but this is only a report) has beaten the Spaniards
back over the Varo, and I this moment hear from the
Secretary's office, that Prince Charles has undoubtedly passed
the Rhine at the head of fourscore thousand men-where, and
with what circumstances, I don't know a word; ma basta cos`i.
It is said, too, that the Marquis de la Ch`etardie(946) is
sent away from Russia: but this one has no occasion to
believe.  False good news are always produced by true good,
like the waterfall by the rainbow.  But why do I take upon me
to tell you all this?-you, who are the centre of ministers and
business! the actuating genius in the conquest of Naples! You
cannot imagine how formidable you appear to me.  My poor
little, quiet Miny, with his headache and `epuisements, and
Cocchio, and coverlid of cygnet's down, that had no dealings
but with a little spy-abb`e at Rome, a civil whisper with
Count Lorenzi,(947) or an explanation on some of Goldsworthy's
absurdities, or with Richcourt about some sbirri,(948) that
had insolently passed through the street in which the King of
Great Britain's arms condescended to hang!  Bless me! how he
is changed, become a trafficking plenipotentiary with Prince
lobkowitz, Cardinal Albani(949) and Admiral Matthews! Why, my
dear child, I should not know you again; I should not dare to
roll you up between a finger and thumb like wet brown paper.
Well, heaven prosper your arms!  But I hate you, for I now
look upon you as ten times fatter than I am.

I don't think it would be quite unadvisable for Bistino(950)
to take a journey hither.  My Lady Carteret would take
violently to any thing that came so far as to adore her
grandeur.  I believe even my Lady Pomfret would be persuaded
he had seen the star of their glory travelling westward to
direct him.  For my part, I expect soon to make a figure too
in the political magazine, for all our Florence set is coming
to grandeur; but you and my Lady Carteret have outstripped me.
I remain with -the Duke of Courtland in Siberia-my father has
actually gone thither for a long season.  I met my Lady
Carteret the other day at Knaptons,(951) and desired leave to
stay while she sat for her picture.  She is drawn crowned with
corn, like the Goddess of Plenty, and a mild dove in her arms,
like Mrs. Venus.  We had much of my lord and my lord.  The
countess-mother was glad my lord was not there-he was never
satisfied with the eyes; she was afraid he would have had them
drawn bigger than the cheeks.  I made your compliments
abundantly, and cried down the charms of the picture as
politically as if' you yourself had been there in person.

To fill up this sheet, I shall transcribe some very good lines
published to-day in one of the papers, by I don't know whom,
on Pope's death.

"Here lies, who died, as most folks die, in hope,
The mouldering, more ignoble part of Pope;
The hard, whose sprightly genius dared to wage
Poetic war with an immoral age;
Made every vice and private folly known
In friend and foe--a stranger to his own
Set Virtue in its loveliest form to view,
And still professed to be the sketch he drew.
As humour or as interest served, his verse
Could praise or flatter, libel or asperse:
Unharming innocence with guilt could load,
Or lift the rebel patriot to a god:
Give the censorious critic standing laws-
The first to violate them with applause;
The just translator and the solid wit,
Like whom the passions few so truly hit:
The scourge of dunces whom his malice made-
The impious plague of the defenceless dead:
To real knaves and real fools a sore-
Beloved by many but abhorr'd by more,
If here his merits are not full exprest,
His never-dying strains shall tell the rest."

Sure the greater part was his true character; Here is another
epitaph by Rolli;(952) which for the profound fall in some of
the verses', especially in the last, will divert you.

"Spento `e il Pope: de' poeti Britanni
Uno de' lumi che sorge in mille anni:
Pur si vuol che la macchia d'Ingrato
N'abbia reso il fulgor men sereno:
Stato fora e pi`u giusto e pi`u grato.
Men lodando e biasmando ancor meno."

(946) French ambassador at the court of St. Petersburg, and
for some time a favourite of the Empress Elizabeth.  The
report of his disgrace was correct.  He died in 1758.-E.

(947) A Florentine, but employed as minister by France.

(948) The officers of justice, who are reckoned so infamous in
Italy, that the foreign ministers have always pretended to
hinder them from passing through the streets where they
reside.

(949) Cardinal Alexander Albani, nephew of Clement XI. was
minister of the Queen of Hungary at Rome.

(950) Giovanni Battista Uguecioni, a Florentine nobleman, and
great friend of the Pomfrets.


(951) George Knapton, a portrait painter.  Walpole says, he
was well versed in the theory of painting, and had a thorough
knowledge of the hands of the good masters.  He died at
Kensington, in 1778, at the age of eighty.-E.

(952) Paolo Antonio Rolli, composer of the operas, translated
and published several things.  [Thus hitched into the Dunciad-

"Rolli the feather to his ear conveys
Then his nice taste directs our operas."

Warburton says, "He taught Italian to some fine gentlemen, who
affected to direct the operas."



379 Letter 143
To The Hon. H. S. Conway.
Arlington Street, July 20, 1744.

My dearest Harry,
I feel that I have so much to say to you, that I foresee there
will be but little method in my letter; but if, upon the
whole, you see My meaning, and the depth of my friendship for
you, I am content.

It was most agreeable to me to receive a letter of confidence
from you, at the time I expected a very different one from
you; though, by the date of your last, I perceive you had not
then received some letters, which, though I did not see, I
must call simple, as they could only tend to make you uneasy
for some months.  I should not have thought of communicating a
quarrel to you at a distance, and I don't conceive the sort of
friendship of those that thought it necessary.  When I heard
it had been wrote to you, I thought it right to myself to give
you my account of it, but, by your brother's desire,
suppressed my letter, and left it to be explained by him, who
wrote to you so sensibly on it, that I shall say no more but
that I think myself so ill-used that it will prevent my giving
you thoroughly the advice you ask of me for how can I be sure
that my resentment might not make me see in a stronger light
the reasons for your breaking off an affair(953) which you
know before I never approved?

You know my temper is so open to any body I love that I must
be happy at seeing you lay aside a reserve with me, which is
the only point that ever made me dissatisfied with you.  That
silence of yours has, perhaps, been one of the chief reasons
that has always prevented my saying much to you on a topic
which I saw was so near your heart.  Indeed, its being so near
was another reason; for how could I expect you would take my
advice, even if you bore it? But, my dearest Harry, how can I
advise you now? Is it not gone too far -for me to expect you
should keep any resolution about it, especially in absence,
which must be destroyed the moment you meet again? And if ever
you should marry and be happy, won't you reproach me with
having tried to hinder it?  I think you as just and honest as
I think any man living; but any man living in that
circumstance would think I had been prompted by private
reasons.  I see as strongly as you can all the arguments for
your breaking off; but, indeed, the alteration of your fortune
adds very little strength to what they had before.  You never
had fortune enough to make such a step at all prudent: she
loved you enough to be content with that; I can't believe this
change will alter her sentiments, for I must do her the
justice to say that it is plain she preferred you with nothing
to all the world.  I could talk upon this head, but I will
only leave you to consider, without advising YOU On either
side, these two things-whether you think it honester to break
off with her after such engagements as yours (how strong I
don't know), after her refusing very good matches for you, and
show her that she must think of making her fortune; or whether
you will wait with her till some amendment in your fortune can
put it in your power to marry her.                    '


My dearest Harry, you must see why I don't care to say more on
this head.  My wishing it could be right for you to break off
with her (for, without it is right, I would not have you on
any account take such a step) makes it impossible for me to
advise it; and therefore, I am sure you will forgive my
declining, an act of friendship which your having put in my
power gives me the greatest satisfaction.  But it does put
something else in my power, which I am sure nothing can make
me decline, and for which I have long wanted an opportunity.
Nothing could prevent my being unhappy at the smallness of
your fortune, but its throwing it into my way to offer you to
share mine.  As mine is so precarious, by depending on so bad
a constitution, I can only offer you the immediate use of it.
I do that most sincerely.  My places still (though my Lord
Walpole has cut off three hundred pounds a-year to save
himself the trouble of signing his name ten times for once)
bring me in near two thousand pounds a-year.  I have no debts,
no connexions; indeed, no -way to dispose of it particularly.
By living with my father, I have little real use for a quarter
of it.  I have always flung it away all in the most idle
manner; but, my dear Harry, idle -,is I am, and thoughtless, I
have sense enough to have real pleasure in denying myself
baubles, and in saving a very good income to make a man happy,
for whom I have a just esteem and most sincere friendship.  I
know the difficulties any gentleman and man of spirit must
struggle with, even in having such an offer made him, much
more in accepting it.  I hope you will allow there are some in
making it.  But hear me: if there is such a thing as
friendship in the world, these are the opportunities of
exerting it, and it can't be exerted without it is accepted.
I must talk of myself to prove to you that it will be right
for 'you to accept it.  I am sensible of having more follies
and weaknesses, and fewer real good qualities than most men.
I sometimes reflect on this, though I own too seldom.  I
always want to begin acting like a man, and a sensible one,
which I think I might b, if I would.  Can I begin better, than
by taking care of my fortune for one I love?  You have seen (I
have seen you have) that I am fickle, and foolishly fond of
twenty new people; but I don't really love them-I have always
loved you constantly: I am willing to convince you and the
world, what I have always told you, that I loved you better
than any body.  If I ever felt much for any thing, which I
know may be questioned, it was certainly my mother.  I look on
you as my nearest relation by her, and I think I can never do
enough to show my gratitude and affection to her.  For these
reasons, don't deny me what I have set my heart on-the making
your fortune easy to you.


[The rest of this letter is wanting.]

(953) This was an early attachment of Mr. Conway's.  By his
having complied with the wishes and advice of his friends on
this subject, and got the better of his passion, he probably
felt that he, in some measure, owed to Mr. Walpole the
subsequent happiness of his life, in his marriage with another
person.  (the lady alluded to was Lady Caroline Fitzroy,
afterwards Countess of Harrington, whose sister, Lady
Isabella, had, three years before, married Mr. Conway's elder
brother, afterwards Earl and Marquis of Hertford.]



381 Letter 144
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, July 22, 1744.

I have not written to you, my dear child, a good while, I know
but, indeed, it was from having nothing to tell you.  You know
I love you too well for it to be necessary to be punctually
proving it to you; so, when I have nothing worth your knowing,
I repose myself upon' the persuasion that you must have of my
friendship.  But I will never let that grow into any
negligence, I should say, idleness, which is always mighty
ready to argue me out of every thing I ought to do; and
letter-writing is one of the first duties that the very best
people let perish out of their rubric.  Indeed, I pride myself
extremely in having been so good a correspondent; for, besides
that every day grows to make one hate writing, more, it is
difficult, you must own, to keep up a correspondence of this
sort with any spirit, when long absence makes one entirely out
of all the little circumstances of each other's society, and
which are the soul of letters.  We are forced to deal only in
great events, like historians; and, instead of being Horace
Mann and Horace Walpole, seem to correspond as Guicciardin and
Clarendon would:

Discedo Alceus puncto Illius; ille meo quis!
Quis nisi Callimachus?

Apropos to writing histories and Guicciardin; I wish to God,
Boccalini was living! never was such an opportunity for
Apollo's playing off a set of looks, as there is now! The good
city of London, who, from long dictating to the government,
are now come to preside over taste and letters, have given one
Carte,(954) a Jacobite parson, fifty pounds a-year, for seven
years, to write the history of England; and four aldermen and
six common councilmen are to .inspect his materials and the
progress of the work.  Surveyors and common sewers turned
supervisors of literature! To be sure, they think a history of
England is no more than Stowe's Survey of the Parishes!
Instead of having books published with the imprimatur of an
university, they Will be printed, as churches are whitewashed,
John Smith and Thomas Johnson, churchwardens.

But, brother historian, you will wonder I should have nothing
to communicate, when all Europe is bursting with events, and
every day "big with the fate of Cato and of Rome."  But so it
is; I know nothing; Prince Charles's great passage of the
Rhine has hitherto produced nothing, more: indeed, the French
armies are moving towards him from Flanders; and they tell us,
ours is crossing the Scheldt to attack the Count de Saxe, now
that we arc equal to him, from our reinforcement and his
diminutions.  In the mean time, as I am at least one of the
principal heroes of my own politics, being secure of any
invasion, I am going to leave all my lares, that is, all my
antiquities, household gods and pagods, and take a journey
into Siberia for six weeks, where my father's grace of
Courland has been for some time.

Lord Middlesex is going to be married to Miss Boyle,(955) Lady
Shannon's daughter; she has thirty thousand pounds, and may
have as much more, if her mother, who is a plain widow, don't
happen to Nugentize.(956)  The girl is low and ugly, but a
vast scholar.

Young Churchill has got a daughter by the Frasi;(957) Mr.
Winnington calls it the opera-comique ; the mother is an opera
girl; the grandmother was Mrs.  Oldfield.

I must tell you of a very extraordinary print, which my Lady
Burlington gives away, of her daughter Euston, -with this
inscription:

Lady Dorothy Boyle,
Once the pride, the joy, the -comfort of her parents,
The admiration of all that saw her,
The delight of all that knew her.
Born May 14, 1724, married alas! Oct. 10, 1741, an
delivered from extremest misery May 2, 1742.

This print was taken from a picture drawn by memory seven
weeks after her death, by her most afflicted mother;
DOROTHY BURLINGTON.(958)

I am forced to begin a new sheet, lest you should think my
letter came from my Lady Burlington, as it ends so patly with
her name.  But is it not a most melancholy way of venting
oneself? She has drawn numbers of these pictures: I don't
approve her having them engraved; but sure the
inscription(959) is pretty.

I was accosted the other night by 'a little, pert petit-maitre
figure, that claimed me for acquaintance.  Do you remember to
have seen at Florence an Abb`e Durazzo, of Genoa? well, this
was he: it is mighty dapper and French: however, I will be
civil to it: I never lose opportunities of paving myself an
agreeable passage back to Florence.  My dear Chutes, stay for
me: I think the first gale of peace will carry me to you.  Are
you as fond of Florence as ever? of me you are not, I am sure,
for you never write me a line.  You would be diverted with the
grandeur of our old Florence beauty, Lady Carteret.  She
dresses more extravagantly, and grows more short-sighted every
day: she can't walk a step without leaning on one of her
ancient daughters-in law.  Lord Tweedale and Lord Bathurst are
her constant gentlemen-ushers.  She has not quite digested her
resentment to Lincoln yet.  He was walking with her at
Ranelagh the other night, and a Spanish refugee marquis,(960)
who is of the Carteret court, but who, not being quite perfect
in the carte du pais, told my lady, that Lord Lincoln had
promised him to make a very good husband to Miss Pelham.  Lady
Carteret, with an accent of energy, replied, "J'esp`ere qu'il
tiendra sa promesse!" Here is a good epigram that has been
made on her:

"Her beauty, like the Scripture feast,
To which the invited never came,
Deprived of its intended guest,
Was given to the old and lame."

Adieu! here is company; I think I may be excused leaving off
at the sixth side.

(954) Thomas Carte, a laborious writer of history.  His
principal works are, his Life of the Duke of Ormonde, in three
volumes, folio, and his History of England, in four.  He
                        died in 1754.-D. [The former, though
ill-written, was considered by Dr. Johnson as a work of
authority; and of the latter Dr. Warton remarks, "You may read
Hume for his  eloquence, but Carte is the historian for
facts."]

(955) Grace Boyle, daughter and sole heiress of Richard,
Viscount Shannon.  She became afterwards a favourite of
Frederick, Prince of Wales, and died in 17 63.-D.

(956) See ant`e, p. 205.  (Letter 48)

(957 Prima donna at the opera.

(958) This is an incorrect copy of the inscription on Lady
Euston's picture given in a note at 329 of this volume.-D.
(Letter 110, p. 328/9)

(959) It is said to be Pope's.

(960) The Marquis Tabernego.



383 Letter 145
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, Aug. 6, 1744.

I don't tell you any thing about Prince Charles, for you must
hear all his history as soon as we do: at least much sooner
than it can come to the very north, and be despatched back to
Italy.  There is nothing from Flanders: we advance and they
retire-just as two months ago we retired and they advanced:
but it is good to be leading up this part of the tune.  Lord
Stair is going into Scotland: the King is grown wonderfully
fond of him, since he has taken the resolution of that
journey.  He said the other day, "I wish my Lord Stair was in
Flanders! General Wade is a very able officer, but he is not
alert."  I, in my private litany, am beseeching the Lord, that
he may contract none of my Lord Stair's alertness.

When I first wrote you word of la Ch`etardie's disgrace, I did
not believe it; but you see it is now public.  What I like is,
her Russian Majesty's making her amour keep exact pace with
her public indignation.  She sent to demand her picture and
other presents. "Other presents," to be sure, were
billet-doux, bracelets woven of her own bristles-for I look
upon the hair of a Muscovite Majesty in the light of the
chairs which Gulliver made out of the combings of the Empress
of Brobdignag's tresses: the stumps he made into very good
large-tooth combs.  You know the present is a very Amazon. she
has grappled with all her own grenadiers.  I should like to
see their loves woven into a French opera: La Ch`etardie's
character is quite adapted to the civil discord of their
stage: and then a northern heroine to reproach him in their
outrageous quavers, would make a most delightful crash of
sentiment, impertinence, gallantry, contempt, and screaming.
The first opera that I saw at Paris, I could not believe was
in earnest, but thought they had carried me to the
op`era-comique.  The three acts of the piece(961) were three
several interludes, of the Loves of Antony and Cleopatra, of
Alcibiades and the Queen of Sparta, and of Tibuilus with a
niece of Macenas; besides something of Circe, who was screamed
by a Mademoiselle Hermans, seven feet high.  She was in
black, with a nosegay of black (for on the French stage they
pique themselves on propriety,) and without powder: whenever
you are a widow, are in distress, or are a witch, you are to
leave off powder.

I have no news for you, and am going to have less, for I a)n
going into Norfolk.  I have stayed till I have not one
acquaintance left: the next billow washes me last off the
plank.  I have not cared to stir, for fear of news from
Flanders; but I have convinced myself that there will be
none.  Our army is much superior to the Count de Saxe;
besides, they have ten large towns to garrison, which will
reduce their army to nothing; or they must leave us the towns
to walk into coolly.

I have received yours of July 21.  Did neither I nor your
brother tell you, that we had received the Neapolitan
snuff-box?(962)  it is above a month ago: how could I be so
forgetful? but I have never heard one word of the cases, nor
of Lord Conway's guns, nor Lord Hartington's melon-seeds, all
which you mention to have sent.  Lestock has long been
arrived, so to be sure the cases never came with him: I hope
Matthews will discover them.  Pray thank Dr. Cocchi very
particularly for his book.

I am very sorry too for your father's removal; it was not done
in the most obliging manner by Mr. Winnington; there was
something exactly like a breach of promise in it to my father,
which was tried to be softened by a civil alternative, that
was no alternative at all.  He was forced to it by my Lady
Townshend, who has an implacable aversion to all my father's
people; and not having less to Mr. Pelham's, she has been as
brusque with Winnington about them.  He has no principles
himself, and those no principles of his are governed
absolutely by hers, which are no-issimes.

I don't know any of your English.  I should delight in your
Vauxhall-ets: what a figure my Grifona must make in such a
romantic scene!  I have lately been reading the poems of the
Earl of Surrey,(963) in Henry the Eighth's time; he was in
love with the fair Geraldine of Florence; I have a mind to
write under the Grifona's picture these two lines from one of
his sonnets:

"From Tuscane came my lady's worthy race,
Fair Florence was some time her auncient seat."

And then these:

"Her beauty of kinde, her vertue from above;
Happy is he that can obtaine her love!"


I don't know what of kinde means, but to be sure it was
something prodigiously expressive and gallant in those days,
by its being unintelligible now.  Adieu! Do the Chutes
cicisb`e it?

(961) I think it was the ballet de la paix.

(962) It was for a present to Mr. Stone, the Duke of
Newcastle's secretary

(963) Henry Howard, son of the Duke of Norfolk.  Under a
charge of high-treason, of which he was manifestly innocent,
this noble soldier and accomplished poet was found guilty, and
in 1547, in his thirty-first year, was beheaded on Tower Hill.
History is silent as to the name of fair Geraldine.-E.



385 Letter 146
To Sir Horace Mann.
London, Aug. 16, 1744.

I am writing to you two or three days beforehand, by way of
settling my affairs-not that I am going to be married or to
die; but something as bad as either if it were to last as
long.  You will guess that it can only be going to Houghton;
but I make as much an affair of that, as other people would of
going to Jamaica.  Indeed I don't lay in store of cake and
bandboxes, and citron-water, and cards, and cold meat, as
country-women do after the session.  My packing-up and
travelling concerns lie in very small compass; nothing but
myself and Patapan, my footman, a cloak-bag, and a couple of
books.  My old Tom is even reduced upon the article of my
journey; he is at the Bath, patching together some very bad
remains of a worn-out constitution.  I always travel without
company; for then I take my own hours and my own humours,
which I don't think the most tractable to shut up in a coach
with any body else.  You know, St. Evremont's rule for
conquering the passions, was to indulge them mine for keeping
my temper in order, is never to leave it too long with another
person.  I have found out that it will have its way, but I
make it take its way by itself.  It is such sort of reflection
as this, that makes me hate the country: it is impossible in
one house with one set of company, to be always enough upon
one's guard to make one's self agreeable, which one ought to
do, as one always expects it from others.  If I had a house of
my own in the country, and could live there now and then
alone, or frequently changing my company, I am persuaded I
should like it; at least, I fancy I should; for when one
begins to reflect why one don't like the country, I believe
one grows near liking to reflect in it.  I feel very often
that I grow to correct twenty things in myself, as thinking
them ridiculous at my age; and then with my spirit of whim and
folly, I make myself believe that this is all prudence, and
that I wish I were young enough to be as thoughtless and
extravagant as I used to be. But if I know any thing of the
matter, this is all flattering myself. I grow older, and love
my follies less-if I did not, alas! poor prudence and
reflection!

I think I have pretty well exhausted the chapter of myself.  I
will now go talk to YOU Of another fellow, who makes me look
upon myself as a very perfect character; for as I have little
merit naturally, and only pound a stray virtue now @ind then
by chance, the other gentleman seems to have no vice, rather
no villainy, but what he nurses in himself and metliodizes
with as much pains as a stoic would patience.  Indeed his
pains are not thrown away.  This painstaking person's name is
Frederic, King of Prussia.  Pray remember for the future never
to speak of him and H. W. without giving the latter the
preference.  Last week we were all alarm!  He was before
Prague with fifty thousand men, and not a man in Bohemia to
ask him, "What dost thou?"  This week we have raised a hundred
thousand Hungarians, besides vast militias and loyal
nobilities.  The King of Poland is to attack him on his march,
and the Russians to fall on Prussia.(964)  In the mean time,
his letter or address to the people of England(965) has been
published here: it is a poor performance!  His Voltaires and
his litterati should correct his works before they are
printed.  A careless song, with a little nonsense in it now
and then, does not misbecome a monarch; but to pen manifestoes
worse than the lowest commis that is kept jointly by two or
three margraves, is insufferable!

We are very strong in Flanders, but still expect to do nothing
this campaign.  The French are so entrenched, that it is
impossible to attack them.  There is talk of besieging
Maubeuge; I don't know how certainly.

Lord Middlesex's match is determined, and the writings signed.
She proves an immense fortune; they pretend a hundred and
thirty thousand pounds-what a fund for making operas!

My Lady Carteret is going to Tunbridge--there is a hurry for a
son: his only one is gone mad: about a fortnight ago he was at
the Duke of Bedford's, and as much in his few senses as ever.
At five o'clock in the morning he waked the duke and duchess
all bloody, and with the lappet of his coat held up full of
ears: he had been in the stable and cropped all the horses! He
is shut up.(966)  My lady is in the honeymoon of her grandeur:
she lives in public places, whither she is escorted by the old
beaux of her husband's court; fair white-wigged old gallants,
the Duke of Bolton,(967) Lord Tweedale, Lord Bathurst, and
Charles Fielding;(968) and she all over knots, and small
hoods, and ribands.  Her brother told me the other night,
"Indeed I think my thister doesth countenanth Ranelagh too
mutch."  They call Lord Pomfret, King Stanislaus, the queen's
father.

I heard an admirable dialogue, which has been written at the
army on the battle of Dettingen, but one can't get a copy; I
must tell you two or three strokes in it that I have heard.
Pierot asks Harlequin, "Que donne-t'on aux g`en`eraux qui ne
se sont pas trouv`es `a la bataille!"  Harl. "On leur donne le
cordon rouge."  Pier. "Et que donne-t'on au g`en`eral en
Chef(969 qui a gagn`e la victoire!"  Harl. "Son cong`e."
Pier. "Qui a soin des bless`es?"  Harl. "L'ennemi."  Adieu!

(964) This alludes to the King of Prussia's retreat from
Prague, on the approach of the Austrian army commanded by
Prince Charles Lorraine.-D.

(965) In speaking of this address of the King of Prussia, Lady
Hervey, in a letter of the 17th, says, "I think it very well
and very artfully drawn for his purpose, and very
impertinently embarrassing to our King.  He is certainly a
very artful prince, and I cannot but think his projects and
his ambition still more extensive, than people at present
imagine them."-E.

(66) On the death of his father this son succeeded to the
earldom in 1763.  He died in 1776, when the title became
extinct.-E.

(967) Charles Poulett, third Duke of Bolton.

(968) The Hon, Charles Fielding, third son of William, third
Earl of Denbigh; a lieutenant-colonel in the guards, and
Gentleman-usher to Queen Caroline.  He died in 1765.-E.

(969) Lord Stair.-D.



387 Letter 147
To Sir Horace Mann.
Houghton, Sept. 1, 1744.

I wish you joy of your victory at Velletri!(970)  I call it
yours, for you are the great spring of all that war.  I intend
to publish your life, with an Appendix, that shall contain all
the letters to you from princes, cardinals, and great men of
the time.  In speaking of Prince Lobkowitz's attempt to seize
the King of Naples at Velletri, I shall say: "for the share
our hero had in this great action, vide the Appendix, Card.
Albani's letter, p. 14."  You shall no longer be the dear
Miny, but Manone, the Great Man; you shall figure with the
Great Pan, and the Great Patapan.  I wish you and your laurels
and your operations were on the Rhine, in Piedmont, or in
Bohemia; and then Prince Charles would not have repassed the
first, nor the Prince of Conti advanced within three days of
Turin, and the King of Prussia would already have been
terrified from entering the last-all this lumping bad news
came to counterbalance your Neapolitan triumphs.  Here is all
the war to begin again! and perhaps next winter a second
edition of Dunkirk.  We could not even have the King of France
die, though he was so near it.  He was in a woful fright, and
promised the Bishop of Soissons, that if he lived, he would
have done with his women.(971)  A man with all these crowns on
his head, and attaching and disturbing all those on the heads
of other princes, who is the soul of all the havoc and ruin
that has been and is to be spread through Europe in this war,
haggling thus for his bloody life, and cheapening it at the
price of a mistress or two! and this was the fellow that they
fetched to the army to drive the brave Prince Charles beyond
the Rhine again.  It is just Such another paltry mortal(972)
that has fetched him back into Bohemia-I forget which of his
battles(973) it was, that when his army had got the victory,
they could not find the King: he had run away for a whole day
without looking behind him.

I thank you for the particulars of the action, and the list of
the prisoners: among them is one Don Theodore Diamato Amor, a
cavalier of so romantic a name, that my sister and Miss Leneve
quite interest themselves in his captivity; and make their
addresses to you, who, they hear, have such power with Prince
Lobkowitz, to obtain his liberty.  If he has Spanish gallantry
in any proportion to his name, he will immediately come to
England, and vow himself their knight.

Those verses I sent you on Mr. Pope, I assure you, were not
mine; I transcribed them from the newspapers; from whence I
must send you a very good epigram on Bishop Berkeley's
tar-water:

"Who dare deride what pious Cloyne has done?
The Church shall rise and vindicate her son;
She tells us, all her Bishops shepherds are-
And shepherds heal their rotten sheep with tar."

I am not at all surprised at my Lady Walpole's ill-humour to
you about the messenger.  If the resentments of women did not
draw them into little dirty spite, their hatred would be very
dangerous; but they vent the leisure they have to do mischief
in a thousand meannesses, which only serve to expose
themselves.

Adieu! I know nothing here but public politics, of which I
have already talked to you, and which you hear as soon as I
do.

Thank dear Mr. Chute for his letter; I will answer it very
soon; but in the country I am forced to let my pen lie fallow
between letter and letter.


(970) The Austrians had formed a scheme to surprise the
Neapolitan King and general at Velletri, and their first
column penetrated into the place, but reinforcements coming
up, they were repulsed with considerable slaughter.-E.

(971) On the 8th of August, Louis the Fifteenth was seized at
Metz, on his march to Alsace, with a malignant putrid fever,
which increased so rapidly, that, in a few days, his life was
despaired of.  In his illness, he dismissed his reigning
mistress, Madame de Chateauroux.-E.

(972) The King of Prussia.

(973) The battle of Molwitz.



388 Letter 148
To The Hon. H. S. Conway.
 Houghton, Oct. 6, 1744.

My dearest Harry,
My lord bids me tell you how much he is obliged to you for
your letter, and hopes you will accept my answer for his.
I'll tell you what, we shall both be obliged to you if you
will inclose a magnifying-glass in your next letters; for your
two last were in so diminutive a character, that we were
forced to employ all Mrs. Leneve's spectacles, besides an
ancient family reading-glass, with which my grandfather used
to begin the psalm, to discover what you said to us.  Besides
this, I have a piece of news for you: Sir Robert Walpole, when
he was made Earl of Orford, left the ministry, and with it the
palace in Downing-street; as numbers of people found out three
years ago, who, not having your integrity, were quick in
perceiving the change of his situation.  Your letter was full
as honest as you; for, though directed to Downing-street, it
would not, as other letters would have done, address itself to
the present possessor.  Do but think if it had!  The smallness
of the hand would have immediately struck my Lord Sandys with
the idea of a plot; for what he could not read' at first
sight, he would certainly have concluded must be cipher.

I march next week towards London, and have already begun to
send my heavy artillery before me, consisting of half-a-dozen
books and part of my linen: my light-horse, commanded by
Patapan, follows this day se'nnight.  A detachment of hussars
surprised an old bitch fox yesterday morning, who had lost a
leg in a former engagement; and then, having received advice
of another litter being advanced as far as Darsingham, Lord
Walpole commanded Captain Riley's horse, with a strong party
of foxhounds, to overtake them; but on the approach of our
troops the enemy stole off, and are now encamped at Sechford
common, whither we every hour expect orders to pursue them.

My dear Harry, this is all I have to tell you, and, to my
great joy, which you must forgive me, is full as memorable as
any part of the Flanders campaign.  I do not desire to have
you engaged in the least more glory than you have been.  I
should not love the remainder of you the least better for your
having lost an arm or a leg, and have as full persuasion of
your courage as if you had contributed to the slicing off
twenty pair from French officers.  Thank God. you have sense
enough to content yourself without being a hero! though I
don't quite forget your expedition a hussar-hunting the
beginning of this campaign.  Pray, no more of those jaunts.  I
don't know any body you would oblige with a present of such
game - for my part, a fragment of the oldest hussar on earth
should never have a place in my museum-they are not antique
enough; and for a live one, I must tell you, I like my raccoon
infinitely better.

Adieu! my dear Harry.  I long to see you, You will easily
believe the thought I have of being particularly well with you
is a vast addition to my impatience, though you know it is
nothing new to me to be overjoyed at your return.  Yours ever.



390 Letter 149
To Sir Horace Mann.
Houghton, Oct. 6, 1744.

Does decency insist upon one's writing within certain periods,
when one has nothing to say? because, if she does, she is the
most formal, ceremonious personage I know.  I shall not enter
into a dispute with her, as my Lady Hervey did with the
goddess of Indolence, or with the goddess of letter-writing, I
forget which, in a long letter that she sent to the Duke of
Bourbon; because I had rather write than have a dispute about
it.  Besides, I am not at all used to converse with
hierglyphic ladies.  But, I do assure you, it is merely to
avoid scolding that I set about this letter: I don't mean your
scolding, for you are all goodness to me; but my own scolding
of myself-a correction I stand in great awe of, and which I am
sure never to escape as often as I am to blame.  One can scold
other people again, or smile and jog one's foot, and affect
not to mind it; but those airs won't do with oneself; One
always comes by the worst in a dispute with one's own
conviction.

Admiral Matthews sent me down hither your great packet: I am
charmed with your prudence, and with the good sense of your
orders for the Neapolitan expedition; I won't say your good
nature, which is excessive for I think your tenderness of the
little Queen(974) a little outree, especially as their
apprehensions might have added great weight to your menaces.
I would threaten like a corsair, though I would conquer with
all the good-breeding of a Scipio.  I most devoutly wish you
success; you are sure of having me most happy with any honour
you acquire.  You have quite soared above all fear of
Goldsworthy, and, I think, must appear of consequence to any
ministry.  I am much obliged to you for the medal, and like
the design: I shall preserve it as part of your works.

I can't forgive what you say to me about the coffee-pot: one
would really think that you looked upon me as an old woman
that had left a legacy to be kept for her sake, and a curse to
attend the parting with it.  My dear child, is it treating me
justly to enter into the detail of your reasons? was it even
necessary to say, ,I have changed your coffee-pot for some
other plate?"

I have nothing to tell you but that I go to town next week,
and will then write you all I hear.  Adieu!

(974) The Queen of Naples,-Maria of Saxony, wife of Charles
the Third, King of Naples, and subsequently, on the death of
his elder brother, King of Spain.  This alludes to the
Austrian campaign in the Neapolitan territories, the attack on
the town of Velletri, etc.-E.



391 Letter 150
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, Oct 19, 1744.

I have received two or three letters from you since I wrote to
you last, and all contribute to give me fears for your
situation at Florence.  How absurdly all the Queen's ban
haughtinesses are dictated to her by her ministers, or by her
own Austriacity!  She lost all Silesia because she would not
lose a small piece of it, and she is going to lose Tuscany for
want of a neutrality, because she would not accept one for
Naples, even after all prospect of conquering it was vanished.
Every thing goes ill! the King of Sardinia beaten; and to-day
we hear of Coni lost! You will see in the papers too, that the
Victory, our finest ship, is lost, with Sir John Balchen and
nine hundred men.(975)  The expense alone of the ship is
computed at above two hundred thousand pounds.  We have
nothing good but a flying report of a victory of Prince
Charles over the Prussian, who, it 'Is said, has lost ten
thousand men, and both his legs by a cannon-ball.  I have no
notion of his losing them, but by breaking them in over-hurry
to run away.  However, it comes from a Jew, who had the first
news of the passage of the Rhine.(976)  But, my dear child,
how will this comfort me, if you are not to remain in peace at
Florence! I tremble as I write!

Yesterday morning carried off those two old beldamss, Sarah of
Marlborough and the (.countess Granville;(977) so now
Uguccioni's(978) epithalamium must be new-tricked out in
titles, for my Lady Carteret is Countess! Poor Bistino! I wish
my Lady Pomfret may leave off her translation of Froissart to
English the eight hundred and forty heroics! When I know the
particulars of old Marlborough's will, you shall.

My Lord Walpole has promised me a letter for young Gardiner;
who, by the way, has pushed his fortune en vrai b`atard,
without being so, for it never was pretended that he was my
brother's - he protests he is not; but the youth has profited
of his mother's gallantries.

I have not seen Admiral Matthews yet, but I take him to be
very mad. He walks in the Park with a cockade of three
/colours: the Duke desired a gentleman to ask him the meaning,
and all the answer he would give was, "The Treaty of Worms!
the treaty of Worms!"  I design to see him, thank him for my
packet, and inquire after the cases.

it is a most terrible loss for his parents, Lord
Beauchamp's(979) death: if they were out of the question, one
could not be sorry for such a mortification to the pride of
old Somerset.  He has written the most shocking letter
imaginable to poor Lord Hertford, telling him that it is a
judgment upon him for all his undutifulness, and that he must
always look upon himself. as the cause of' his son's death.
Lord Hertford is as good a man as lives, and has always been
most unreasonably ill-used by that old tyrant.  The title of'
Somerset will revert to Sir Edward Seymour, whose line has
been most unjustly deprived of it from the first creation.
  The Protector when only Earl of Hertford, married a great
heiress, and had a Lord Beauchamp, who was about twenty when
his mother died.  His father then married an Anne Stanhope,
with whom he was In love, and not only procured an act of
parliament to deprive Lord Beauchamp of' his honours and to
settle the title of Somerset, which he was going to have, on
the children of' this second match, but took from him even his
mother's fortune.  From him descended Sir Edward Seymour, the
Speaker, who, on King William's landing, when he said to him,
"Sir Edward, I think you are of the Duke of Somerset's
family!" replied, "No, Sir: he is of mine."

Lord Lincoln was married last Tuesday, and Lord Middlesex will
be very soon.  Have you heard the gentle manner of the French
King's dismissing Madame de Chateauroux? In the very circle,
the Bishop of Soissons(980) told her, that, as the scandal the
King had given with her was public, his Majesty thought his
repentance ought to be so too, and that he therefore forbade
her the court; and then turning to the monarch, asked him if
that was not his pleasure, who replied, Yes.  They have taken
away her pension too, and turned out even laundresses that she
had recommended for the future Dauphiness.  A-propos to the
Chateauroux: there is a Hanoverian come over, who was so
ingenuous as to tell Master Louis,(981) how like he is to M.
Walmoden.  You conceive that "nous autres souvereins nous
n'aimons pas qu'on se m`eprenne aux gens:" we don't love that
our Fitzroys should be scandalized with any mortal
resemblance.

I must tell you a good piece of discretion of a Scotch
soldier, whom Mr. Selwyn met on Bexley Heath walking back to
the army.  He had met with a single glove at Higham, which had
been left there last year in an inn by an officer now in
Flanders: this the fellow was carrying in hopes of a little
money; but, for fear he should lose the glove, wore it all the
way.

Thank you for General Braitwitz's deux potences.(982)  I hope
that one of them, at least will rid us of the Prussian.
Adieu! my dear child: all my wishes are employed about
Florence.

(975) The Victory, of a hundred and ten brass guns, was lost,
between the 4th and 5th of October, near Alderney.-E.

(976) This report proved to be without foundation.

(977) Mother of John, Lord Carteret, who succeeded her in the
title.

(978) A Florentine, who had employed an abbe of his
acquaintance to write an epithalamium on Lord Carteret's
marriage, consisting of eight hundred and forty Latin lines.
Sir H. Mann had given an account of the composition of this
piece of literary flattery in one of his letters to
Walpole.-D.

(979) Only son of Algernon, Earl of Hertford, afterwards the
last Duke of Somerset of that branch. [lord Beauchamp was
seized with the smallpox at Bologna, and, after an illness of
four days, died on the 11th of September; on which day he had
completed his nineteenth year.]

(980) Son of Fitzjames, Duke of Berwick.  This Bishop of
Soissons, on the King being given over at Metz, prevailed on
him to part with his mistress, the Duchess de Chateauroux; but
the King soon recalled her, and confined the bishop to his
diocese.

(981) Son of King George II. by Madame Walmoden, created
Countess of Yarmouth.

(982) General Braitwitz, commander of the Queen of Hungary's
troops in Tuscany, speaking of the two powers, his mistress
and the King of Sardinia, instead of' saying "ces deux
pouvoirs," said "ces deux potences."




393 Letter 151
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, Nov. 9, 1744.

I find I must not wait any longer for news, if I intend to
keep up our correspondence.  Nothing happens; nothing has
since I wrote last, but Lord Middlesex's wedding;(983) which
was over above a week before it was known.  I believe the
bride told it then; for he and all his family are so silent,
that they Would never have mentioned it: she might have popped
out a child, before a single Sackville would have been at the
expense of a syllable to justify her.

Our old acquaintance, the Pomfrets, are not so reserved about
their great matrimony: the new Lady Granville was at home the
other night for the first time of her being mistress of the
house.  I was invited, for I am in much favour with them all,
but found myself extremely d`eplac`e: there was nothing but
the Winchilseas and Baths, and the Gleanings of a party
stuffed out into a faction, some foreign ministers, and the
whole blood of Fermor.  My Lady Pomfret asked me if I
corresponded still with the Grifona: "No," I said, "since I
had been threatened with a regale of hams and Florence wine, I
had dropped it."  My Lady Granville said, "You was afraid of
being thought interested."--"Yes," said the queen-mother, with
all the importance with which she used to blunder out pieces
of heathen mythology, "I think it was very ministerial."
Don't you think that the Minister word came in as awkwardly as
I did into their room?  The Minister is most gracious to me;
he has returned my visit, which, you know, IS never practised
by that rank: I put it all down to my father's account, who is
not likely to keep up the civility.

You will see the particulars of old Marlborough's will in the
Evening Posts of this week: it is as extravagant as one should
have expected; but I delight in her begging that no part of
the Duke of Marlborough's life may be written in verse by
Glover and Mallet, to whom she gives five hundred pounds
apiece for writing it in prose.(984)  There is a great deal of
humour in the thought: to be sure the spirit of the dowager
Leonidas(985) inspired her with it.

All public affairs in agitation at present go well for us;
Prince Charles in Bohemia, the raising of the siege of Coni,
and probably of that of Fribourg, are very good circumstances.
I shall be very tranquil this winter, if Tuscany does not come
into play, or another scene of invasion.  In a fortnight meets
the Parliament; nobody guesses what the turn of the Opposition
will be.  Adieu! My love to the Chutes.  I hope you now and
then make my other compliments: I never forget the Princess,
nor (ware hams!) the Grifona.

(983) The Earl of Middlesex married Grace, daughter and sole
heiress of Lord Shannon.  On the death of his father in 1765,
he succeeded, as second Duke of Dorset, and died without
issue, in 1769.-E.

(984) Glover, though in embarrassed circumstances at the time,
renounced the legacy; Mallet accepted it, but never fulfilled
the terms.-E.

(985) Glover wrote a dull heroic poem on the action of
Leonidas at Thermopylae.  ["Though far indeed from being a
vivid or arresting picture of antiquity, Leonidas," says Mr.
Campbell, "the local descriptions of Leonidas, its pure
sentiments, and the classical images which it recalls, render
it interesting, as the monument of an accomplished and amiable
mind."]



394 Letter 152
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, Nov. 26, 1744.

I have not prepared for you a great event, because it was
really,
 so unlikely to happen, that I was afraid of being the author
of a mere political report; but, to keep you no longer in
suspense, Lord Granville has resigned: that is the term
"l'honn`ete fa`con de parler;" but, in few words, the truth of
the history is, that the Duke of Newcastle (by the way, mind
that the words I am going to use are not mine, but his
Majesty's,) "being grown as jealous of Lord Granville(986) as
he had been of Lord Orford, and wanting to be first minister
himself, which, a puppy! how should he be?"  (autre phrase
royale) and his brother being as susceptible of the noble
passion of jealousy as he is, have long been conspiring to
overturn the great lord.  Resolution and capacity were all
they wanted to bring it about; for the imperiousness and
universal contempt which their rival had for them, and for the
rest of the ministry, and for the rest of the nation, had made
almost all men his engines; and, indeed, he took no pains to
make friends: his maxim was, "Give any man the Crown on his
side, and he can defy every thing."  Winnington asked him, if
that were true, how he came to be minister? About a fortnight
ago, the whole cabinet-council, except Lord Bath, Lord
Winchilsea, Lord Tweedale, the Duke of Bolton, and my good
brother-in-law,(987) (the two last severally bribed with the
promise of Ireland,) did venture to let the King know, that he
must part with them or with Lord Granville.  The monarch does
not love to be forced, and his son is full as angry.  Both
tried to avoid the rupture.  My father was sent for, but
excused himself from coming till last Thursday, and even then
would not ,go to the King; and at last gave his opinion very
unwillingly.  But on Saturday it was finally determined: Lord
Granville resigned the seals, which are given back to my Lord
President Harrington.  Lord Winchilsea quits too; but for all
the rest of that connexion, they have agreed not to quit, but
to be forced out: so Mr. Pelham must have a new struggle to
remove every one.  He can't let them stay in; because, to
secure his power, he must bring in Lord Chesterfield, Pitt,
the chief patriots, and perhaps some Tories. The King has
declared that my Lord Granville has his opinion and
affection-the Prince warmly and openly espouses him.  Judge
how agreeably the two brothers will enjoy their ministry!
To-morrow the Parliament meets: all in suspense! every body
will be staring at each other! I believe the war will still go
on, but a little more Anglicized.  For my part, I behold all
with great tranquillity; I cannot --be sorry for Lord
Granville,-for he certainly sacrificed everything to please
the King; I cannot be glad for the Pelhams, for they sacrifice
every thing to their own jealousy and ambition.

Who are mortified, are the fair Sophia and Queen Stanislaus.
However, the daughter carries it off heroically: the very
night of her fall she went to the Oratorio.  I talked to her
much, and recollected all that had been said to me upon the
like occasion three years ago: I succeeded, and am invited to
her assembly next Tuesday.  Tell Uguccioni that she still
keeps conversazioni, or he will hang himself.  She had no
court, but an ugly sister and the fair old-fashioned Duke of
Bolton.  It put me in mind of a scene in Harry VIII., where
Queen Catherine appears after her divorce, with Patience her
waiting-maid, and Griffith her gentleman-usher.

My dear child, voil`a le monde! are you as great a philosopher
about it as I am? You cannot imagine how I entertain myself,
especially as all the ignorant flock hither, and conclude that
my lord must be minister again.  Yesterday, three bishops came
to do him homage; and who should be one of them but Dr.
Thomas.(988) the only man mitred by Lord Granville! As I was
not at all mortified with our fall, I am only diverted with
this imaginary restoration.  They little think how incapable
my lord is of business again.  He has this whole summer been
troubled with bloody water upon the least motion; and to-day
Ranby assured me, that he has a stone in his bladder, which he
himself believed before: so now he must never use the least
exercise, never go into a chariot again; and if ever to
Houghton, in a litter.  Though this account will grieve you, I
tell it you, that you may know what to expect; yet it is
common for people to live many years in his situation.

if you are not as detached from every thing as I am, you will
wonder at my tranquillity, to be able to write such variety in
the midst of hurricanes.  It costs me nothing; so I shall
write on, and tell you an adventure of my own.  The town has
been trying all this winter to beat pantomimes off the stage,
very boisterously; for it is the way here to make even an
affair of taste and sense a matter of riot and arms.
Fleetwood, the master of Drury-Lane, has omitted nothing to
support them, as they supported his house.  About ten days
ago, he let into the pit great numbers of Bear-garden bruisers
(that is the term), to knock down every body that hissed.  The
pit rallied their forces, and drove them out: I was sitting
very quietly in the side-boxes, contemplating all this.  On a
sudden the curtain flew up, and discovered the whole stage
filled with blackguards, armed with bludgeons and clubs, to
menace the audience.  This raised the greatest uproar; and
among the rest, who flew 'into a passion, but your friend the
philosopher.  In short, one of the actors, advancing to the
front of the stage to make an apology for the manager, he had
scarce begun to say, "Mr. Fleetwood--" when your friend, with
a most audible voice and dignity of anger, called out, "He is
an impudent rascal!"  The whole pit huzzaed, and repeated the
words.  Only think of my being a popular orator! But what was
still better, while my shadow of a person was dilating to the
consistence of a hero, One of the chief ringleaders of the
riot, coming under the box where I sat, and pulling off his
hat, said, "Mr.  Walpole, what would you please to have us do
next?" It is impossible to describe to you the confusion into
which this apostrophe threw me.  I sank down into the box, and
have never since ventured to set my foot into the playhouse.
The next night, the uproar was repeated with greater violence,
and nothing was heard but voices calling out, "Where's Mr. W.?
where's Mr. W.?"  In short, the whole town has been
entertained with my prowess, and Mr. Conway has given me the
name of Wat Tyler; which, I believe, would have stuck by me,
if this new episode of Lord Granville had not luckily
interfered.

We every minute expect news of the Mediterranean engagement
for, besides your account, Birtles has written the same from
Genoa.  We expect good news, too, from Prince Charles, who is
driving the King of Prussia before him.  In the mean time, his
wife the Archduchess is dead, which may be a signal loss to
him.

I forgot to tell you that, on Friday, Lord Charles Hay,(989)
who has more of the parts of an Irishman than of a Scot, told
my Lady Granville at the drawing-room, on her seeing so full a
court, "that people were come out of curiosity."  The
Speaker,(990) is the happiest of any man in these bustles: he
says, "this Parliament has torn two favourite ministers from
the throne."  His conclusion is, that the power of the
Parliament will in the end be so great, that nobody can be
minister but their own speaker.

Winnington says my Lord Chesterfield and Pitt will have places
before old Marlborough's legacy to them for being patriots is
paid.  My compliments to the family of Suares on the
Vittorina's marriage.  Adieu!

(986) By the death of his mother, Lord Carteret had become
Earl Granville.-E.

(987) George, Earl Cholmondeley.

(988) Bishop of Lincoln [successively translated to Salisbury
and Winchester.  He died in 1781.]

(989) Brother of Lord Tweedale.

(990) Arthur Onslow.



397 Letter 153
To sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, Dec.  '24, 1744.

You will wonder what has become of me: nothing has.  I know it
is above three weeks since I wrote to you; but I will tell you
the reason.  I have kept a parliamentary silence, which I must
'explain to you.  Ever since Lord Granville went out, all has
been in suspense. The leaders of the Opposition immediately
imposed silence upon their party; every thing passed without
the least debate--in short, all were making their bargains.
One has heard of the corruption of courtiers; but believe me,
the impudent prostitution of patriots, going to market with
their honesty, beats it to nothing.  Do but think of two
hundred men of the most consummate virtue, setting themselves
to sale for three weeks!  I have been reprimanded by the wise
for saying that they all stood like servants at a country
statute fair to be hired.  All this while nothing was certain:
one day the coalition was settled; the next, the treaty broke
off-I hated to write to you what I might contradict next post.
Besides, in my last letter I remember telling you that the
Archduchess was dead; she did not die till a fortnight
afterwards.

The result of the whole is this: the King, instigated by Lord
Granville, has used all his ministry as ill as possible, and
has with the greatest difficulty been brought to consent to
the necessary changes.  Mr. Pelham has had as much difficulty
to regulate the disposition of places.  Numbers of lists of
the hungry have been given in by their centurions of those,
several Tories have refused to accept the proffered posts
some, from an impossibility of being rechosen for their
Jacobite counties.  But upon the whole, it appears that their
leaders have had very little influence with them; for not
above four or five are come into place.  The rest will stick
to Opposition.  Here is a list of the changes, as made last
Saturday:

Duke of Devonshire, Lord Steward, in the room of the Duke of
Dorset.
Duke of Dorset, Lord President, in Lord Harrington's room.
Lord Chesterfield,+ Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, in the Duke of
Devonshire's.
Duke of Bedford,+ Lord Sandwich,+ George Grenville,+ Lord Vere
Beauclerc,(991) and Admiral Anson, Lords of the Admiralty, in
the room of Lord Winchilsea,* Dr. Lee,* Cockburn,* Sir Charles
Hardy,* and Philipson.*
Mr. Arundel and George Lyttelton,f Lords of the Treasury, in
the room of Compton* and Gybbon.*
Lord Gowerf again Privy Seal, in Lord Cholmondeley's* room,
who is made Vice-Treasurer of Ireland in Harry Vane's.*
Mr. Doddington,+ Treasurer of the Navy, in Sir John
Rushout's.*
Mr. Waller,+ Cofferer, in Lord Sandys'.*
Lord Hobart, Captain of the Pensioners, in Lord Bathurst's.*
Sir John Cotton, +(992) Treasurer of the Chambers, in Lord
Hobart'S.(993)
Mr. Keene, Paymaster of the Pensions, in Mr. Hooper's.*
Sir John Philippsf and John Pitt+ Commissioners of Trade, in
Mr. Keene's and Sir Charles Gilmour's.*
William Chetwynd,+ Master of the Mint, in Mr. Arundel's.
Lord Halifax,+ Master of the Buck-hounds, in Mr. Jennison's,
who has a pension.

All those with a cross are from the Opposition; those with a
star, the turned-out, and are of the Granville and Bath
squadron, except Lord Cholmondeley, (who, too, had connected
with the former,) and Mr. Philipson.  The King parted with
great regret with Lord Cholmondeley, and complains loudly of
the force put upon him.  The Prince, who is full as warm as
his father for Lord Granville, has already turned out
Lyttelton, who was his secretary, and Lord Halifax; and has
named Mr. Drax and Lord Inchiquin(994) in their places.  You
perceive the great Mr. William Pitt is not in the list, though
he comes thoroughly into the measures.  To preserve his
character and authority in the Parliament, he was unwilling to
accept any thing yet: the ministry very rightly insisted that
he should; he asked for secretary at war, knowing it would be
refused-and it was.(995)

By this short sketch, and it is impossible to be more
explanatory, you will perceive that all is confusion: all
parties broken to Pieces, and the whole Opposition by tens and
by twenties selling themselves for profit-power they get none!
It is not easy to say where power resides at present: it is
plain that it resides not in the King; and yet he has enough
to hinder any body else from having it.  His new governors
have no interest with him-scarce any converse with him.

The Pretender's son is owned in France as Prince of Wales; the
princes of the blood have been to visit him in form.  The
Duchess of Chateauroux is poisoned there; so their monarch is
as ill-used as our most gracious King!(996)  How go your
Tuscan affairs? I am always trembling for you, though I am
laughing at every thing else.  My father is pretty well: he is
taking a preparation of Mr. Stephens's(997) medicine; but I
think all his physicians begin to agree that he has no large
stone.

Adieu! my dear child: I think the present comedy cannot be of
long duration.  the Parliament is adjourned for the holidays;
I am impatient to see the first division.

(991) Lord Vere Beauclerc, third son of the first Duke of St.
Albans, afterwards created Lord Vere, of Hanworth.  He entered
early into a maritime life, and distinguished himself in
several commands, He died in 1781.-E.

(992) The King was much displeased that an adherent of the
exiled family should be forced into the service of his own. in
consequence of this appointment a caricature was circulated,
representing the ministers thrusting Sir John, who was
extremely corpulent, down the King's throat.

(993) John, first Lord Hobart, so created in 1728, by the
interest of his sister, Lady Suffolk, the mistress of George
the Second.  In 1746 he was created Earl of Buckinghamshire;
and died in 1756.-D.

(994) William O'Brien, fourth Earl of Inchiquin, in Ireland.
He died in 1777.-E.

(995) Pitt alone was placeless.  He loftily declared, that he
would accept no office except that of secretary at war, and
the ministers were not yet able to dispense with Sir William
Yonge in that department.  This resolution of Pitt, joined to
the King's pertinacity against him, excluded him, for the
present, from any share in power."-Lord Mahon, vol. iii. p.
315.

(996) The Duchess died on the 8th of December.  The Biog.
Univ. says, that the rumour of her having been poisoned was
altogether without foundation.-E.

(997) It was Dr. Jurin's preparation.



399 Letter 154
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, Jan. 4, 1745.

When I receive your long letters I am ashamed: mine are notes
in comparison.  How do you contrive to roll out your patience
into two sheets? You certainly don't love me better than I do
you; and yet if our loves were to b@ sold by the quire, you
would have by far the more magnificent stock to dispose of.  I
can only say that age has already an effect on the vigour of
my pen; none on yours: it is not, I assure you, for you alone,
but my ink is at low water-mark for all my acquaintance.  My
present shame arises from a letter of eight sides, of December
8th, which I received from you last post; but before I say a
word to that, I must tell you that I have at last received the
cases; three with gesse figures, and one with Lord Conway's
gun- barrels: I thought there were to be four, besides the
guns; but I quite forget, and did not even remember what they
were to contain.  Am not I in your debt again? Tell me, for
you know how careless I am.  Look over your list, and see
whether I have received all.  There were four barrels, the
Ganymede, the Sleeping Cupid, the model of my statue, the
Musaeum Florentinum, and some seeds for your brother.  But
alas! though I received them in gross, I did not at all in
detail; the model was broken into ten thousand bits, and the
Ganymede shorn in two: besides some of the fingers quite
reduced to powder.  Rysbrach has undertaken to mend him.  The
little Morpheus arrived quite whole, and is charmingly pretty;
I like it better in plaster than in the original black marble.

It is not being an upright senator to promise one's vote
beforehand, especially in a money matter; but I believe so
many excellent patriots have just done the same thing, that I
shall venture readily to engage my promise to you, to get you
any sum for the defence of Tuscany -why it is to defend you
and my own country! my own palace in via di santo
spirits,(998) my own Princess `epuis`ee, and all my family! I
shall quite make interest for you: nay, I would speak to our
new ally, and your old acquaintance, Lord Sandwich, to assist
in it; but I could have no hope of getting at his ear, for he
has put on such a first-rate tie-wig, on his admission to the
admiralty board, that nothing without the lungs of a boatswain
can ever think to penetrate the thickness of the curls.  I
think, however, it does honour to the dignity of ministers:
when he was but a patriot, his wig was not of half its present
gravity.  There are no more changes made: all is quiet yet;
but next Thursday the Parliament meets to decide the
complexion of the session.  My Lord Chesterfield goes next
week to Holland, and then returns for Ireland.

The great present disturbance in politics is my Lady
Granville's assembly; which I do assure you distresses the
Pelhams infinitely more than a mysterious meeting of the
States would, and far more than the abrupt breaking up of the
Diet at Grodno.  She had begun to keep Tuesdays before her
lord resigned, which now she continues with greater zeal.  Her
house is very fine, she very handsome, her lord very agreeable
and extraordinary; and yet the Duke of Newcastle wonders that
people will go thither. He mentioned to my father my going
there, who laughed at him; Cato's a proper person to trust
with such a childish  jealousy!  Harry Fox says, "Let the Duke
of Newcastle open his own house, and see if all that come
thither are his friends."  The fashion now is to send cards to
the women, and to declare that all men Are welcome without
being asked.  This is a piece of ease that shocks the prudes
of the last age.  You can't imagine how my Lady Granville
shines in doing favours; you know she is made for it.  My lord
has new furnished his mother's apartment for her, and has
given her a magnificent set of dressing plate: he is very fond
of her, and she as fond of his being so.

You will have heard of Marshal Belleisle's being made a
prisoner at Hanover: the world will believe it was not by
accident.  He is sent for over hither: the first thought was
to confine him to the Tower, but that is contrary to the
politesse of modern war: they talk of sending him to
Nottingham, where Tallard was.  I am sure, if he is prisoner
at large anywhere, we could not have a worse inmate! so
ambitious and intriguing a man, who was author of this whole
war, will be no bad general to be ready to head the Jacobites
on any insurrection.(999)

I can say nothing more about young Gardiner, but that I don't
think my father at all inclined now to have any letter written
for him.  Adieu!

(998) The street in Florence where Mr. Mann lived.
(999) Belleisle and his brother, who had been sent by the King

of France on a mission to the King of Prussia, were detained,
while changing horses, at Elbengerode, and from thence
conveyed to England; where, refusing to give their parole in
the mode it was required, they were confined in Windsor
Castle.




400 Letter 155
To sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, Jan. 14, 1745.

I have given my uncle the letter from M. de Magnan; he had
just received another from him at Venice, to desire his
recommendation to you.  His history is, first,-the Regent
picked him up, (I don't know from whence, but he is of the
Greek church,) to teach the present Duke of Orleans the Russ
tongue, when they had a scheme for marrying him into Muscovy.
At Paris, Lord Waldegrave(1000) met with him, and sent him
over hither, where they pensioned him and he was to be a spy,
but made nothing out; till the King was weary of giving him
money, and then they despatched him to Vienna, with a
recommendation to Count d'Uhlefeldt, who, I suppose, has
tacked him upon the Great Duke.  My uncle says, he knows no
ill of him; that you may be civil to him, but not enter into
correspondence with him, you need not; he is of no use.
Apropos to you; I have been in a fright about you; we were
told that Prince Lobkowitz was landed at Harwich; I did not
like the name; and as he has been troublesome to you, I did
not know but he might fancy he had some complaints against
you.  I wondered you had never mentioned his being set out;
but it is his son, a travelling boy of twenty; he is sent
under the care of an apothecary and surgeon.

The Parliament is met: one hears of the Tory Opposition
continuing, but nothing has appeared; all is quiet.  Lord
Chesterfield is set out for the Hague - I don't know what ear
the States will lend to his embassy, when they hear with what
difficulty the King was brought to give him a parting
audience; and which, by a watch, did not last five-and-forty
seconds.  The Granville faction are still the constant and
only countenanced people at court.  Lord Winchilsea, one of
the disgraced, played at court On Twelfth-night, and won: the
King asked him the next morning, how much he had for his own
share?(1001)  He replied, "Sir, about a quarter's salary."  I
liked the spirit, and was talking to him Of it the next night
at Lord Granville's: "Why, yes," said he, "I think it showed
familiarity at least: tell it your father--I don't think he
will dislike it." My Lady Granville gives a ball this week,
but in a manner a private one, to the two families of Carteret
and Fermor and their intimacies: there is a fourth sister,
Lady Jullana,(1002) who is very handsome, but I think not so
well as Sophia: the latter thinks herself breeding.

I will tell you a very good thing: Lord Baltimore will not
come into the admiralty, because in the new commission they
give Lord Vere Beauclerc the precedence to him, and he has
dispersed printed papers with precedents in his favour.  A
gentleman, I don't know who, the other night at Tom's
coffee-house, said, "It put him in mind of Ponkethman's
petition in the Spectator, where he complains, that formerly
he used to act second chair in Dioclesian, but now was reduced
to dance fifth flowerpot."

The Duke of Montagu has found out an old penny-history-book,
called the Old Woman's Will of Ratcliffe-Highway, which he has
bound up with his mother-in-law's, Old Marlborough,(1003)
only-tearing away the title-page of the latter.

My father has been extremely ill this week with his disorder--
I think the physicians are more and more persuaded that it is
the stone in his bladder.  He is taking a preparation of Mrs.
Stevens's medicine, a receipt of one Dr. Jurin, which we began
to fear was too violent for him: I made his doctor angry with
me, by arguing on this medicine, which I never could
comprehend.  it is of so great violence, that it Is to split a
stone when it arrives at it, and yet it is to do no damage to
all the tender intestines through which it must first
pass.(1004)  I told him, I thought it was like an admiral
going on a secret expedition of war, with instructions, which
are not to be opened till he arrives in such a latitude.

George Townshend,(1005) my lord's eldest son, who is at the
Hague on his travels, has had an offer to raise a regiment for
their service, of which he is to be colonel, with power of
naming all his own officers.  It was proposed, that it should
consist of Irish Roman Catholics, but the regency of Ireland
have represented against that, because they think they will
all desert to the French. He is now to try it of Scotch, which
will scarce succeed, unless he will let all the officers be of
the same nation.  An affair of this kind first raised the late
Duke of Argyll; and was the cause of the first quarrel with
the Duke of Marlborough, who was against his coming into our
army in the same rank.

Sir Thomas Hanmer has at last published his Shakspeare: he has
made several alterations, but they will be the less talked of,
as he has not marked in the text, margin, or notes, where or
why he has made any change; but every body must be obliged to
collate it with other editions.  One most curiously absurd
alteration I have been told.  In Othello, it is said of
Cassio, "a Florentine, one almost damned in a fair wife."  It
happens that there is no other mention in the play of Cassio's
wife.  Sir Thomas has altered it-how do you think?-no, I
should be sorry if you could think how-"almost damned in a
fair phiz!"-what a tragic word! and what sense!

Adieu! I see advertised a translation of Dr. Cocchi's book on
living on vegetables:(1006)  Does he know any thing of it? My
service to him and every body.

(1000) James, first Earl of Waldegrave, ambassador at Paris,
K. G. He died in 1741.-D.

(1001) Those who play at court on Twelfth-night, make a bank
with several people.

(1002) Lady Juliana Fermor, married in 1751 to Thomas Penn,
Esq. (son of William Penn, the great legislator of the
Quakers) one of the proprietors of Pennsylvania.  He died in
1775, and Lady Juliana in 1781.-E.

(1003) The Duchess of Marlborough's will was published in a
thin octavo volume.-D.

(1004) Mrs. Stephens's remedy for the stone made for some
time, the greatest noise, and met both with medical
approbation and national reward.  In 1742, Dr. James Parsons
published a pamphlet on the subject, which Dr. Mead describes
as @' a very useful book; in which both the mischiefs done by
the medicine, and the artifices employed to bring it into
vogue are set in a clear light."--E.

(1005) Afterwards first Marquis Townshend, Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland, Master General of the Ordnance. etc.

(1006) The Doctor's treatise "Di Vitto Pythagorico," appeared
this year in England, under the title of "The Pythagorean
Diet; or Vegetables only conducive to the Preservation of
Health and the Cure of Diseases."-E.




402 letter 156
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, Feb. 1, 1745.

I am glad my letters, obscure as they of course must be, give
you any light into England; but don't mind them too much; they
may be partial; must be imperfect: don't negotiate upon their
authority, but have Capello's(1007) example before your eyes!
How I laugh when I see him important, and see my Lady
Pomfret's letters at the bottom of his instructions! how it
would make a philosopher smile at the vanity of politics! How
it diverts me, who can entertain myself at the expense of
philosophy, politics, or any thing else! Mr. Conway says I
laugh at all serious characters-so I do-and at myself too, who
am far from being of the number.  Who would not laugh at a
world, where so ridiculous a creature as the Duke of Newcastle
can overturn ministries! Don't take me for a partisan of Lord
Granville's because I despise his rivals; I am not for
adopting his measures; they were wild and dangerous -. in his
single capacity, I think him a great genius(1008) and without
having recourse to the Countess's translatable periods, am
pleased with his company.  His frankness charms one when it is
not necessary to depend upon it: and his contempt for fools is
very flattering to any one who happens to know the present
ministry.  Their coalition goes on as One should expect; they
have the name of having effected it; and the Opposition is no
longer mentioned: yet there is not a half-witted prater in the
House but can divide with every new minister on his side,
except Lyttelton, whenever he pleases.  They actually do every
day bring in popular bills, and on the first tinkling of the
brass, all the new bees swarm back to the Tory side of the
House.  The other day, on the Flanders army, Mr. Pitt came
down to prevent this: he was very ill, but made a very strong
and much admired speech for coalition,(1009) which for that
day succeeded, and the army was voted with but one negative,.
But now the Emperor (1010) is dead, and every thing must wear
a new face.  If it produces a peace, Mr. Pelham is a fortunate
man!  He will do extremely well at the beginning of peace,
like the man in Madame de la Fayette's Memoirs, Qui exer`coit
extr`emement bien sa charge, quand il n'avoit rien `a faire."
However, do you keep well with them, and be sure don't write
me back any treason, in answer to all I write to you: you are
to please them; I think of them -is they are.

The new Elector(1011) seems to set out well for us, though
there are accounts of his having taken the style of Archduke,
as claiming the Austrian succession: if he has, it will be
like the children's game of beat knaves out of doors, where
you play the pack twenty times over; one gets pam, the other
gets pam, but there is no conclusion to the game till one side
has never a card left.

After my ill success with the baronet,(1012) to whom I gave a
letter for
 you.  I shall always be very cautious how I recommend
barbarians to your protection.  I have this morning been
solicited for some credentials for a Mr. Oxenden.(1013)  I
could not help laughing: he is a son of Sir George, my Lady
W.'s famous lover! Can he want recommendations to Florence?
However, I must give him a letter; but beg you will not give
yourself any particular trouble about him, for I
do not know him enough to bow to.  His person is good: that
and his name, I suppose, will bespeak my lady's attentions,
and save you the fatigue of doing him many honours.

Thank Mr. Chute for his letter; I will answer it very soon.  I
delight in the article of the Mantua Gazette.  Adieu!

(1007) The Venetian ambassador.

(1008) Swift, in speaking of Lord Granville, says, that "he
carried away from college more Greek, Latin, and philosophy
than properly became a person of his rank;" and Walpole, in
his Memoires, describes him as "an extensive scholar, master
of all classic criticism, and of all modern politics."-E.

(1009) "Mr. Pitt, who had been laid up with the gout, came
down with the mien and apparatus of an invalid, on purpose to
make a full declaration of his sentiments on our present
circumstances.  What he said was enforced with much grace both
of action and elocution.  He commended the ministry for
pursuing moderate and healing measures, and such -,is tended
to set the King at the head of all his people." See Mr.- P.
Yorke's MS. Parliamentary Journal.-E.

(1010) Charles Vii.  Elector of Bavaria.

(1011) Maximilian Joseph.  He died in 1777.-E.

(1012) Sir William Maynard. (He married the daughter of Sir
Cecil Bisshopp, and died in 1772.]

(1013) Afterwards Sir Henry Oxenden, the sixth baronet of the
family, and eldest son of Sir George Oxenden, for many years a
lord of the treasury during the reign of George the Second.
He died in 1803.-E.



404 Letter 157
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, Feb. 28, 1745.

You have heard from your brother the reason of my not having
written to you so long.  I have been out but twice since my
father fell into this illness, which is now near a month; and
all that time either continually in his room, or obliged to
see multitudes of people; for it is most wonderful how every
body of all kinds has affected to express their concern for
him.  He has been out of danger above this week; but I can't
say he mended at all perceptibly, till these last three days.
His spirits are amazing, and his constitution more; for Dr.
Hulse, said honestly from the first, that if he recovered, it
would be from his own strength, not from their art.  After the
four or five first days, in which they gave him the bark, they
resigned him to the struggles of his own good temperament-and
it has surmounted! surmounted an explosion and discharge of
thirty-two pieces of stone, a constant and vast effusion of
blood for five days, a fever of three weeks, a perpetual flux
of water, and sixty-nine years, already (one should think)
worn down with his vast fatigues! How much more he will ever
recover, one scarce dare hope about: for us, he is greatly
recovered; for himself-

March 4th.

I had written thus far last week, without being able to find a
moment to finish.  In the midst of all my attendance on my
lord and receiving visits, I am forced to go out and thank
those that have come and sent; for his recovery is now at such
a pause, that I fear it is in vain to expect much farther
amendment.  How dismal a prospect for him, with the possession
of the greatest understanding in the world, not the least
impaired to lie without any use of it! for to keep him from
pains and restlessness, he takes so much opiate, that he is
scarce awake four hours of the four-and-twenty; but I -will
say no more on this.

Our coalition goes on thrivingly; but at the expense of the
old Court, who are all discontented, and are likely soon to
show their resentment.  The brothers have seen the best days
of their ministry.  The Hanover troops dismissed to please the
Opposition, and taken again with their consent, under the
cloak of an additional subsidy to the Queen of Hungary, who is
to pay them.  This has set the patriots in so villainous a
light, that they will be ill able to support a minister who
has thrown such an odium on the Whigs, after they had so
stoutly supported that measure last year, and which, after all
the clamour, is now universally adopted, as you see.  If my
Lord Granville had any resentment, as he seems to have nothing
but thirst, sure there is no vengeance he might not take! So
far from contracting any prudence from his fall, he laughs it
off every night over two or three bottles.  The countess is
with child.  I believe she and the countess-mother have got
it; for there is nothing ridiculous which they have not done
and said about it.  There was a private masquerade lately at
the Venetian ambassadress's for the Prince of Wales, who named
the company, and expressly excepted my Lady Lincoln and others
of the Pelham faction.  My Lady Granville came late, dressed
like Imoinda, and handsomer than one of the houris - the
Prince asked her why she would not dance? , Indeed, Sir, I was
afraid I could not have come at all, for I had a fainting fit
after dinner." The other night my Lady Townshend made a great
ball on her son's coming of age: I went for a little while,
little thinking of dancing.  I asked my Lord Granville, why my
lady did not dance?  "Oh, Lord! I wish you would ask her: she
will with you." I was caught, and did walk down one country
dance with her; but the prudent Signora-madre would not let
her expose the young Carteret any farther.

You say, you expect much information about Belleisle, but
there has not (in the style of the newspapers) the least
particular transpired.  He was at first kept magnificently
close at Windsor; but the expense proving above one hundred
pounds per day, they have taken his parole, and sent him to
Nottingham, `a la Tallarde.  Pray, is De Sade with you still'?
his brother has been taken too by the Austrians.

My Lord Coke is going to be married to a Miss Shawe,(1014) of
forty thousand pounds.  Lord Hartington(1015) is contracted to
Lady Charlotte Boyle, the heiress of Burlington, and sister of
the unhappy Lady Euston; but she is not yet old enough.  Earl
Stanhope,(1016) too, has at last lifted up his eyes from
Euclid, and directed them to matrimony.  He has chosen the
eldest sister of your acquaintance Lord Haddington.  I revive
about you and Tuscany.  I will tell you. what is thought to
have reprieved you: it is much suspected that the King of
Spain(1017) is dead.  I hope those superstitious people will
pinch the queen, as they do witches, to make her loosen the
charm that has kept the Prince of Asturias from having
children.  At least this must turn out better than the death
of the Emperor has.

The Duke,(1018) you hear, is named generalissimo, with Count
Koningseg, Lord Dunmore,(1019) and Ligonier,(1020) under him.
Poor boy! he is most Brunswickly happy with his drums and
trumpets.  Do but think that this sugar-plum was to tempt him
to swallow that bolus the Princess of Denmark!(1021)  What
will they do if they have children?  The late Queen never
forgave the Duke of Richmond, for telling her that his
children would take place before the Duke's grandchildren.

I inclose you a pattern for a chair, which your brother
desired me to send you.  I thank you extremely for the views
of Florence; you can't imagine what wishes they have awakened.
My best thanks to Dr. Cocci for his book: I have delivered all
the copies as directed.  Mr. Chute will excuse me yet; the
first moment I have time I will write.  I have: just received
your letter of Feb. 16, and grieve for your disorder: you
know, how much concern your ill health gives m.  Adieu! my
dear child: I write with twenty people in the room.

(1014) This marriage did not take place.  Lord Coke afterwards
married Lady Campbell; and Miss Shawe, William, fifth Lord
Byron, the immediate predecessor of the great poet.-E.

(1015) In 1755 he succeeded his father as fourth Duke of
Devonshire.  He died at Spa, in 1764; having filled at
different times, the offices of lord lieutenant of Ireland,
first lord of the treasury, and lord chamberlain of the
household.  His marriage with Lady Charlotte Boyle took place
in March 1748.-E.

(1016) Philip, second Earl Stanhope.  See ant`e, p. 308.
Letter 96.  He married, in July following, Lady Grizel
Hamilton, daughter of Charles Lord Binning.-E.

(1017) The imbecile and insane Philip V. He did not die till
1746.  The Prince of Asturias was Ferdinand VI., who succeeded
him, and died childless in 1759.-D.

(1018) Of Cumberland.  He never married.-D.

(1019) John Murray, second Earl of Dunmore: colonel of the
third regiment of Scotch foot-guards.  He died in 1752-E.

(1020) Sir John Ligonier a general of merit.  He was created
Lord Ligonier in Ireland, in 1757, an English peer by the same
title in 1763, and Earl Ligonier in 1766.  He died at the
great age of ninety-one, in 1770.-D.

(1021) The Princess was deformed and- ugly. "Having in vain
remonstrated with the King against the marriage, the Duke sent
his governor, mr. Poyntz, to consult Lord Orford how to avoid
the match.  After reflecting a few moments, Orford advised
'that the Duke should give his consent, on condition of his
receiving an ample and immediate establishment; and believe
me,' added he, 'that the match will be no longer pressed.'
The Duke followed the advice, and the result fulfilled the
prediction "' Lord Mahon, vol. iii. p. 321.-E.



406 Letter 158
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, March 29, 1745.

I begged your brother to tell you what it was impossible for
me to tell you.(1023)  You share nearly in our common loss!
Don't expect me to enter at all upon the subject.  After the
melancholy two months, that I have passed, and in my
situation, you will not wonder I shun a conversation which
could not be bounded by a letter-a letter that would grow into
a panegyric, or a piece of moral; improper for me to write
upon, and too distressful for us both!-a death is only to be
felt, never to be talked over by those it touches!

I had yesterday your letter of three sheets - I began to
flatter myself that the storm was blown over, but I tremble to
think of the danger you are in! a danger, in which even the
protection of the great friend you have lost could have been
of no service to you.  How ridiculous it seems for me to renew
protestations of my friendship for you, at an instant when my
father is just dead, and the Spaniards just bursting into
Tuscany! How empty a charm would my name have, when all my
interest and significance are buried in my father's grave! All
hopes of present peace, the only thing that could save you,
seem vanished.  We expect every day to hear of the French
declaration of war against Holland.  The new Elector of
Bavaria is French, like his father; and the King of Spain is
not dead.  I don't know how to talk to you.  I have not even a
belief that the Spaniards will spare Tuscany.  My dear child
what will become of you? whither will you retire till a peace
restores you to your ministry? for upon that distant view
alone I repose!

We are every day nearer confusion.  The King is in as bad
humour as a monarch can be; he wants to go abroad, and is
detained by the Mediterranean affair; the inquiry into which
was moved by a Major Selwyn, a dirty pensioner, half-turned
patriot, by the Court being overstocked with votes.(1024)
This inquiry takes up the whole time of the House of Commons,
but I don't see what conclusion it can have. My confinement
has kept me from being there, except the first day; and all I
know of what is yet come out is, as it was stated by a Scotch
member the other day, "that there had been one (Matthews) with
a bad head, another, (Lestock) with a worse heart, and four
(the captains of the inactive ships) with no heart at all."
Among the numerous visits of form that I have received, one
was from my Lord Sandys: as we two could only converse upon
general topics, we fell upon this of the Mediterranean, and I
made him allow, "that, to be sure, there is not so bad a court
of justice in the world as the House of Commons; and how hard
it is upon any man to have his cause tried there!"

Sir Everard Falkner(1025) is made secretary to the Duke, who
is not yet gone: I have got Mr. Conway to be one of his
aide-de-camps.  Sir Everard has since been offered the
joint-Postmastersh'ip, vacant by Sir John Iyles'S(1026) death;
but he would not quit the Duke.  It was then proposed to the
King to give it to the brother: it happened to be a cloudy
day, and he, only answered, ,I know who Sir Everard is, but I
don't know who Mr. Falkner is."

The world expects some change when the Parliament rises.  My
Lord Granville's physicians have ordered him to go to the Spa,
as, you know, they often send ladies to the Bath who are very
ill of a want of diversion.  It will scarce be possible for
the present ministry to endure this jaunt.  Then they are
losing many of their new allies: the new Duke of
Beaufort,(1027) a most determined and unwavering Jacobite, has
openly set himself at the head of that party, and forced them
to vote against the Court, and to renounce my Lord Gower.  My
wise cousin, Sir John Phillipps, has resigned his place; and
it is believed that Sir John Cotton will soon resign but the
Bedford, Pitt, Lyttelton, and that squadron, stick close to
their places.  Pitt has lately resigned his bedchamber to the
Prince, which, in friendship to Lyttelton, it was expected he
would have done long ago.  They have chosen for this
resignation a very apposite passage out of Cato:

"He toss'd his arm aloft, and proudly told me
He would not stay, and perish like Sempronius."

This was Williams's.

My Lord Coke's match is broken off, upon some coquetry of the
lady with Mr. Mackenzie,(1028) at the Ridotto.  My Lord
Leicester says, there shall not be a third lady in Norfolk of
the species of the two fortunes(1029) that matched at Rainham
and Houghton."  Pray, will the new Countess of Orford come to
England?

The town flocks to a new play of Thomson's, called Tancred and
Sigismunda: it is very dull, I have read it.(1030)  I cannot
bear modern poetry; these refiners of the purity of the stage,
and of the incorrectness of English verse, are most
-,,,wofully insipid.  I had rather have written the most
absurd lines in Lee, than Leonidas or the Seasons; as I had
rather be put into the round-house for a wrong-headed quarrel,
than sup quietly at eight o'clock with my grandmother.  There
is another of these tame geniuses, a Mr. Akenside,(1031)  who
writes Odes: in one he has lately published, he says, "Light
the tapers, urge the fire." Had not you rather make gods
jostle 'in the dark, than light the candles for fear they
should break their heads? One Russel, a mimic, has a
puppet-show to ridicule operas; I hear, very dull, not to
mention its being twenty years too late: it consists of three
acts, with foolish Italian songs burlesqued in Italian.

There is a very good quarrel on foot between two duchesses;
she of Queensberry sent to invite Lady Emily Lennox(1032) to a
ball: her Grace of Richmond, who is wonderfully cautious since
Lady Caroline's elopement, sent word, "she could not
determine." The other sent again the same night: the same
answer.  The Queensberry then sent word, that she had made up
her company, and desired to be excused from having Lady
Emily's; but at the bottom of the card wrote, "Too great a
trust." You know how mad she is, and how capable of such a
stroke.  There is no declaration of war come out from the
other duchess; but, I believe it will be made a national
quarrel of the whole illegitimate royal family.

It is the present fashion to make conundrums: there are books
of them printed, and produced at all assemblies: they are full
silly enough to be made a fashion.  I will tell you the most
renowned--"Why is my uncle Horace like two people
conversing?-Because he is both teller and auditor."  This was
Winnington's.

Well, I had almost forgot to tell you a most extraordinary
impertinence of your Florentine Marquis Riccardi.  About three
weeks ago, I received a letter by Monsieur Wastier's footman
from the marquis.  He tells me most cavalierly, that he has
sent me seventy-seven antique gems to sell for him, by the way
of Paris, not caring it should be known in Florence.  He will
have them sold altogether, and the lowest price two thousand
pistoles.  You know what no-acquaintance I had with him.  I
shall be as frank as he, and not receive them.  If I did, they
might be lost in sending back, and then I must pay his two
thousand doppie di Spagna.  The refusing to receive them is
Positively all the notice I shall take of it.

I enclose what I think a fine piece on my father:(1033)  it
was written by Mr. Ashton, whom you have often heard me
mention as a particular friend.  You see how I try to make out
a long letter, in return for your kind one, which yet gave me
great pain by telling me of your fever.  My dearest Sir, it is
terrible to have illness added to your other distresses! .

I will take the first opportunity to send Dr. Cocchi his
translated book; I have not yet seen it myself.

Adieu! my dearest child! I write with a house full of
relations, and must conclude.  Heaven preserve you and
Tuscany.

(1023) The death of Lord Orford. - He expired," says Coxe, "on
the 18th of March, 1745, in the sixty-ninth year of his age.  His
remains were interred in the parish church at Houghton,
without monument or inscription-

"So peaceful rests, without a stone, a name,
Which once had honours, titles, wealth and fame!"-E.

(1024) "February 26.-We had an unexpected motion from a very
contemptible fellow, Major Selwyn, for an inquiry into the
cause of the miscarriage of the fleet in the action off
Toulon.  Mr. Pelham, perceiving that the inclination of the
House was for an inquiry, acceded to the motion; but
forewarned it of the temper, patience, and caution with which
it should be pursued."-Mr. Yorke's MS.  Journal.-E.

(1025) He had been ambassador at Constantinople.

(1026) Sir John Eyles, Bart. an alderman of the city of
London, and at one time member of parliament for the same.  He
died March 11, 1745.-D.

(1027) Charles Noel Somerset, fourth Duke of Beaufort,
succeeded his elder brother Henry in the dukedom, February 14,
1745.-D.

(1028) The Hon.  James Stuart Mackenzie, second son of James,
second Earl of Bute, and brother of John, Earl of Bute, the
minister.  He married Lady Elizabeth Campbell, one of the
daughters of John, the great Duke of Argyll, and died in
1800.-D.

(1029) Margaret Rolle, Countess of Orford, and Ethelreda
Harrison, Viscountess Townshend.

(1030) This was the most successful of all Thomson's plays;
"but it may be doubted," says Dr. Johnson, " whether he was,
either by the bent of nature or habits of study, much
qualified for tragedy: it does not appear that he had much
sense of the pathetic; and his diffusive and Descriptive style
produced declamation rather than dialogue."-E.

(1031) The author of "The Pleasures of the Imagination;" a
poem of some merit, though now but little read.-D.

(1032) Second daughter of Charles, Duke of Richmond.
(Afterwards married to James Fitzgerald, first Duke of
Leinster in Ireland.-D.)

1033) It was printed in the public papers.



410 Letter 159
To sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, April 15, 1745.

By this time you have heard of my Lord's death: I fear it will
have been a very great shock to you.  I hope your brother will
write you all the particulars; for my part, you can't expect I
should enter into the details of it.  His enemies pay him the
compliment of saying, they do believe now that he did not
plunder the public,, as he was accused (as they accused him)
of doing, he having died in such circumstances." If he had no
proofs of his honesty but this, I don't think this would be
such indisputable authority: not having immense riches would
be scanty evidence of his not having acquired them, there
happening to be such a thing as spending them.  It is certain,
he is dead very poor: his debts, with his legacies, which are
trifling, amount to fifty thousand pounds.  His estate, a
nominal eight thousand a-year, much mortgaged.  In short, his
fondness for Houghton has endangered Houghton.  If he had not
so overdone it, he -might have left such an estate to his
family as might have secured the glory of the place for many
years: another such debt must expose it to sale.  If he had
lived, his unbounded generosity and contempt of money would
have run him into vast difficulties.  However irreparable his
personal loss may be to his friends, he certainly died
critically well for himself: he had lived to stand the rudest
trials with honour, to see his character universally cleared,
his enemies brought to infamy for their ignorance or villainy,
and the world allowing him to be the only man in England fit
to be what he had been; and he died at a time when his age and
infirmities prevented his again undertaking the support of a
government, which engrossed his whole care, and which he
foresaw was falling into the last confusion.  In this I hope
his judgment failed! His fortune attended him to the last; for
he died of the most painful of all distempers, with little or
no pain.


The House of Commons have at last finished their great affair,
their inquiry into the Mediterranean miscarriage.  It was
carried on with more decency and impartiality than ever was
known in so tumultuous, popular, and partial a court.  I can't
say it ended so; for the Tories, all but one single man, voted
against Matthews, whom they have not forgiven for lately
opposing one of their friends in Monmouthshire, and for
carrying his election.  The greater part of the Whigs were for
Lestock.  This last is a very great man: his cause, most
unfriended, came before the House with all the odium that
could be laid on a man standing in the light of having
betrayed his country.  His merit, I mean his parts, prevailed,
and have set him in a very advantageous point of view.  Harry
Fox has gained the greatest honour by his assiduity and
capacity in this affair.  Matthews remains in the light of a
hot, brave, imperious, dull, confused fellow.  The question
was to address the King to appoint a trial, by court-martial,
of the two admirals and the four coward captains.  Matthews's
friends were for leaving out his name, but, after a very long
debate, were only 76 to 218.  It is generally supposed, that
the two admirals will be acquitted and the captains hanged.
By what I can make out, (for you know I have been confined,
and could not attend the examination,) Lestock preferred his
own safety to the glory of his country; I don't mean cowardly,
for he is most unquestionably brave, but selfishly.  Having to
do with a man who, he knew, would take the slightest
opportunity to ruin him, if he in the least transgressed his
orders, and knowing that man too dull to give right orders, he
chose to stick to the letter, when, by neglecting it, he might
have done the greatest service.

We hear of great news from Bavaria, of that Elector being
forced into a neutrality; but it IS not confirmed.

Mr. Legge is made lord of the admiralty, and Mr. Philipson
surveyor of the roads in his room.  This is all I know.  I
look with anxiety every day into the Gazettes about Tuscany,
but hitherto I find all is quiet.  My dear Sir, I tremble for
you!


I have been much desired to get you to send five gesse
figures; the Venus, the Faun, the Mercury, the Cupid and
Psyche, and the little Bacchus; you know the original is
modern: if this is not to be had, then the Ganymede.  My dear
child, I am sorry to give you this trouble; order any body to
buy them, and to Send them from Leghorn by the first ship. let
me have the bill, and bill of lading.  Adieu!



411 Letter 160
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, April 29, 1745.

When you wrote your last of the 6th of this month, you was
still in hopes about my father.  I wish I had received your
letters on his death, for it is most shocking to have all the
thoughts opened again upon such a subject!-it is the great
disadvantage of a distant correspondence.  There was a report
here a fortnight ago of the new countess coming over.  She
could not then have heard it.  Can she be so mad? Why should
she suppose all her shame buried in my lord's grave? or does
not she know, has she seen so little of the world, as not to
be sensible that she will now return in a worse light than
ever? A few malicious, who would have countenanced her to vex
him, would now treat her like the rest of the world.  It is a
private family affair; a husband, a mother, and a son, all
party against her, all wounded by her conduct, would be too
much to get over!
 \\

My dear child, you have nothing but misfortunes of your
friends to lament.  You have new subject by the loss of poor
Mr. Chute's brother.(1034)  It really is a great loss! he was
a most rising man, and one of the best-natured and most honest
that ever lived.  If it would not sound ridiculously, though,
I assure you, I am far from feeling it lightly, I would tell
you of poor Patapan's death - he died about ten days ago.

This peace with the Elector of Bavaria may Produce a general
one.  You have given great respite to my uneasiness, by
telling me that Tuscany seems out of danger.  We have for
these last three days been in great expectation of a battle.
The French have invested Tournay; our army came up with them
last Wednesday, and is certainly little inferior, and
determined to attack them; but it is believed they are
retired: we don't know who commands them; it is said, the Duc
d'Harcourt.  Our good friend, the Count de Saxe, is
dying(1036)-by Venus, not by Mars.  The King goes on Friday;
this may make the young Duke(1036) more impatient to give
battle, to have all the honour his own.

There is no kind of news; the Parliament rises on Thursday,
and every body is going out of town.  I shall only make short
excursions in visits; you know I am not fond of the country,
and have no call into it now!  My brother will not be at
Houghton this year; he shuts it Up to enter on new, and there
very unknown economy: he has much occasion for it!  Commend me
to poor Mr. Chute!  Adieu!

(1034) Francis Chute, a very eminent lawyer.

(1035) The Marshal de Saxe- did not die till 1750.  He was,
however, exceedingly ill at the time of the battle of
Fontenoy.  Voltaire, in his "Si`ecle de Louis XV." mentions
having met him at Paris just as he was setting out for the
campaign.  Observing how unwell he seemed to b, he asked him
whether he thought he had strength enough to go through the
fatigues which awaited him.  To this the Marshal's reply was
"il ne s'agit pas de vivre, mais de partir."-D.

William, Duke of Cumberland.-D.



412 Letter 161
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, May 11, 1745.

I stayed till to-day, to be able to give you some account of
the battle of Tournay:(1037) the outlines you will have heard
already.  We don't allow it to be a victory on the French
side: but that is, just as a woman is not called Mrs. till she
is married, though she may have had half-a-dozen natural
children.  In short, we remained upon the field  of battle
three hours: I fear, too many of us remain there still!
without palliating, it is certainly a heavy stroke.  We never
lost near so many officers.  I pity the Duke, for it is almost
the first battle of consequence that we ever lost.  By the
letters arrived to-day we find that Tournay still holds out.
There are certainly killed Sir James Campbell, General
Ponsonby, Colonel Carpenter, Colonel Douglas, young Ross,
Colonel Montagu, Geo, Berkeley, and Kellet.  Mr. Vanbrugh is
since dead.  Most of the your),r men of quality in the Guards
@ are wounded.  I have had the vast fortune to have nobody
hurt, for whom I was in the least interested.  Mr. Conway, in
particular, has highly distinguished himself; he ind Lord
Petersham,' who is slightly wounded, are most commended;
though none behaved ill but the Dutch horse.  There has been
but very little consternation here: the King minded it so
little, that being set out for Hanover, and blown back into
Harwich-roads since the news came, he could not be persuaded
to return, but sailed yesterday with the fair wind.  I believe
you will have the Gazette sent Tonight; but lest it should not
be printed time enough, here is a list of the numbers, as it
came over this morning.

British foot 1237 killed.
Ditto horse 90 ditto.
Ditto foot 1968 wounded.
Ditto horse 232 ditto.
Ditto foot 457 missing.
Ditto horse 18 ditto.
Hanoverian foot 432 killed.
Ditto horse 78 ditto.
Ditto foot 950 wounded.
Ditto horse 192 ditto.
Ditto horse and foot 53 missing.
Dutch 625 killed and wounded.
Ditto 1019 missing.

So the whole hors de combat is above seven thousand three
hundred.  The French own the loss of three thousand; I don't
believe many more, for it was a most desperate and rash
perseverance on our side. The Duke behaved very bravely and
humanely;(1038) but this will not have advanced the peace.

However coolly the Duke may have behaved, and coldly his
father, at least his brother, has outdone both.  He not only
went to the play the night the news came, but in two days made
a ballad.  It is in imitation of the Regent's style, and has
miscarried in nothing but the language, the thoughts, and the
poetry.  Did I not tell you in my last that he was going to
act Paris in Congreve's Masque? The song is addressed to the
goddesses.

1. Venez, mes ch`eres D`eesses,
Venez calmer mon chagrin;
Aidez, mes belles Princesses,'
A le noyer dans le vin.
Poussons cette douce Ivresse
Jusqu'au milieu de la nuit,
Et n'`ecoutons que la tendresse
D'un charmant vis-a-vis.

2. Quand le chagrin me d`evore,
Vite `a table je me mets,
Loin des objets que j'abhorre,
Avec joie j'y trouve la paix.
Peu d'amis, restes D'un naufrage
Je rassemble autour de moi,
Et je me ris de l'`etalage.
Qu'a chez lui toujours on Roi.

3. Que m'importe, que l'Europe
Ait Un, ou plusieurs tyrans?
Prions seulement Calliope,
Qu'elle inspire nos vers, nos chants.
Laissons Mars et toute la gloire;
Livrons nous tous `a l'amour;
Que Bacchus nous donne `a boire;
A ces deux fasions la cour.

4. Passons ainsi notre vie,
Sans rover IL ce qui suit;
Avec ma ch`ere Sylvie,(1039)
Le tems trop Vite me fuit.
Mais si, par Un malheur extr`eme,
Je perdois cet objet charmant,
Oui, cette compagnie m`eme
Ne me tiendroit Un moment.

5. me livrant `a ma tristesse,
Toujours plein de mon chagrin,
Je n'aurois plus d'all`egresse
Pour mettre Bathurst(1040) en train:
Ainsi pour vous tenir en joie
Invoquez toujours les Dieux,
Q Qu'elle vive et qu'elle soit
Avec nous toujours heureuse!

Adieu! I am in a great hurry.

(1037) Since called the battle of Fontenoy.  (The Marshal de
Saxe commanded the French army, and both Louis XV. and his son
the Dauphin were present in the action.  The Duke of
Cumberland commanded the British forces.-D.)

(1037) William, Lord Petersham, eldest son of the Earl of
Harrington.

(1038) The Hon.  Philip Yorke, in a letter to Horace Walpole,
the elder, of the following day, says,"the Duke's behaviour
was, by all accounts, the most heroic and gallant imaginable:
he was the whole day in the thickest of the fire.  His Royal
Highness drew out a pistol upon an officer whom he saw running
away."-E.

(1038) Frederick, Prince of Wales.  The following song was
written immediately after the battle of Fontenoy, and was
addressed to Lady Catherine Hanmer, Lady Fauconberg, and Lady
Middlesex, who were to act the three goddesses, with the
Prince of Wales, in Congreve's Judgment of Paris, whom he was
to represent, and Prince Lobkowitz, Mercury.-E.

(1039) The Princess.

(1040) Allen, Lord Bathurst.



415 Letter 162
To George Montagu, Esq.
Arlington Street, May 18, 1745.

Dear George,
I am very sorry to renew our correspondence upon so melancholy
a circumstance, but when you have lost so near a friend as
your brother,(1041) 'tis sure the duty of all your other
friends to endeavour to alleviate your loss, and offer all the
increase of affection that is possible to compensate it.  This
I do most heartily; I wish I could most effectually.

You will always find in me, dear Sir, the utmost inclination
to be of service to you; and let me beg that you will remember
your promise of writing to me.  As I am so much in town and in
the world, I flatter myself with having generally something to
tell you that may make my letters agreeable in the country:
you, any where, make yours charming.

Be so good to say any thing you think proper from me to your
sisters, and believe me, dear George, yours most sincerely.

(1041) Lieutenant-Colonel Edward Montagu, killed at the battle
of Fontenoy.



415 Letter 163
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, May 24, 1745.

I have no consequences of the battle of Tournay to tell you
but the taking of the town: the governor has eight days
allowed him to consider whether he will give up the citadel.
The French certainly lost more men than we did.  Our army is
still at Lessines waiting for recruits from Holland and
England; ours are sailed.  The King is at Hanover.  All the
letters are full of the Duke's humanity and bravery: he will
be as popular with the lower class of men as he has been for
three or four years with the low women: he will be the
soldier's Great Sir as well as theirs.  I am really glad; it
will be of great service to the family, if any one of them
come to make a figure.

Lord Chesterfield is returned from Holland; you will see a
most simple farewell speech of his in the papers.(1042)


I have received yours of the 4th of May, and am extremely
obliged to you for your expressions of kindness: they did not
at all surprise me, but every instance of your friendship
gives me pleasure.  I wish I could say the same to good prince
Craon.  Yet I must set about answering his letter: it is quite
an affair; I have so great a disuse of writing French, that I
believe it will be very barbarous.

My fears for Tuscany are again awakened: the wonderful march
Which the Spanish Queen has made Monsieur de Gage take, may
probably end in his turning short to the left; for his route
to Genoa will be full as difficult as what he has already
passed.  I watch eagerly every article from Italy, at a time
when nobody will read a paragraph but from the army in
Flanders.

I am diverted with my Lady's(1043) account of the great riches
that are now coming to her.  She has had so many foolish
golden visions, that I should think even the Florentines would
not be the dupes of any more.  As for her mourning, she may
save it, if she expects to have it notified.  Don't you
remember my Lady Pomfret's having a piece of economy of that
sort, when she would not know that the Emperor was dead,
because my Lord Chamberlain had not notified it to her.

I have a good story to tell you of Lord Bath, whose name you
have not heard very lately; have you? He owed a tradesman
eight hundred pounds, and would never pay him: the man
determined to persecute him till he did; and one morning
followed him to Lord Winchilsea's, and sent up word that he
wanted to speak with him.  Lord Bath came down, and said,
"Fellow, what do you want with me'!"-"My money," said the man,
as loud as ever he could bawl, before all the servants.  He
bade him come the next morning, and then would not see him.
The next Sunday the man followed him to church, and got into
the next pew: he leaned over, and said, , "My money; give me
my money!"  My lord went to the end of the pew; the man too:
"Give me my money!"  The sermon was on avarice, and the text,
"Cursed are they that heap up riches."  The man groaned out,
"O lord!" and pointed to my Lord Bath.  In short, he persisted
so much, and drew the eyes of all the congregation, that my
Lord Bath went out and paid him directly.  I assure you this
is a fact.  Adieu.

(1042) " Have you Lord Chesterfield's speech on taking leave?
It is quite calculated for the language it is wrote in, and
makes but an indifferent figure in English.  The thoughts are
common, and yet he strains hard to give them an air of
novelty; and the quaintness of the expression is quite a la
Fran`caise." The Hon.  P. Yorke to Horatio Walpole.-E.

(1043) Lady Walpole, now become Countess of Orford.-D.



416 Letter 164
To George Montagu, Esq.
Arlington Street, May 25, 1745.

Dear George,
I don't write to you now so much to answer your letter as to
promote your diversion, which I am as much obliged to you for
consulting me about, at least as much as about an affair of
honour, or your marriage, or any other important transaction;
any one of which you might possibly dislike more than
diverting yourself.  For my part, I shall give you my advice
on this point with as much reflection as I should, if it were
necessary for me, like a true friend, to counsel you to
displease yourself.

You propose making a visit at Englefield Green, and ask me, if
I think it right? Extremely so.  I have heard it is a very
pretty place.  You love a jaunt--have a pretty chaise, I
believe, and, I dare swear, very easy; in all probability, you
have a fine evening too ; and, added to all this, the
gentleman you would go to see is very agreeable and good
humoured.(1044)  He has some very Pretty children, and a
sensible, learned man that lives with him, one Dr.
Thirlby,(1045) whom, I believe you know.  The master of the
house plays extremely well on the bass-viol, and has generally
other musical people with him.  He knows a good deal of the
private history of a late ministry; and, my dear George, you
love memoires.  Indeed, as to personal acquaintance with any
of the court beauties, I can't say you will find your account
in him ; but, to make amends, he is perfectly master of all
the quarrels that have been fashionably on foot about Handel,
and can give you a very perfect account of all the modern
rival painters.  In short, you may pass a very agreeable day
with him; and if he does but take to you, as I can't doubt,
who know you both, you will contract a great friendship with
him, which he will preserve with the greatest warmth and
partiality.

In short, I can think of no reason in the world against your
going there but one: do you know his youngest brother? If you
to be so unlucky, I can't flatter you so far as to advise you
to make him a visit; for there is nothing in the world the
Baron of Englefield has such an aversion for as for his
brother.

(1044) Mr. Walpole's brother, Sir Edward.  See Ant`e, p.189,
letter 42.

(1045) Styan Thirlby, fellow of Jesus College, Cambridge,
published an edition of Justin Martyr, and, I think, wrote
something against Middleton.  He communicated several notes to
Theobald for his Shakspeare, and in the latter part of his
life, took to study the common law.  He lived chiefly for his
last years with Sir Edward Walpole, who had procured for him a
small place in the Custom house, and to whom he left his
papers: he had lost his intellects some time before his death.
[He died a martyr to intemperance, in 1751, in his sixty-first
year.  Mr. Nichols says, that, while in Sir Edward's houses,
he kept a miscellaneous book of Memorables, containing
whatever was said or done amiss by Sir Edward, or any part of
his family.]



417 Letter 165
To The Hon. H. S. Conway.
Arlington Street, May 27, 1745.

My dear Harry,
As gloriously as you have set out, yet I despair of seeing you
a perfect hero! You have none of the charming violences that
are so essential to that character.  You write as coolly,
after behaving well in battle, as you fought in it.  Can your
friends flatter themselves with seeing you, one day or other,
be the death of thousands, when you wish for peace in three
weeks after four first engagements and laugh at the ambition
of those men who have given you this opportunity of
distinguishing yourself? With the person of an Orondates, and
the courage, you have all the compassion, the reason, and the
'reflection of one that never read a romance.  Can one ever
hope you will make a figure, when you only fight because it
was right you should, and not because you hated the French or
loved destroying mankind? This is so un-English, or so
un-heroic, that I despair of you!

Thank Heaven, you have one spice of madness! Your admiration
of your master(1047) leaves me a glimmering of hope, that you
will not be always so unreasonably reasonable.  Do you
remember the humorous lieutenant, in one of Beaumont and
Fletcher's plays, that is in love with the king? Indeed, your
master is not behindhand with you; you seem to have agreed to
puff one another.

If you are acting up to the strictest rules of war and
chivalry in Flanders, we are not less scrupulous on this side
the water in fulfilling all the duties of the same order.  The
day the young volunteer(1048 departed for the army (unluckily
indeed, it was after the battle), his tender mother
Sisygambis, and the beautiful Statira,(1049) a lady formerly
known in your history by the name of Artemisia, from her
cutting off her hair in your absence, were so afflicted and SO
inseparable, that they made a party together to Mr.
graham'S(1050) (you may read lapis if you please) to be
blooded.  It was settled that this was a more precious way of
expressing Concern than shaving the head, which has been known
to be attended with false locks the next day.

For the other princess you wot of, who is not entirely so tall
as the former, nor so evidently descended from a line of
monarchs--I don't hear her talk of retiring.  At present she
is employed in buying up all the nose-gays in Covent Garden
and laurel leaves at the pastry cooks, to where chaplets for
the return of her hero.  Who that is I don't pretend to know
or guess.  All I know is, that in this age retirement is not
one of the fashionable expressions of passion.

(1046) The battle of Fontenoy, where Mr. Conway greatly
distinguished himself.


(1047) The Duke of Cumberland, to whom Mr. Conway was
aide-de-camp.

(1048) George, afterwards Marquis Townshend.

(1049) Ethelreda Harrison, Viscountess Townshend, and her
daughter, the Hon.  Audrey Townshend, afterwards married to
Robert Orme, Esq.

(1050) A celebrated apothecary in Pall-mall.



418                 Letter 166
To Sir Horace Mann.

I have the pleasure of recommending you a new acquaintance,
for which I am sure you will thank me.  Mr. Hobart(1051)
proposes passing a little time at Florence, which I am sure
you will endeavour to make as agreeable to him as possible.  I
beg you will introduce him to all my friends, who, I don't
doubt, will show him the same civilities that I received.
Dear Sir, this will be a particular obligation to me, who am,
etc.

1051) Eldest son of John, Earl of Buckinghamshire, (The Hon.
John Hobart, afterwards second Earl of Buckinghamshire, and
lord Lieutenant of Ireland.-D.)



419 Letter 167
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, June 24, 1745.

I have been a fortnight in the country, and had ordered all my
to be kept till I came to town, or I should have written to
you sooner about my sister-countess.  She is not arrived yet,
but is certainly coming: she has despatched several letters to
notify her intentions: a short one to her mother, saying,
"Dear Madam, as you have often desired me to return to
England, I am determined to set out, and hope you will give me
reasons to subscribe myself your most affectionate daughter."
This "often desired me to return" has never been repeated
since the first year of her going away.  The poor
signora-madre is in a terrible fright, and will not come to
town till her daughter is gone again, which all advices agree
will be soon.  Another letter is to my Lady Townshend, telling
her, "that, as she knows her ladyship's way of thinking, she
does not fear the continuance of her friendship." Another, a
long one, to my Lord Chesterfield; another to Lady Isabella
Scot,(1052) an old friend of hers; and another to Lady
Pomfret.  This last says, that she hears from guccioni, my
Lady O. will stay here a very little time, having taken a
house at Florence for three years.  She is to come to my Lady
Denbigh.(1053)  My brother is extremely obliged to you for all
your notices about her, though he is very indifferent about
her motions.  If she happens to choose law (though on what
foot no mortal can guess), he is prepared; having from the
first hint of her journey, fee'd every one of the considerable
lawyers.  In short, this jaunt is as simple as all the rest of
her actions have been hardy.  Nobody wonders at her bringing
no English servants with her-they know, and consequently might
tell too much.

I feel excessively for you, my dear child, on the loss of Mr.
Chute!--so sensible and so good-natured a man would be a loss
to any body; but to you, who are so meek and helpless, it is
irreparable! who will dry you when you are very wet
brown-paper?(1054)  Though I laugh, you know how much I pity
you: you will want somebody to talk over English letters, and
to conjecture with ),on; in short, I feel your distress in all
its lights.

The citadel of Tournay is gone;(1055) our affairs go ill.
Charles of Lorrain(1056) has lost a great battle grossly! He
was constantly drunk, and had no kind of intelligence.  Now he
acts from his own head, his head turns out a very bad one.  I
don't know, indeed, what they can say in defence of the great
general to whom we have just given the garter, the Duke of
Saxe Weissenfels; he is not of so serene a house but that he
might have known something of the motions of the Prussians.
Last night we heard that the Hungarian insurgents had cut to
pieces two  Prussian regiments.  The King of Prussia and
Prince Charles are so near, that we every day expect news of
another battle.  We don't know yet what is to be the next step
in Flanders.  Lord Cobham has got Churchill'S(1057) regiment,
and Lord Dunmore his government of Plymouth.  At the Prince's
court there is a great revolution; he, or rather Lord
Granville, or perhaps the Princess, (who, I firmly believe, by
all her quiet sense, will turn out a Caroline,) have at last
got rid of Lady Archibald,(1058) who was strongly attached to
the coalition.  They have civilly asked her, and Crossly
forced her to ask civilly to go away, which she has done, with
a pension of twelve hundred a-year.  Lady Middlesex,(1059) is
mistress of the robes: she lives with them perpetually, and
sits up till five in the morning at their suppers.  Don't
mistake!-not for her person, which is wondrous plain and
little: the town says it is for her friend Miss Granville, one
of the maids of honour; but at least yet, that is only
scandal.  She is a fair, red-haired girl, scarce pretty;
daughter of the poet, Lord Lansdown.(1060)  Lady Berkeley is
lady of the bedchamber, and Miss Lawson maid of honour.  Miss
Neville, a charming beauty, and daughter of the pretty,
unfortunate Lady Abergavenny,(1061) is named for the next
vacancy.

I was scarcely settled in my joy for the Spaniards having
taken the opposite route to Tuscany, when I heard of Mr.
Chute's leaving you.  I long to have no reason to be uneasy
about you.  I am obliged to you for the gesse figures, and beg
you will send me the bill in your first letter.  Rysbrach has
perfectly mended the Ganymede and the model, which to me
seemed irrecoverably smashed.

I have just been giving a recommendatory letter for you to Mr.
Hobart; he is a particular friend of mine, but is Norfolk, and
in the world; so you will be civil to him. He is of the
Damon-kind, and not one of whom you will make a Chute.  madame
Suares may make something of him.  Adieu!

(1052) Daughter of Anne, Countess of Buccleuch, and Duchess of
Buccleuch and Monmouth, the wife of James, the unhappy Duke of
Monmouth.  Lady Isabella Scott was the daughter of the duchess
by her second husband, Charles, third Lord Cornwallis.  She
died unmarried, Feb. 18, 1748.-D.

(1053) Isabella de Jonghe, a Dutch lady, and wife of William
Fielding, fifth Earl of Denbigh.  She died in 1769.-D.

(1054) Mr. Mann was so thin and weak that Mr. Walpole used to
compare him to wet brown-paper.

(1055) The treachery of the principal engineer, who deserted
to the enemy, and the timidity of other officers in the
garrison, produced a surrender of the city in a fortnight, and
Of the citadel in another week.-E.

(1056) He was brother of Francis, at this time Grand Duke of
Tuscany.  On the 3d of June, the King of Prussia had gained a
signal victory over him at Friedberg.-E.

(1057) General Churchill, or, as he was commonly called, "Old
Charles Churchill," was just dead.-D.

(1058) Lady Archibald Hamilton, daughter of Lord Abercorn, and
wife of Lord Archibald Hamilton.

(1059) Daughter of Lord Shannon, and wife of Charles, Earl of
Middlesex, eldest son of Lionel, Duke of Dorset.  Her favour
grew to be thought more than platonic.

(1060) George Granville, Lord Lansdowne, one of Queen Ann,-'s
twelve Tory Peers styled by Pope, who addressed his Windsor
Forest to him, "the polite." He died in 1735.-E.

(1061) Catherine Tatton, daughter of Lieutenant-General
Tatton.  She married, first, Edward Neville-,, thirteenth Lord
Abergavenny, who died without issue in his nineteenth year, in
1724.  She remarried with his cousin and successor, William,
fourteenth Lord Abergavenny, by whom she had issue, one son,
George, afterwards fifteenth Lord Abergavenny, and one
daughter, Catherine, who is mentioned above.  Lady Abergavenny
herself died in childbed, Dec. 4, 1729, in less than one month
after the detection of an intrigue between her and Richard
Lyddel, Esq. against whom Lord Abergavenny brought an action
for damages, and recovered five thousand pounds.  In a poem
written on her death by Sir Charles Hanbury Williams, she is
praised for her gentleness, and pitied for her " cruel
wrongs." Her husband is also called "that stern lord." All
further details respecting her are, however, now unknown.-D.



421 Letter 168
To George Montagu, Esq.
Arlington Street, June 25, 1745.

Dear George,
I have been near three weeks in Essex, at Mr. Rigby's,(1062)
and had left your direction behind me, and could not write to
you.  It is the charmingest place by nature, and the most
trumpery by art, that ever I saw.  The house stands on a high
hill, on an arm of the sea, which winds itself before two
sides of the house.  On the right and left, at the very foot
of this hill, lie two towns; the one of market quality, and
the other with a wharf where ships come up.  This last was to
have a church, but by a lucky want of religion in the
inhabitants, who would not contribute to building a steeple,
it remains an absolute antique temple, with a portico on the
very strand.  Cross this arm of the sea, you see six churches
and charming woody hills in Suffolk.  All this parent Nature
did for this place; but its godfathers and godmothers, I
believe, promised it should renounce all the pomps and
vanities of this world, for they have patched up a square
house, full of windows, low rooms, and thin walls; piled up
walls wherever there was a glimpse of prospect; planted
avenues that go nowhere, and dug fishponds where there should
be avenues.  We had very bad weather the whole time I was
there! but however I rode about and sailed, not having the
same apprehensions Of catching cold that Mrs.
Kerwood had once at Chelsea, when I persuaded her not to go
home by water, because it would be damp after rain.

The town is not quite empty yet.  My Lady Fitzwatter, Lady
Betty Germain,(1063) Lady Granville,(1064) and the dowager
Strafford have their At-homes, and amass company.  Lady Brown
has done with her Sundays, for she is changing her house into
Upper Brook Street.  In the mean time, she goes to
Knightbridge, and Sir Robert to the woman he keeps at
Scarborough: Winnington goes on with the Frasi; so my lady
Townshend is obliged only to lie of people.  You have heard of
the disgrace of the Archibald, and that in future scandal she
must only be ranked with the Lady Elizabeth Lucy and Madam
Lucy Walters, instead of being historically noble among the
Clevelands, Portsmouths, and Yarmouths.  It is said Miss
Granville has the reversion of her coronet;
 others say, she won't accept the patent.

Your friend Jemmy Lumley,(1065)--beg pardon, I mean your kin,
is not he? I am sure he is not your friend;--well, he has had
an assembly, and he would write all the cards himself, and
every one of them was to desire he's company and she's
company, with other pieces of curious orthography.  Adieu,
dear George!  I wish you a merry farm, as the children say at
Vauxhall.  My compliments to your sisters.

(1062) Mistley Hall, near Manningtree.

(1063) Second daughter of the Earl of Berkeley, and married to
Sir John Germain.

(1064) Daughter of rhomms, Earl of Pomfret.  She was Lord
Granville's second wife.

(1065) Seventh son of the first Earl of Scarborough.  He died
in 1766, unmarried.-E.



422 Letter 169
To The Hon. H. S. Conway.
Arlington Street, July 1, 1745.

My dear harry,
If it were not for that one slight inconvenience, that I
should probably be dead now, I should have liked much better
to have lived in the last war than in this; I mean as to the
pleasantness of writing letters.  Two or three battles won,
two or three towns taken, in a summer, were pretty objects to
keep up the liveliness of a correspondence.  But now it hurts
one's dignity to be talking of English and French armies, at
the first period of our history in which the tables are
turned.  After having learnt to spell out of the reigns of
Edward the Third and Harry the Fifth, and begun lisping with
Agincourt and Cressy, one uses one's self but awkwardly to the
sounds of Tournay and Fontenoy.  I don't like foreseeing the
time so near, when all the young orators in Parliament will be
haranguing out of Demosthenes upon the imminent danger we are
in from the overgrown power of King Philip.  As becoming as
all that public spirit will be, which to be sure will now come
forth, I can't but think we were at least as happy and as
great when all the young Pitts and Lytteltons were pelting
oratory at my father for rolling out a twenty years' peace,
and not envying the trophies which he passed by every day in
Westminster Hall.  But one must not repine; rather reflect on
the glories which they have drove the nation headlong into.
One must think all our distresses and dangers well laid out,
when they have purchased us Glover'S(1066) Oration for the
merchants, the Admiralty for the Duke of Bedford, and the
reversion of Secretary at war for Pitt, which he will
certainly have, unless the French King should happen to have
the nomination; and then I fear, as much obliged as that court
is to my Lord Cobham and his nephews, they would be so partial
as to prefer some illiterate nephew of Cardinal Tencin's, who
never heard of Leonidas or the Hanover troops.

With all these reflections, as I love to make myself easy,
especially politically, I comfort myself with what St.
Evremond (a favourite philosopher of mine, for he thought what
he liked, not liked what he thought) said in defence of
Cardinal Mazarin, when he was reproached with neglecting the
good of the kingdom that he might engross the riches of it:
"Well, let him get all the riches, and then he will think of
the good of the kingdom, for it will all be his own." Let the
French but have England, and they won't want to conquer it.
We may possibly contract the French spirit of being supremely
content with the glory of our monarch, and then-why then it
will be the first time we ever -were contented yet.  We hear
of nothing but your retiring,(1067 and of Dutch treachery: in
short, 'tis an holy scene!

I know of no home news but the commencement of the gaming
act,(1068) for which they are to put up a scutcheon at
White's--for the death of play; and the death of Winnington's
wife, which may be an unlucky event for my Lady Townshend.  As
he has no children, he will certainly marry again; and who
will give him their daughter, unless he breaks off that
affair, which I believe he will now very willingly make a
marriage article? We want him to take Lady -Charlotte Fermor.
She was always his beauty, and has so many charming qualities,
that she would make any body happy.  He will make a good
husband; for he is excessively good-natured, and was much
better to that strange wife than he cared to own.

You wondered at my journey to Houghton; now -wonder more, for
I am going to Mount Edgecumbe.  Now my summers are in my own
hands, and I am not obliged to pass great part of them in
Norfolk, I find it is not so very terrible to dispose of them
up and down. In about three weeks I shall set out, and see
Wilton and Doddington's in my way.  Dear Harry, do but get a
victory, and I will let off every cannon at Plymouth:
reserving two, till I hear particularly that you have killed
two more Frenchmen with your own hand.(1069) Lady Mary(1070)
sends you her compliments; she is going to pass a week with
Miss Townshend(1071) at Muffits; I don't think you will be
forgot.  Your sister Anne has got a new distemper, which she
says feels like something jumping in her.  You know my style
on such an occasion, and may be sure I have not spared this
distemper.  Adieu! Yours ever.

(1066) The author of Leonidas.

(1067) Mr. Conway was still with the army in Flanders.

(1068) An act had recently passed to prevent excessive and
deceitful gaming.-E.

(1069) Alluding to Mr. Conway's having been engaged with two
French grenadiers at once in the battle of Fontenoy.

(1070) Lady Mary Walpole, youngest daughter of Sir R. Walpole,
afterwards married to Charles Churchill, Esq.

(1071) DAUGHTER of Charles Viscount Townshend, afterwards
married to Edward Cornwallis, brother to Earl Cornwallis, and
groom of the bedchamber to the King.



424 Letter 170
To sir Horace Mann.
Strawberry Hill, July 5, 1745.

All yesterday we were in the utmost consternation an express
came the night before from Ostend with an account of the
French army in Flanders having seized Ghent and Bruges, cut
off a detachment of four thousand men, surrounded our army,
who must be cut to pieces or surrender themselves prisoners,
and that the Duke was gone to the Hague, but that the Dutch
had signed a neutrality.  You will allow that here was ample
subject for confusion!  To-day we are a little relieved, by
finding that we have lost but five hundred men(1072) instead
of four thousand, and that our army, which is inferior by half
to theirs, is safe behind a river.  With this came the news of
the Great Duke's victory over the Prince of Conti:(1073) he
has killed fifteen thousand, and taken six thousand prisoners.
Here is already a third great battle this summer! But Flanders
is gone! The Dutch have given up all that could hinder the
French from overrunning them, upon condition that the French
should not overrun them.  Indeed, I cannot be so exasperated
at the Dutch as it is the fashion to be; they have not forgot
the peace of Utrecht, though we have.  Besides, how could they
rely on any negotiation with a people whose politics alter so
often as ours? Or why were we to fancy that my Lord
Chesterfield's parts would have more weight than my uncle had,
whom, ridiculous as he was, they had never known to take a
trip to Avignon to confer with the Duke of Ormond?(1074)

Our communication with the army is cut off through Flanders
and we are in great pain for Ostend: the fortifications are
all out of repair.  Upon Marshal Wade's reiterated
remonstrances, we did cast thirty cannon and four mortars for
it-and then the economic ministry would not send them. "What!
fortify the Queen of Hungary's towns? there will be no end of
that."  As if Ostend was of no more consequence to us, than
Mons or Namur! Two more battalions are ordered over
immediately; and the old pensioners of Chelsea College are to
mount guard at home! Flourishing in a peace of twenty years,
we were told that we were trampled upon by Spain and France.
Haughty nations, like those, who can trample upon an enemy
country, do not use to leave it in such wealth and happiness
as we enjoyed; but when the Duke of Marlborough's old
victorious veterans are dug out of their colleges and repose,
to guard the King's palace, and to keep up the show of an army
which we have buried in America, or in a manner lost in
Flanders, we shall soon know the real feel of being trampled
upon! In this crisis, you will hear often from me; for I will
leave you in no anxious uncertainty from which I can free you.

The Countess(1075) is at Hanover, and, we hear, extremely well
received.  It is conjectured, and it is not impossible, that
the Count may have procured for her some dirty dab of a
negotiation about some 'acre of territory more for Hanover, in
order to facilitate her reception.  She has been at Hesse
Cassel, and fondled extremely Princess Mary'S(1076) children;
just as you know she used to make a rout about the Pretender's
boys.  My Lord Chesterfield laughs at her letter to him; and,
what would anger her more than the neglect, ridicules the
style and orthography.  Nothing promises well for her here.

You told me you wished I would condole with Prince Craon on
the death of his son:(1077) which son? and where was he
killed?  You don't tell me, and I never heard.  Now it would
be too late.  I should have been uneasy for Prince Beauvau,
but that you say he is in Piedmont.

Adieu! my dear child: we have much to wish! A little good
fortune will not re-establish us.  I am in pain for your
health from the great increase of your business.

(1072 The French had been successful in a skirmish against the
English army, at a place called Melle.  The consequence of
this success was their obtaining the possession of Ghent.-D.

(1073) The army of the Prince of Conti, posted near the Maine,
had been so weakened by the detachments sent from it to
reinforce the army in Flanders, that it was obliged to retreat
before the Austrians.  This retrograde movement was effected
with considerable loss, both of soldiers and baggage; but it
does not appear that any decisive general engagement took
place during the campaign between the French and Austrians.-D.

(1074) ant`e, p. 195; Letter 45 (note 334).

(1075) Lady Orford.

(1076) Princess Mary of England, daughter of George the
Second; married in 1740 to the Prince of Hesse Cassel, who
treated her with great inhumanity.  She died in June, 1771.-E.

(1077) The young Prince de Craon was killed at the head of his
regiment at the battle of Fontenoy.-D.



425 Letter 171
To sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, July 12, 1745.

I am charmed with the sentiments that Mr. Chute expresses for
you; but then you have lost him! Here is an answer to his
letter; I send it unsealed, to avoid repealing what I have
thought on our affairs.  Seal it and send it.  Its being open,
prevented my saying half so much about you as I should have
done.

There is no more news - the Great Duke's victory, of which we
heard so much last week, is come to nothing! So far from
having defeated the Prince of Conti, it is not at all
impossible but the Prince may wear the imperial coat of
diamonds, though I am persuaded the care of that will be the
chief concern of the Great Duke, (next to his own person,) in
a battle.  Our army is retreated beyond Brussels; the French
gather laurels, and towns, and prisoners, as one would a
nosegay.  In the mean time you are bullying the King of
Naples, in the person of the English fleet; and I think may
possibly be doing so for two months after that very fleet
belongs to the King of France; as astrologers tell one that we
should see stars shine for I don't know how long after they
were annihilated.  But I like your spirit; keep it up!
Millamant, in the Way of the World, tells Mirabel, that she
will be solicited to the very last; nay, and afterwards. He
replies, "What! after the last?"

I am in great pain about your arrears; it is a bad season for
obtaining payment.  In the best times, they make a custom of
paying foreign ministers Ill; which may be very politic, when
they send men of too great fortunes abroad in order to lessen
them: but, my dear child, God knows that is not your case!

I have some extremely pretty dogs of King Charles's breed, if
I knew how to convey them to you: indeed they are not
Patapans.  I can't tell how they would like travelling into
Italy, when there is a prospect of the rest of their race
returning from thence: besides, you must certify me that none
of them shall ever be married below themselves; for since the
affair of Lady Caroline Fox, one durst not hazard the Duke of
Richmond's resentment even about a dog and bitch of that
breed.

Lord Lempster(1078) is taken prisoner in the affair of the
detachment to Ghent.  My lady,(1079) who has heard of Spartan
mothers, (though you know she once asserted that nobody knew
any thing of the Grecian Republics,) affects to bear it with a
patriot insensibility.  She told me the other day that the
Abb`e Niccolini and the eldest Pandolfini are coming to
England: is it true? I shall be very Clad to be civil to them,
especially to the latter, who, you know, was one of my
friends.

My Lady Orford is at Hanover, most Graciously received by "the
Father of all his people!" In the papers of yesterday was this
paragraph; "Lady O. who has spent several years in Italy,
arrived here (Hanover) the 3d, on her return to England, and
was Graciously received by his Majesty." Lady Denbigh is gone
into the country so I don't know where she is to lodge-perhaps
at St. James's, out of' regard to my father's memory.

Trust me, you escaped well in Pigwiggin's(1079) not accepting
your invitation of living with you: you must have aired your
house, as Lady Pomfret was forced to air Lady Mary Wortley's
bedchamber.  He has a most unfortunate breath: so has the
Princess his sister.  When I was at their country-house, I
used to sit in the library and turn over books of prints: out
of good breeding they would not quit me; nay, would look over
the prints with me.  A whiff would come from the east, and I
turned short to the west, whence the Princess would puff me
back with another gale full as richly perfumed as her
brother's.  Adieu!

(1078) George Fermor: who, on the death of his father in 1753,
became second Earl of Pomfret.  He died in 1785.-E.

(1079) Henrietta Louisa, Countess of Pomfret, mother of Lord
Lempster.

(1080) A nickname given by Walpole to his cousin Horace,
eldest son of "Old Horace Walpole," afterwards first Earl of
Orford of the second creation.  He died in 1809, at the age of
eighty-six.-E.



427 Letter 172
To George Montagu, Esq.
Arlington Street, July 13, 1745.

Dear George,
We are all Cabob'd and Cocofagoed, as my Lord Denbigh says.
We, who formerly, you know, could any one of us beat three
Frenchmen, are now so .degenerated, that three Frenchmen(1081)
can evidently beat One Englishman.  Our army is running away,
all that is left to run; for half of it is picked up by three
or four hundred at a time. In short, we must step out of the
high pantoufles that were made by those cunning shoemakers at
Poitiers and Ramilies, and go clumping about perhaps in wooden
ones.  My Lady Hervey, who you know dotes upon every thing
French, is charmed with the hopes of these new shoes, and has
already bespoke herself a pair of pigeon wood.  How did the
tapestry at Blenheim look? Did it glow with victory, or did
all our glories look overcast?

I remember a very admired sentence in one of my Lord
Chesterfield's speeches, when he was haranguing for this war;
with a most rhetorical transition, he turned to the tapestry
in the House of Lords,(1082) and said, with a sigh, he feared
there were no historical looms at work now! Indeed, we have
reason to bless the good patriots, who have been for employing
our manufactures so historically.  The Countess of that wise
Earl, with whose two expressive words I began this letter,
says, she is very happy now that my lord had never a place
upon the coalition, for then all this bad situation of our
affairs would have been laid upon him.

Now I have been talking of remarkable periods in our annals, I
must tell you what my Lord Baltimore thinks one:--He said to
the Prince t'other day, "Sir, your Royal Highness's marriage
will be an area in English history."

If it were not for the life that is put into the town now and
then by very bad news from abroad, one should be quite
stupefied.  There is nobody left but two or three solitary
regents; and they are always whisking backwards and forwards
to their villas; and about a dozen antediluvian dowagers,
whose carcasses have miraculously resisted the wet, and who
every Saturday compose a very reverend catacomb at my old Lady
Strafford's.  She does not take money at the door for showing
them, but 'you pay twelvepence apiece under the denomination
of card-money.  Wit and beauty, indeed, remain in the persons
of Lady Townshend and Lady Caroline Fitzroy; but such is the
want of taste of this age, that the former is very often
forced to wrap up her wit in plain English before it can be
understood; and the latter is almost as often obliged to have
recourse to the same artifices to make her charms be taken
notice of.

Of beauty, I can tell you an admirable story.  One Mrs.
Comyns, an elderly gentlewoman, has lately taken a house in
St. James's Street: some young gentlemen went there t'other
night;--"Well, Mrs. Comyns, I hope there won't be the same
disturbances here that were at your other house in Air
Street."--"Lord, Sir, I never had any disturbances there: mine
was as quiet a house as any in the neighbourhood, and a great
deal of company came to me: it was only the ladies of quality
that envied Me."--"Envied you! why, your house was pulled down
about your ears."--"Oh, dear Sir! don't you know how that
happened?"--"No; pray how?"--"Why, dear Sir, it was my Lady
**** who gave ten guineas to the mob to demolish my house,
because her ladyship fancied I got women for Colonel Conway."

My dear George, don't you delight in this story? If poor
Harry(1083) comes back from Flanders, I intend to have
infinite fun with his prudery about this anecdote, which is
full as good as if it was true.  I beg you will visit Mrs.
Comyns when you come to town- she has infinite humour.

(1081) Alluding to the success of the French army in Flanders,
under the command of Mareschal Saxe.

(1082) Representing the defeat of the Spanish armada in 1588,
and surrounded by portraits of the principal officers who
commanded the fleet.  This noble suit of hangings was wrought
in Holland, at the expense of the Earl of Nottingham, lord
high admiral.-E.

(1083) The Honourable Henry Seymour Conway.



428 Letter 173
To Sir Horace Mann.
July 15, 1745.

You will be surprised at another from me so soon, when I wrote
to you but four days ago.  This is not with any news, but upon
a private affair.  You have never said any thing to Me about
the extraordinary procedure of Marquis Riccardi, of which I
wrote you word.  Indeed, as his letter came just upon my
father's death, I had forgot it too; so much so, that I have
lost the catalogue which he sent me. Well, the other day I
received his cargo.  Now, My dear child, I don't write to him
upon it, because, as he Sent the things without asking my
leave, I am determined never to acknowledge the receipt of
them because I will in no manner be liable to pay for them if
they are lost: which I think highly probable; and as I have
lost the catalogue, I cannot tell whether I have received all
or not.

I beg you will just say what follows to him.  That I am
extremely amazed he should think of employing me to sell his
goods for him, especially without asking my consent, that an
English gentleman, just come from France, has brought me a box
of things, of which he himself had no account; nor is there
any letter or catalogue with them; that I suppose they may be
the Marquis's collection: I have lost the catalogue, and
consequently cannot tell whether I have received all or not,
nor whether they are his: that as they came in so blind a
manner, and have been opened at several custom-houses, I will
not be answerable especially having never given my consent to
receive them, and having opened the box ignorantly, without
knowing the contents: that when I did open it, I concluded it
came from Florence, having often refused to buy most of the
things, which had long lain upon the jeweller's hands on the
old bridge, and which are very improper for sale here, as all
the English for some years have seen them, and not thought
them worth purchasing - that I remember in the catalogue the
price for the whole was fixed at two thousand pistoles; that
they are full as much worth two-and-twenty thousand; and that
I have been laughed at by people to whom I have showed them
for naming so extravagant a price: that nobody living would
think of buying all together: that for myself, I have entirely
left off making any collection; and if I had not, would not
buy things dear now which I have formerly refused at much
lower prices.  That, after all, though I cannot think myself
at all well used by Marquis Riccardi, either in sending me the
things, in the price he has fixed on them, or in the things
themselves, which to my knowledge he has picked up from the
shops on the old bridge, and were no family collection, yet,
as I received so many civilities at Florence from the
nobility, and in particular from his wife, Madame Riccardi, if
he will let me do any thing that is practicable, I will sell
what I can for him. That if he will send me A new and distinct
catalogue, with the price of each piece, and a price
considerably less than what he has set upon the whole, I will
endeavour to dispose of what I can for him.  But as most of
them are very indifferent, and the total value most
unreasonable, I absolutely will not undertake the sale of them
upon any other terms, but will pack them up, and send them
away to Leghorn by the first ship that sails; for as we are at
war with France, I cannot send them that way, nor will I
trouble any gentleman to carry them, as he might think himself
liable to make them good if they met with any accident; nor
will I answer for them by whatever way they go, as I did not
consent to receive them, nor am sure that I have received the
Marquis's collection.

My dear Sir, translate this very distinctly for him, for he
never shall receive any other notice from me; nor will I give
them up to Wasner or Pucci,(1084) or any body else, though he
should send me an order for it; for nobody saw me open them,
nor shall any body be able to say I had them, by receiving
them from me.  In short, I think I cannot be too cautious in
such a negotiation.  If a man will send Me things to the value
of two thousand pistoles, whether they are really worth it or
not, he shall take his chance for losing them, and shall
certainly never come upon me for them.  He must absolutely
take his choice, of selling them at a proper price and
separately, or of having them directly sent back by sea; for
whether he consents to either or not, I shall certainly
proceed in my resolution about them
the very instant I receive an answer from you; for the sooner
I am clear of them the better.  If he will let me sell them
without setting a price, he may depend upon my taking the best
method for his service; though really, my dear child, it will
be for my own honour, not for his sake, who has treated me so
impertinently.  I am sorry to give you this trouble, but judge
how much the fool gives me!  Adieu!

(1084) Ministers of the Queen of Hungary and the Great Duke.




430 Letter 174
To Sir Horace Mann.
Arlington Street, July 26, 1745.

