
 
 
 Chapter III 
 A FEW MORE LESSONS 

I ROSE next morning with a feeling of hopeful exhilaration, in spite of the 
disappointments already experienced; but I found the dressing of Mary Ann was 
no light matter, as her abundant hair was to be smeared with pomade, plaited 
in three long tails, and tied with bows of ribbon, a task my unaccustomed 
fingers found great difficulty in performing. She told me her nurse could do 
it in half the time, and, by keeping up a constant fidget of impatience, 
contrived to render me still longer. When all was done, we went into the 
school-room, where I met my other pupil, and chatted with the two till it was 
time to go down to breakfast. That meal being concluded, and a few civil 
words having been exchanged with Mrs Bloomfield, we repaired to the 
school-room again, and commenced the business of the day. I found my pupils 
very backward indeed; but Tom, though averse to every species of mental 
exertion, was not without abilities. Mary Ann could scarcely read a word, and 
was so careless and inattentive, that I could hardly get on with her at all. 
However, by dint of great labour and patience, I managed to get something 
done in the course of the morning, and then accompanied my young charge out 
into the garden and adjacent grounds, for a little recreation before dinner. 
There we got along tolerably together, except that I found they had no notion 
of going with me; I must go with them wherever they chose to 
lead me. I must run, walk, or stand exactly as it suited their fancy. This, 
I thought, was reversing the order of things; and I found doubly 
disagreeable, 
as on this as well as subsequent 
occasions, they seemed to prefer the dirtiest places, and the most dismal 
occupations. But there was no remedy; either I must follow them, or keep 
entirely apart from them, and thus appear neglectful of my charge. To-day, 
they manifested a particular attachment to a well at the bottom of the lawn, 
where they persisted in dabbling with sticks and pebbles, for above half an 
hour. I was in constant fear that their mother would see them from the 
window, and blame me for allowing them thus to draggle their clothes, and wet 
their feet and hands, instead of taking exercise; but no arguments, commands, 
or intreaties could draw them away. If she did not see them some one 
else did&mdash;a gentleman on horseback had entered the gate, and was 
proceeding up the road; at the distance of a few paces from us he paused, and 
calling to the children in a waspish penetrating tone, bade them &ldquo;keep out of 
that water.&rdquo; &ldquo;Miss Grey,&rdquo; said he, &ldquo;(I suppose it is Miss Grey) I am 
surprised that you should allow them to dirty their clothes, in that 
manner&mdash;Don't you see how Miss Bloomfield has soiled her 
frock?&mdash;and that Master Bloomfield's socks are quite 
wet?&mdash;and both of them without gloves! Dear, dear! Let me 
 request that in future, you will keep them decent at least!&rdquo; so 
saying he turned away, and continued his ride up to the house. This was Mr 
Bloomfield. I was surprised that he should nominate his children Master and 
Miss Bloomfield, and still more so, that he should speak so uncivilly to 
me&mdash;their governess, and a perfect stranger to himself. Presently 
the bell rang to summon us in. I dined with the children at one, while he and 
his lady took their luncheon at the same table. His conduct there did not 
greatly raise him in my estimation. He was a man of ordinary 
stature&mdash;rather below than above, and rather thin than stout, 
apparently between thirty and forty years of age: he had a large mouth, pale, 
dingy complexion, 
milky blue eyes, and hair the colour 
of a hempen cord. There was a roast leg of mutton before him: he helped Mrs 
Bloomfield, the children, and me, desiring me to cut up the children's meat, 
then after twisting about the mutton in various directions, and eyeing it 
from different points, he pronounced it not fit to be eaten, and called for 
the cold beef. 


 

&ldquo;What is the matter with the mutton, my dear?&rdquo; asked his mate. 


 

&ldquo;It is quite overdone. Don't you taste, Mrs Bloomfield, that all the goodness 
is roasted out of it? And can't you see that all that nice, red gravy is 
completely dried away?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Well, I think the beef will suit you.&rdquo; 


 

The beef was set before him, and he began to carve, but with the most rueful 
expressions of discontent. 


 

&ldquo;What is the matter with the beef, Mr Bloomfield? I'm sure I thought 
it was very nice.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;And so it was very nice. A nicer joint could not be; but it is 
 quite spoiled,&rdquo; replied he, dolefully. 


 

&ldquo;How so?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;How so? Why, don't you see how it is cut? Dear&mdash;dear! it is quite 
shocking!&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;They must have cut it wrong in the kitchen then, for I'm sure I carved it 
quite properly here, yesterday.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;No doubt they cut it wrong in the kitchen&mdash;the savages! 
Dear&mdash;dear! Did ever any one see such a fine piece of beef so 
completely ruined? But remember that, in future, when a decent dish leaves 
this table, they shall not touch it in the kitchen. Remember 
 that, Mrs Bloomfield!&rdquo; 


 

Notwithstanding the ruinous state of the beef, the gentleman managed to cut 
himself some delicate slices, part of which he ate in silence. When he next 
spoke it was, in a less querulous tone, to ask what there was for dinner. 


 

&ldquo;Turkey and grouse,&rdquo; was the concise reply. 


 

&ldquo;And what besides?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Fish . &ldquo; 


 

&ldquo;What kind of fish?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I don't know.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo; You don't know? &rdquo; cried he, looking solemnly up from his plate, and 
suspending his knife and fork in astonishment. 


 

&ldquo;No. I told the cook to get some fish&mdash;I did not particularize 
what.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Well, that beats everything! A lady professes to keep house, and doesn't 
even know that fish is for dinner! professes to order fish, and doesn't 
specify what!&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Perhaps, Mr Bloomfield, you will order dinner yourself in future. &ldquo; 


 

Nothing more was said; and I was very glad to get out of the room with my 
pupils; for I never felt so ashamed and uncomfortable in my life, for 
anything that was not my own fault. 


 

In the afternoon we applied to lessons again; then went out again; then had 
tea in the school-room; then I dressed Mary Ann for dessert; and when she and 
her brother were gone down to the dining-room, I took the opportunity of 
beginning a letter to my dear friends at home; but the children came up 
before I had half completed it. 


 

At seven, I had to put Mary Ann to bed; then I played with Tom till eight, 
when he too went; and I finished my letter, and unpacked my clothes, which I 
had hitherto found no opportunity for doing, and, finally, went to bed 
myself. 


 

But this is a very favourable specimen of a day's proceedings. 


 

My task of instruction and surveillance, instead of becoming easier as my 
charges and I got better accustomed to each other, became more arduous as 
their characters unfolded. The name of governess, I soon found, was a mere 
mockery as applied to me; my pupils had no more notion of 
 obedience than a wild, unbroken colt. The habitual fear of 
their father's peevish temper, and the dread of the punishments he was wont 
to inflict when irritated, kept them generally within bounds in his immediate 
presence. The girls, too, had some fear of their mother's anger; and the boy 
might occasionally be bribed to do as she bid him by the hope of reward: but 
I had no rewards to offer, and as for punishments, I was given to understand, 
the parents reserved that privilege to themselves; and yet they expected me 
to keep my pupils in order. Other children might be guided by the fear of 
anger, and the desire of approbation; but neither the one nor the other had 
any effect upon these. 


 

Master Tom, not content with refusing to be ruled, must needs set up as a 
ruler, and manifested a determination to keep, not only his sisters, but his 
governess in order, by violent manual and pedal applications; and, as he was 
a tall, strong boy of his years, this occasioned no trifling inconvenience. A 
few sound boxes in the ear, on such occasions, might have settled the matter 
easily enough: but as, in that case, he might make up some story to his 
mother, which she would be sure to believe, as she had such unshaken faith in 
his veracity&mdash;though I had already discovered it to be by no means 
unimpeachable, I determined to refrain from striking him even in 
self-defence; and, in his most violent moods, my only resource was to throw 
him on his back, and hold his hands and feet till the frenzy was somewhat 
abated. 


 

To the difficulty of preventing him from doing what he ought not, was added 
that of forcing him to do what he ought. Often he would positively refuse to 
learn, or to repeat his lessons, or even to look at his book. Here again, a 
good birch rod might have been serviceable; but, as my powers were so 
limited, I must make the best use of what I had. As there were no settled 
hours for study and play, I resolved to give my pupils a certain task, which, 
with 
moderate attention, they could perform in a short 
time; and till this was done, however weary I was, or however perverse they 
might be, nothing short of parental interference should induce me to suffer 
them to leave the school-room; even if I should sit with my chair against the 
door to keep them in. Patience, Firmness, and Perseverance were my only 
weapons; and these I resolved to use to the utmost. 


 

I determined always strictly to fulfil the threats and promises I made; and 
to that end, I must be cautious to threaten and promise nothing that I could 
not perform. Then, I would carefully refrain from all useless irritability 
and indulgence of my own ill temper: when they behaved tolerably, I would be 
as kind and obliging as it was in my power to be, in order to make the widest 
possible distinction between good and bad conduct; I would reason with them 
too in the simplest and most effective manner. When I reproved them, or 
refused to gratify their wishes, after a glaring fault, it should be more in 
sorrow than in anger: their little hymns and prayers I would make plain and 
clear to their understanding; when they said their prayers at night, and 
asked pardon for their offences, I would remind them of the sins of the past 
day, solemnly, but in perfect kindness, to avoid raising a spirit of 
opposition; penitential hymns should be said by the naughty; cheerful ones by 
the comparatively good; and every kind of instruction, I would convey to 
them, as much as possible, by entertaining discourse&mdash;apparently 
with no other object than their present amusement in view. 


 

By these means I hoped, in time, both to benefit the children, and to gain 
the approbation of their parents; and, also, to convince my friends at home 
that I was not so wanting in skill and prudence as they supposed. I knew the 
difficulties I had to contend with were great; but I knew, (at least, I 
believed,) unremitting patience and perseverance 
could 
overcome them, and night and morning I implored Divine assistance to this 
end. But either the children were so incorrigible, the parents so 
unreasonable, or myself so mistaken in my views, or so unable to carry them 
out, that my best intentions and most strenuous efforts seemed productive of 
no better result, than sport to the children, dissatisfaction to their 
parents, and torment to myself. 


 

The task of instruction was as arduous for the body as the mind. I had to run 
after my pupils, to catch them, to carry, or drag them to the table, and 
often forcibly to hold them there, till the lesson was done. Tom, I 
frequently put into a corner, seating myself before him in a chair, with the 
book which contained the little task that must be said, or read, before he 
was released in my hand. He was not strong enough to push both me and the 
chair away; so he would stand twisting his body and face into the most 
grotesque and singular contortions&mdash;laughable, no doubt, to an 
unconcerned spectator, but not to me- and uttering loud yells and doleful 
outcries, intended to represent weeping, but wholly without the accompaniment 
of tears. I knew this was done solely for the purpose of annoying me; and, 
therefore, however I might inwardly tremble with impatience and irritation, I 
manfully strove to suppress all visible signs of molestation, and affected to 
sit, with calm indifference, waiting till it should please him to cease this 
pastime, and prepare for a run in the garden, by casting his eye on the book, 
and reading or repeating the few words he was required to say. 


 

Sometimes he would determine to do his writing badly; and I had to hold his 
hand to prevent him from purposely blotting or disfiguring the paper. 
Frequently, I threatened that, if he did not do better, he should have 
another line: then, he would stubbornly refuse to write this line; and I, 
to save my word, had finally to resort to the expedient 
of holding his fingers upon the pen, and forcibly drawing his hand up and 
down till, in spite of his resistance, the line was in some sort completed. 


 

Yet Tom was by no means the most unmanageable of my pupils: sometimes, to my 
great joy, he would have the sense to see that his wisest policy was to 
finish his tasks, and go out and amuse himself till I and his sisters came to 
join him, which, frequently, was not at all, for Mary Ann seldom followed his 
example in this particular. She apparently preferred rolling on the floor 
to any other amusement. Down she would drop like a leaden weight; and when 
I, with great difficulty, had succeeded in rooting her thence, I had still to 
hold her up with one arm, while, with the other, I held the book from which 
she was to read or spell her lesson. As the dead weight of the big girl of 
six became too heavy for one arm to bear, I transferred it to the other; or, 
if both were weary of the burden, I carried her into a corner, and told her 
she might come out when she should find the use of her feet, and stand up; 
but she generally preferred lying there like a log till dinner or tea time, 
when, as I could not deprive her of her meals, she must be liberated, and 
would come crawling out with a grin of triumph on her round, red face. 


 

Often she would stubbornly refuse to pronounce some particular word in her 
lesson; and now I regret the lost labour I have had in striving to conquer 
her obstinacy. If I had passed it over as matter of no consequence, it would 
have been better for both parties, than vainly striving to overcome it, as I 
did; but I thought it my absolute duty to crush this vicious tendency in the 
bud; and so it was, if I could have done it, and, had my powers been less 
limited, I might have enforced obedience; but as it was, it was a trial 
of strength between her and me, in which she generally 
came off victorious; and every victory served to encourage and strengthen her 
for a future contest. 


 

In vain I argued, coaxed, entreated, threatened, scolded; in vain I kept her 
in from play, or, if obliged to take her out, refused to play with her, or to 
speak kindly, or have anything to do with her; in vain I tried to set before 
her the advantages of doing as she was bid, and being loved, and kindly 
treated in consequence, and the disadvantages of persisting in her absurd 
perversity. Sometimes, when she asked me to do something for her, I would 
answer&mdash; 


 

&ldquo;Yes, I will, Mary Ann, if you will only say that word. Come! you'd better 
say it at once, and have no more trouble about it.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;No.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Then, of course, I can do nothing for you!&rdquo; 


 

With me, at her age, or under, neglect and disgrace were the most dreadful of 
punishments; but on her they made no impression. 


 

Sometimes, exasperated to the utmost pitch, I would shake her violently by 
the shoulders, or pull her long hair, or put her in the corner,&mdash; 
for which she punished me with loud, shrill, piercing screams, that went 
through my head like a knife. She knew I hated this, and when she had 
shrieked her utmost, would look into my face with an air of vindictive 
satisfaction, exclaiming&mdash; 


 

&ldquo; Now , then! that's for you!&rdquo; 


 

And then shriek again and again, till I was forced to stop my ears. Often 
these dreadful cries would bring Mrs Bloomfield up to inquire what was the 
matter? 


 

&ldquo;Mary Ann is a naughty girl, ma'am.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;But what are these shocking screams?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;She is screaming in a passion.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I never heard such a dreadful noise! You might be killing her. Why is she 
not out with her brother?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I cannot get her to finish her lessons.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;But Mary Ann must be a good girl, and finish her lessons.&rdquo; This was 
blandly spoken to the child. &ldquo;And I hope I shall never hear such 
terrible cries again!&rdquo; 


 

And fixing her cold, stony eyes upon me with a look that could not be 
mistaken, she would shut the door, and walk away. 


 

Sometimes I would try to take the little obstinate creature by surprise, and 
casually ask her the word while she was thinking of something else: 
frequently she would begin to say it, and then suddenly check herself, with a 
provoking look that seemed to say, &ldquo;Ah! I'm too sharp for you; you shan't 
trick It out of me, either.&rdquo; 


 

On another occasion, I pretended to forget the whole affair; and talked and 
played with her as usual, till night, when I put her to bed; then bending 
over her, while she lay all smiles and good humour, just before departing, I 
said, as cheerfully and kindly as before - 


 

&ldquo;Now, Mary Ann, just tell me that word before I kiss you good-night: you are 
a good girl now, and, of course, you will say it.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;No, I won't.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Then I can't kiss you.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Well, I don't care.&rdquo; 


 

In vain I expressed my sorrow; in vain I lingered for some symptom of 
contrition; she really &ldquo;didn't care,&rdquo; and I left her alone, and in darkness, 
wondering most of all at this last proof of insensate stubbornness. In 
 my childhood I could not imagine a more afflictive punishment, than 
for my mother to refuse to kiss me at night: the very idea was terrible; more 
than the idea I never felt, for, happily, I never 
committed a crime that was deemed worthy of such a penalty; but once, I 
remember, for some transgression of my sister's, our mother thought proper to 
inflict it upon her; what she felt, I cannot tell; but my sympathetic 
tears and suffering for her sake, I shall not soon forget. 


 

Another troublesome trait in Mary Ann, was her incorrigible propensity to 
keep running into the nursery to play with her little sisters, and the nurse. 
This was natural enough, but, as it was against her mother's express desire, 
I, of course, forbade her to do so, and did my utmost to keep her with me, 
but that only increased her relish for the nursery; and the more I strove to 
keep her out of it, the oftener she went, and the longer she stayed; to the 
great dissatisfaction of Mrs Bloomfield, who, I well knew, would impute all 
the blame of the matter to me. 


 

Another of my trials was the dressing in the morning: at one time she would 
not be washed; at another she would not be dressed, unless she might wear 
some particular frock that, I knew, her mother would not like her to have; at 
another she would scream, and run away if I attempted to touch her hair. So 
that, frequently, when, after much trouble and toil, I had, at length, 
succeeded in bringing her down, the breakfast was nearly half over; and black 
looks from &ldquo;mama,&rdquo; and testy obs
ervations from &ldquo;papa,&rdquo; spoken at me, if not 
to me, were sure to be my meed: for few things irritated the latter so much 
as want of punctuality at meal-times. 


 

Then, among the minor annoyances, was my inability to satisfy Mrs Bloomfield 
with her daughter's dress; and the child's hair &ldquo;was never fit to be seen.&rdquo; 
Sometimes, as a powerful reproach to me, she would perform the office of 
tire-woman herself, and then complain bitterly of the trouble it gave her. 


 

When little Fanny came into the school-room, I hoped she would be mild and 
inoffensive at least; but a few days, if 
not a few 
hours, sufficed to destroy the illusion: I found her a mischievous, 
intractable little creature, given up to falsehood and deception, young as 
she was, and alarmingly fond of exercising her two favourite weapons of 
offence and defence: that of spitting in the faces of those who incurred her 
displeasure, and bellowing like a bull when her unreasonable desires were not 
gratified. As she, generally, was pretty quiet in her parents' presence, and 
they were impressed with the notion of her being a remarkably gentle child, 
her falsehoods were readily believed, and her loud uproars led them to 
suspect harsh and injudicious treatment on my part; and when, at length, her 
bad disposition became manifest, even to their prejudiced eyes, I felt that 
the whole was attributed to me. 


 

&ldquo;What a naughty girl Fanny is getting,&rdquo; Mrs Bloomfield would say to her 
spouse. &ldquo;Don't you observe, my dear, how she is altered since she entered the 
school-room? She will soon be as bad as the other two; and, I am sorry to 
say, they have quite deteriorated of late.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;You may say that,&rdquo; was the answer. &ldquo;I've been thinking that same myself. I 
thought when we got them a governess they'd improve; but, instead of that, 
they get worse and worse: I don't know how it is with their learning; but 
their habits, I know, make no sort of improvement; they get rougher, and 
dirtier, and more unseemly, every day.&rdquo; 


 

I knew this was all pointed at me; and these, and all similar innuendoes, 
affected me far more deeply than any open accusations would have done; for, 
against the latter, I should have been roused to speak in my own defence: 
now, I judged it my wisest plan to subdue every resentful impulse, suppress 
every sensitive shrinking, and go on perseveringly doing my best; for, 
irksome as my situation was, I earnestly wished to retain it. I thought, if I 
could struggle on with unremitting firmness and integrity, the children 
would, in time, become more humanized: every month 
would contribute to make them some little wiser, and, consequently, more 
manageable; for a child of nine or ten, as frantic and ungovernable as these 
at six and seven would be a maniac. 


 

I flattered myself I was benefiting my parents and sister by my continuance 
here; for, small as the salary was, I still was earning something, and with 
strict economy, I could easily manage to have something to spare for them, if 
they would favour me by taking it. Then, it was by my own will that I had got 
the place, I had brought all this tribulation on myself, and I was determined 
to bear it; nay, more than that, I did not even regret the step I had taken, 
and I longed to show my friends that, even now, I was competent to undertake 
the charge, and able to acquit myself honourably to the end; and, if ever I 
felt it degrading to submit so quietly, or intolerable to toil so constantly, 
I would turn towards my home, and say within myself&mdash; 


 

 &ldquo;They may crush, but they shall not subdue me! 'Tis of thee that I think, not of them.&rdquo; 



 

About Christmas I was allowed a visit home, but only of a fortnight's 
duration. 


 

&ldquo;For,&rdquo; said Mrs Bloomfield, &ldquo;I thought, as you had seen your friends so 
lately, you would not care for a longer stay.&rdquo; 


 

I left her to think so still; but she little knew how long, how wearisome 
those fourteen weeks of absence had been to me, how intensely I had longed 
for my holidays, how greatly I was disappointed at their curtailment. Yet she 
was not to blame in this; I had never told her my feelings, and she could not 
be expected to divine them; I had not been with her a full term, and she was 
justified in not allowing me a full vacation. 

 
 
 
 Chapter IV 
 THE GRANDMAMMA 

I SPARE my readers the account of my delight on coming home, my happiness 
while there&mdash;enjoying a brief space of rest and liberty in that 
dear, familiar place, among the loving and the loved, and my sorrow on being 
obliged to bid them, once more, a long adieu. 


 

I returned, however, with unabated vigour to my work&mdash;a more 
arduous task than any one can imagine, who has not felt something like the 
misery of being charged with the care and direction of a set of mischievous 
turbulent rebels, whom his utmost exertions cannot bind to their duty; while, 
at the same time, he is responsible for their conduct to a higher power, who 
exacts from him what cannot be achieved without the aid of the superior's 
more potent authority, which, either from indolence, or the fear of becoming 
unpopular with the said rebellious gang, the latter refuses to give. I can 
conceive few situations more harassing than that wherein, however you may 
long for success, however you may labour to fulfil your duty, your efforts 
are baffled and set at naught by those beneath you, and unjustly censured and 
misjudged by those above. 


 

I have not enumerated half the vexatious propensities of my pupils, or half 
the troubles resulting from my heavy responsibilities, for fear of 
trespassing too much upon the reader's patience, as, perhaps, I have already 
done; but my design, in writing the last few pages, was not to amuse, but to 
benefit those whom it might concern: he that has no interest in such matters 
will doubtless have skipped them over with a cursory glance, and, perhaps, a 
malediction 
against the prolixity of the writer; but 
if a parent has, there-from, gathered any useful hint, or an unfortunate 
governess received thereby the slightest benefit, I am well rewarded for my 
pains. 


 

To avoid trouble and confusion, I have taken my pupils one by one, and 
discussed their various qualities; but this can give no adequate idea of 
being worried by the whole three together, when, as was often the case, all 
were determined to &ldquo;be naughty, and to tease Miss Grey, and put her in a 
passion.&rdquo; 


 

Sometimes, on such occasions, the thought has suddenly occurred to 
me&mdash;&rdquo;If they could see me now!&rdquo; meaning, of course, my 
friends at home, and the idea of how they would pity me, has made me pity 
myself&mdash;so greatly that I have had the utmost difficulty to 
restrain my tears; but I have restrained them, till my little tormentors were 
gone to dessert, or cleared off to bed, (my only prospects of deliverance,) 
and then, in all the bliss of solitude, I have given myself up to the luxury 
of an unrestricted burst of weeping. But this was a weakness I did not often 
indulge: my employments were too numerous, my leisure moments were too 
precious to admit of much time being given to fruitless lamentations. 


 

I particularly remember one wild, snowy afternoon, soon after my return in 
January&mdash;the children had all come up from dinner, loudly 
declaring that they meant &ldquo;to be naughty;&rdquo; and they had well kept their 
resolution, though I had talked myself hoarse, and wearied every muscle in my 
throat, in the vain attempt to reason them out of it. I had got Tom pinned up 
in a corner, whence, I told him, he should not escape till he had done his 
appointed task. Meantime, Fanny had possessed herself of my work bag, and was 
rifling its contents&mdash;and spitting into it besides. I told her to 
let it alone, but to no purpose, of course. 


 

&ldquo;Burn it, Fanny!&rdquo; cried Tom; and this command she 
 hastened to obey. I sprang to snatch it from the fire, and Tom 
darted to the door. 


 

&ldquo;Mary Ann, throw her desk out of the window!&rdquo; cried he, and my precious desk, 
containing my letters and papers, my small amount of cash, and all my 
valuables, was about to be precipitated from the three-story window. I flew 
to rescue it. Meanwhile Tom had left the room, and was rushing down the 
stairs, followed by Fanny. Having secured my desk, I ran to catch them, and 
Mary Ann came scampering after. All three escaped me, and ran out of the 
house into the garden, where they plunged about in the snow, shouting and 
screaming in exultant glee. 


 

What must I do? If I followed them, I should probably be unable to capture 
one, and only drive them farther away; if I did not, how was I to get them 
in? and what would their parents think of me, if they saw, or heard, the 
children rioting, hatless, bonnetless, gloveless, and bootless, in the deep, 
soft snow? 


 

While I stood in this perplexity, just without the door, trying, by grim 
looks and angry words, to awe them into subjection, I heard a voice behind 
me, in harshly piercing tones exclaiming, 


 

&ldquo;Miss Grey! Is it possible! What, in the d&mdash;l's name, can you be thinking 
about?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I can't get them in, sir,&rdquo; said I turning round, and beholding Mr 
Bloomfield, with his hair on end and his pale blue eyes bolting from their 
sockets. 


 

&ldquo;But I INSIST upon their being got in!&rdquo; cried he, approaching nearer, and 
looking perfectly ferocious. 


 

&ldquo;Then, sir, you must call them yourself if you please, for they won't listen 
to me,&rdquo; I replied stepping back. 


 

&ldquo;Come in with you, you filthy brats; or I'll horsewhip you every one!&rdquo; roared 
he; and the children instantly obeyed. &ldquo;There, you see! they come at the 
first word!&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Yes, when you speak.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;And it's very strange, that, when you've the care of 'em, you've no better 
control over 'em than that!&mdash;Now, there they are&mdash;gone 
upstairs with their nasty snowy feet! Do go after 'em and see them made 
decent, for Heaven's sake!&rdquo; 


 

That gentleman's mother was then staying in the house; and, as I ascended the 
stairs, and passed the drawing-room door, I had the satisfaction of hearing 
the old lady declaiming aloud to her daughter-in-law to this effect (for I 
could only distinguish the 
most emphatic words), 


 

&ldquo;Gracious Heavens!&mdash;never in all my 
life&mdash;!&mdash;get their death as sure as&mdash;! Do 
you think, my dear, she's a proper person &mdash;? Take my word 
for it&mdash;&rdquo; 


 

I heard no more; but that sufficed. 


 

The senior Mrs Bloomfield had been very attentive and civil to me; and till 
now, I had thought her a nice, kind-hearted, chatty old body. She would often 
come to me and talk in a confidential strain, nodding, and shaking her head, 
and gesticulating with hands and eyes, as a certain class of old ladies are 
wont to do: though I never knew one that carried the peculiarity to so great 
an extent: she would even sympathize with me for the trouble I had with the 
children, and express at times, by half sentences, interspersed with nods and 
knowing winks, her sense of the injudicious conduct of their mama in so 
restricting my power, and neglecting to support me with her authority. Such 
a mode of testifying disapprobation was not much to my taste; and I generally 
refused to take it in, or understand anything more than was openly spoken; at 
least, I never went farther than an implied acknowledgment that, if matters 
were otherwise ordered, my task would be a less difficult one, and I should 
be better able to guide and instruct my charge; but now I must be doubly 
cautious. Hitherto, though I saw the old lady had her defects, (of which one 
was a proneness to proclaim her perfections,) I had always been wishful to 
excuse them, and to give her credit for all the 
virtues she professed, and even imagine others yet untold. Kindness, which 
had been the food of my life through so many years, had lately been so 
entirely denied me, that I welcomed with grateful joy the slightest semblance 
of it. No wonder then that my heart warmed to the old lady, and always 
gladdened at her approach, and regretted her departure. 


 

But now, the few words, luckily, or unluckily, heard in passing, had wholly 
revolutionized my ideas respecting her; now I looked upon her as hypocritical 
and insincere, a flatterer, and a spy upon my words and deeds. Doubtless it 
would have been my interest still to meet her with the same cheerful smile, 
and tone of respectful cordiality as before; but I could not, if I would; my 
manner altered with my feelings, and became so cold and shy that she could 
not fail to notice it. She soon did notice it, and her manner altered 
too:&mdash;the familiar nod was changed to a stiff bow, the gracious 
smile gave place to a glare of gorgon ferocity, her vivacious loquacity was 
entirely transferred from me to the &ldquo;darling boys and girls,&rdquo; whom she 
flattered and indulged more absurdly than ever their mother had done. 


 

I confess, I was somewhat troubled at this change: I feared the consequences 
of her displeasure, and even made some efforts to recover the ground I had 
lost&mdash;and with better apparent success than I could have 
anticipated. At one time, I, merely in common civility, asked after her 
cough&mdash;immediately her long visage relaxed into a smile, and she 
favoured me with a particular history of that and her other infirmities, 
followed by an account of her pious resignation, delivered in the usual 
emphatic, declamatory style, which no writing can pourtray. 


 

&ldquo;But there's one remedy for all, my dear, and that's resignation,&rdquo; (a toss of 
the head) &ldquo;resignation to the will of Heaven!&rdquo; (an uplifting of hands and 
eyes.) &ldquo;It has always 
supported me through all my 
trials, and always will do,&rdquo; (a succession of nods.) &ldquo;But then, it isn't 
everybody that can say that;&rdquo; (a shake of the head), &ldquo;but I'm one of the 
pious ones, Miss Grey!&rdquo; (a very significant nod and toss). &ldquo;And, thank 
Heaven, I always was,&rdquo; (another nod) &ldquo;and I glory in it!&rdquo; (an emphatic 
clasping of the hands and shaking of the head) and with several texts of 
scripture, misquoted, or misapplied, and religious exclamations, so redolent 
of the ludicrous in the style of delivery, and manner of bringing in, if not 
in the expressions themselves, that I decline repeating them, she withdrew, 
tossing her large head in high good-humour&mdash;with herself at 
least&mdash;and left me hoping that, after all, she was rather weak 
than wicked. 


 

At her next visit to Wellwood House, I went so far as to say I was glad to 
see her looking so well. The effect of this was magical: the words, intended 
as a mark of civility, were received as a flattering compliment; her 
countenance brightened up, and from that moment she became as gracious and 
benign as heart could wish&mdash;in outward semblance at least; and 
from what I now saw of her, and what I heard from the children, I knew that 
in order to gain her cordial friendship, I had but to utter a word of 
flattery at each convenient opportunity; but this was against my principles; 
and for lack of this, the capricious old dame soon deprived me of her favour 
again, and I believe did me much secret injury. 


 

She could not greatly influence her daughter-in-law against me, because 
between that lady and herself, there was a mutual dislike&mdash;chiefly 
shewn by her, in secret detractions and calumniations, by the other, in an 
excess of frigid formality in her demeanour; and no fawning flattery of the 
elder could thaw away the wall of ice which the younger interposed between 
them. But with her son the old lady had better success: he would listen to 
all she had to say, 
provided she could sooth his 
fretful temper, and refrain from irritating him by her own asperities; and I 
have reason to believe, that she considerably strengthened his prejudice 
against me. She would tell him that I shamefully neglected the children, and 
even his wife did not attend to them as she ought; and that he must look 
after them himself or they would all go to ruin. 


 

Thus urged, he would frequently give himself the trouble of watching them 
from the windows during their play; at times, he would follow them through 
the grounds, and too often came suddenly upon them while they were dabbling 
in the forbidden well, talking to the coachman in the stables, or revelling 
in the filth of the farmyard&mdash;and I meanwhile, stupidly standing 
by, having previously exhausted my energy in vain attempts to get them away; 
often too he would unexpectedly pop his head into the school-room while the 
young people were at meals and find them spilling their milk over the table 
and themselves, plunging their fingers into their own, or each others' mugs, 
or quarrelling over their victuals like a set of tiger's cubs. If I were 
quiet at the moment, I was conniving at their disorderly conduct; if, (as was 
frequently the case,) I happened to be exalting my voice to enforce order, I 
was using undue violence, and setting the girls a bad example by such 
ungentleness of tone and language. 


 

I remember one afternoon in Spring, when, owing to the rain, they could not 
go out; but, by some amazing good fortune, they had all finished their 
lessons, and yet abstained from running down to tease their 
parents&mdash;a trick that annoyed me greatly, but which, on rainy 
days, I seldom could prevent their doing; because, below, they found novelty 
and amusement&mdash;especially when visitors were in the house, and 
their mother, though she bid me keep them in the school-room, would never 
chide them for leaving it, 
or trouble herself to send 
them back; but to-day they appeared satisfied with their present abode, and 
what is more wonderful still, seemed disposed to play together without 
depending on me for amusement, and without quarrelling with each other. Their 
occupation was a somewhat puzzling one: they were all squatted together on 
the floor by the window, over a heap of broken toys, and a quantity of birds' 
eggs, or rather egg-shells, for the contents had luckily been abstracted; 
these shells, they had broken up, and were pounding into small fragments, to 
what end I could not imagine; but, so long as they were quiet, and not in 
positive mischief, I did not care; and, with a feeling of unusual repose, I 
sat by the fire, putting the finishing stitches to a frock for Mary Ann's 
doll; intending, when that was done, to begin a letter to my mother. But, 
suddenly, the door opened, and the dingy head of Mr Bloomfield looked in. 


 

&ldquo;All very quiet here! What are you doing ?&rdquo; said he. 


 

&ldquo;No harm to-day , at least,&rdquo; thought I. 


 

But he was of a different opinion. Advancing to the window, and seeing the 
children's occupation, he testily exclaimed- 


 

&ldquo;What in the world are you about?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;We're grinding egg-shells, papa!&rdquo; cried Tom. 


 

&ldquo;How dare you make such a mess, you little d&mdash;ls? Don't you see what 
confounded work you're making of the carpet?&rdquo; (the carpet was a plain brown 
drugget.) &ldquo;Miss Grey, did you know what they were doing?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Yes, sir.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo; You knew it?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Yes.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;You knew it! and you actually sat there, and permitted them to go on, 
without a word of reproof!&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I didn't think they were doing any harm.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Any harm! Why, look there! Just look at that carpet, and see&mdash;was 
there ever anything like it in a Christian house before? No wonder your room 
is not fit for a pigsty&mdash;no wonder your pupils are worse than a 
litter of pigs!&mdash;no wonder&mdash;Oh! I declare, it puts me 
quite past my patience!&rdquo; and he departed, shutting the door after him with a 
bang that made the children laugh. 


 

&ldquo;It puts me quite past. my patience too!&rdquo; muttered I, getting up; and, 
seizing the poker, I dashed it repeatedly into the cinders, and stirred them 
up with unwonted energy; thus easing my irritation, under pretence of mending 
the fire. 


 

After this, Mr Bloomfield was continually looking in to see if the 
school-room was in order; and, as the children were continually littering the 
floor with fragments of toys, sticks, stones, stubble, leaves, and other 
rubbish which I could not prevent their bringing, or oblige them to gather 
up, and which the servants refused to &ldquo;clean after them,&rdquo; I had to spend a 
considerable portion of my valuable leisure moments, on my knees upon the 
floor, in painsfully reducing things to order. Once, I told them that they 
should not taste their supper till they had picked up everything from the 
carpet; Fanny might have hers when she had taken up a certain quantity, Mary 
Ann when she had gathered twice as much, and Tom was to clear away the rest. 


 

Wonderful to state, the girls did their part; but Tom was in such a fury that 
he flew upon the table, scattered the bread and milk about the floor, struck 
his sisters, kicked the coals out of the coal-pan, attempted to overthrow the 
table and chairs, and seemed inclined to make a Douglas-larder of the whole 
contents of the room; but I seized upon him, and, sending Mary Ann to call 
her mama, held him in spite of kicks, blows, yells, and execrations, till Mrs 
Bloomfield made her appearance. 


 

&ldquo;What is the matter with my boy?&rdquo; said she. 


 

And when the matter was explained to her, all she did was to send for the 
nursery-maid to put the room in order, and bring Master Bloomfield his 
supper. 


 

&ldquo;There now,&rdquo; cried Tom triumphantly, looking up from his viands with his 
mouth almost too full for speech. &ldquo;There now, Miss Grey! you see I have got 
my supper in spite of you: and I haven't picked up a single thing!&rdquo; 


 

The only person in the house who had any real sympathy for me was the nurse; 
for she had suffered like afflictions though in a smaller degree, as she had 
not the task of teaching, nor was she so responsible for the conduct of her 
charge. 


 

&ldquo;Oh, Miss Grey!&rdquo; she would say, &ldquo;you have some trouble with them childer!&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I have indeed, Betty; and I dare say you know what it is.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Ay, I do so! But I don't vex myself o'er 'em as you do. And then, you see, I 
hit 'em a slap sometimes; and them little uns&mdash;I give 'em a good 
whipping now and then&mdash;there's nothing else ull do for 'em, as 
what they say. Howsoever, I've lost my place for it.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Have you, Betty ? I heard you were going to leave.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Eh, bless you, yes ! Missis gave me warning a three-wik sin'. She told me 
afore Christmas how it mud be, if I hit 'em again; but I couldn't hold my 
hand off 'em at nothing&mdash;I know not how you do, for Miss 
Mary Ann's worse by the half nor her sisters ! &ldquo; 

 
 
 
 Chapter V 
 THE UNCLE 

BESIDES the old lady, there was another relative of the family, whose visits 
were a great annoyance to me&mdash;this was &ldquo;uncle Robson,&rdquo; Mrs 
Bloomfield's brother, a tall, self-sufficient fellow, with dark hair and 
sallow complexion like his sister, a nose that seemed to disdain the earth, 
and little grey eyes, frequently half closed, with a mixture of real 
stupidity and affected contempt of all surrounding objects. He was a 
thick-set, strongly-built man, but he had found some means of compressing his 
waist into a remarkably small compass, and that, together with the unnatural 
stiffness of his form, showed that the lofty-minded, manly Mr Robson, the 
scorner of the female sex, was not above the foppery of stays. 


 

He seldom deigned to notice me; and, when he did, it was with a certain 
supercilious insolence of tone and manner, that convinced me he was no 
gentleman, though it was intended to have a contrary effect. But it was not 
for that I disliked his coming, so much as for the harm he did the 
children&mdash;encouraging all their evil propensities, and undoing, in 
a few minutes, the little good it had taken me months of labour to achieve. 


 

Fanny and little Harriet, he seldom condescended to notice; but Mary Ann was 
something of a favourite. He was continually encouraging her tendency to 
affectation, (which I had done my utmost to crush,) talking about her pretty 
face, and filling her head with all manner of conceited notions concerning 
her personal appearance, (which I had instructed her to regard as dust in the 
balance com- 
pared with the cultivation of her mind 
and manners): and I never saw a child so susceptible of flattery as she was. 
Whatever was wrong, in either her or her brother, he would encourage by 
laughing at, if not by actually praising; people little know the injury they 
do to children by laughing at their faults, and making a pleasant jest of 
what their true friends have endeavoured to teach them to hold in grave 
abhorrence. 


 

Though not a positive drunkard, Mr Robson habitually swallowed great 
quantities of wine, and took with relish an occasional glass of brandy and 
water. He taught his nephew to imitate him in this to the utmost of his 
ability, and to believe that the more wine and spirits he could take, and the 
better he liked them, the more he manifested his bold and manly spirit, and 
rose superior to his sisters. Mr Bloomfield had not much to say against it, 
for his favourite beverage was gin and water, of which he took a 
considerable portion every day, by dint of constant sipping&mdash;and 
to that I chiefly attributed his dingy complexion and waspish temper. 


 

Mr Robson likewise encouraged Tom's propensity to persecute the lower 
creation, both by precept and example. As he frequently came to course or 
shoot over his brother-in-law's grounds, he would bring his favourite dogs 
with him, and he treated them so brutally that, poor as I was, I would have 
given a sovereign any day to see one of them bite him, provided the animal 
could have done it with impunity. Sometimes, when in a very complacent mood, 
he would go a-bird-nesting with the children, a thing that irritated and 
annoyed me exceedingly, as, by frequent and persevering attempts, I flattered 
myself I had partly shown them the evil of this pastime, and hoped, in time, 
to bring them to some general sense of justice and humanity; but ten minutes' 
bird-nesting with uncle Robson, or even a laugh from him at some relation of 
their former barbarities 
was sufficient, at once, to 
destroy the effect of my whole elaborate course of reasoning and persuasion. 
Happily, however, during that Spring, they never, but once, got anything but 
empty nests, or eggs&mdash;being too impatient to leave them till the 
birds were hatched; that once, Tom, who had been with his uncle into the 
neighbouring plantation, came running in high glee into the garden, with a 
brood of little callow nestlings in his hands. 


 

Mary Ann and Fanny, whom I was just bringing out, ran to admire his spoils, 
and to beg each a bird for themselves. 


 

&ldquo;No, not one!&rdquo; cried Tom. &ldquo;They're all mine: uncle Robson gave them to 
me&mdash;one, two, three, four, five&mdash;you shan't touch one 
of them! no, not one, for your lives!&rdquo; continued he, exultantly, laying the 
nest on the ground, and standing over it, with his legs wide apart, his hands 
thrust into his breeches-pockets, his body bent forward, and his face twisted 
into all manner of contortions in the ecstasy of his delight. 


 

&ldquo;But you shall see me fettle 'em off. My word, but I will wallop 'em! 
See if I don't now! By gum! but there's rare sport for me in that nest. &ldquo; 


 

&ldquo;But, Tom,&rdquo; said I, &ldquo;I shall not allow you to torture those birds. They must 
either be killed at once, or carried back to the place you took them from, 
that the old birds may continue to feed them.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;But you don't know where that is, madam. It's only me and uncle Robson that 
knows that.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;But if you don't tell me, I shall kill them myself&mdash;much as I 
hate it.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;You daren't. You daren't touch them for your life! because you know papa and 
mama, and uncle Robson would be angry. Ha, ha! I've caught you there, Miss!&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I shall do what I think is right in a case of this sort, without consulting 
any one. If your papa and mama don't 
happen to approve 
of it, I shall be sorry to offend them, but your uncle Robson's opinions, of 
course, are nothing to me.&rdquo; 


 

So saying&mdash;urged by a sense of duty&mdash;at the risk of 
both making myself sick, and incurring the wrath of my 
employers&mdash;I got a large stone, that had been reared up for a 
mouse-trap by the gardener, then, having once more vainly endeavoured to 
persuade the little tyrant to let the birds be carried back, I asked what he 
intended to do with them. With fiendish glee he commenced a list of torments, 
and while he was busied in the relation, I dropped the stone upon his 
intended victims, and crushed them flat beneath it. 


 

Loud were the outcries, terrible the execrations, consequent upon this daring 
outrage; uncle Robson had been coming up the walk with his gun, and was, just 
then, pausing to kick his dog. Tom flew towards him, vowing he would make him 
kick me instead of Juno. Mr Robson leant upon his gun, and laughed 
excessively at the violence of his nephew's passion, and the bitter 
maledictions and opprobrious epithets he heaped upon me. 


 

&ldquo;Well, you are a good 'un!&rdquo; exclaimed he, at length, taking up his 
weapon and proceeding towards the house. &ldquo;Damme, but the lad has some spunk 
in him, too! Curse me, if ever I saw a nobler little scoundrel than that! 
He's beyond petticoat government already:&mdash;by G&mdash;! he defies 
mother, granny, governess, and all! Ha, ha, ha! Never mind, Tom, I'll get you 
another brood to-morrow.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;If you do, Mr Robson, I shall kill them too,&rdquo; said I. 


 

&ldquo;Humph!&rdquo; replied he, and having honoured me with a broad stare, which, 
contrary to his expectations, I sustained without flinching, he turned away 
with an air of supreme contempt, and stalked into the house. 


 

Tom next went to tell his mama. It was not her way to 
say much on any subject; but, when she next saw me, her aspect and demeanour 
were doubly dark and chill. 


 

After some casual remark about the weather, she observed&mdash; 


 

&ldquo;I am sorry, Miss Grey, you should think it necessary to interfere with 
Master Bloomfield's amusements; he was very much distressed about your 
destroying the birds.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;When Master Bloomfield's amusements consist in injuring sentient creatures,&rdquo; 
I answered, &ldquo;I think it my duty to interfere.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;You seem to have forgotten,&rdquo; said she, calmly, &ldquo;that the creatures were all 
created for our convenience.&rdquo; 


 

I thought that doctrine admitted some doubt, but merely replied&mdash; 


 

&ldquo;If they were, we have no right to torment them for our amusement.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I think,&rdquo; said she, &ldquo;a child's amusement is scarcely to be weighed against 
the welfare of a soulless brute.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;But, for the child's own sake, it ought not to be encouraged to have such 
amusements,&rdquo; answered I, as meekly as I could, to make up for such unusual 
pertinacity. 


 

 &ldquo;Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.&rdquo; 



 

&ldquo;Oh! of course! but that refers to our conduct towards each other.&rdquo; 


 

 &ldquo;The merciful man shows mercy to his beast,&rdquo; 



 

I ventured to add. 


 

&ldquo;I think you have not shewn much mercy,&rdquo; replied she, with a short, 
bitter laugh; &ldquo;killing the poor birds by wholesale, in that shocking manner, 
and putting the dear boy to such misery, for a mere whim!&rdquo; 


 

I judged it prudent to say no more. 


 

This was the nearest approach to a quarrel I ever had 
with Mrs Bloomfield, as well as the greatest number of words I ever exchanged 
with her at one time, since the day of my first arrival. 


 

But Mr Robson and old Mrs Bloomfield were not the only guests whose coming to 
Wellwoo
d House annoyed me; every visitor disturbed me, more or less; not so 
much because they neglected me, (though I did feel their conduct strange and 
disagreeable in that respect) as because I found it impossible to keep my 
pupils away from them, as I was repeatedly desired to do: Tom must talk to 
them, and Mary Ann must be noticed by them. Neither the one nor the other 
knew what it was to feel any degree of shame-facedness, or even common 
modesty. They would indecently and clamorously interrupt the conversation of 
their elders, teaze them with the most impertinent questions, roughly collar 
the gentlemen, climb their knees uninvited, hang about their shoulders, or 
rifle their pockets, pull the ladies' gowns, disorder their hair, tumble 
their collars, and importunately beg for their trinkets. 


 

Mrs Bloomfield had the sense to be shocked and annoyed at all this, but she 
had not sense to prevent it. She expected me to prevent it;&mdash;and 
how could I&mdash;when the guests, with their fine clothes and new 
faces, continually flattered and indulged them out of complaisance to their 
parents&mdash;how could I with my homely garments, every-day face, and 
honest words, draw them away? I strained every nerve to do 
so;&mdash;by striving to amuse them, I endeavoured to attract them to 
my side, by the exertion of such authority as I possessed, and by such 
severity as I dared to use, I tried to deter them from tormenting the guests; 
and by reproaching their unmannerly conduct, to make them ashamed to repeat 
it. But they knew no shame&mdash;they scorned authority which had no 
terrors to back it, and as for kindness and affection, either they had no 
hearts, or such as they had were 
so strongly guarded, 
and so well concealed, that I, with all my efforts had not yet discovered how 
to reach them. 


 

But soon my trials in this quarter came to a close&mdash;sooner than I 
either expected or desired; for one sweet evening towards the close of May, 
as I was rejoicing in the near approach of the holidays, and congratulating 
myself upon having made some progress with my pupils&mdash;as far as 
their learning went at least, for I had instilled something 
into their heads, and I had at length, brought them to be a 
little&mdash;a very little&mdash;more rational about getting 
their lessons done in time to leave some space for recreation, instead of 
tormenting themselves and me all day long to no purpose, Mrs Bloomfield sent 
for me, and calmly told me that after Midsummer my services would be no 
longer required. She assured me that my character and general conduct were 
unexceptionable, but the children had made so little improvement since my 
arrival, that Mr Bloomfield and she felt it their duty to seek some other 
mode of instruction. Though superior to most children of their years in 
abilities, they were decidedly behind them in attainments, their manners were 
uncultivated, and their tempers unruly. And this she attributed to a want of 
sufficient firmness, and diligent, persevering care on my part. 


 

Unshaken firmness, devoted diligence, unwearied perseverance, unceasing care, 
were the very qualifications on which I had secretly prided myself, and by 
which I had hoped in time, to overcome all difficulties, and obtain success 
at last. I wished to say something in my own justification, but in 
attempting to speak, I felt my voice falter, and rather than testify any 
emotion, or suffer the tears to overflow, that were already gathering in my 
eyes, I chose to keep silence, and bear all, like a self-convicted culprit. 


 

Thus was I dismissed, and thus I sought my home. Alas! what would they 
think of me? unable, after all my boasting 
to keep my 
place, even for a single year, as governess to three small children, whose 
mother was asserted by my own aunt to be a &ldquo;very nice woman.&rdquo; Having thus 
been weighed in the balance, and found wanting, I need not hope they would be 
willing to try me again. And this was an unwelcome thought; for vexed, 
harassed, disappointed as I had been, and greatly as I had learnt to love and 
value my home, I was not yet weary of adventure, nor willing to relax my 
efforts. I knew all parents were not like Mr and Mrs Bloomfield, and I was 
certain all children were not like theirs. The next family must be 
different, and any change must be for the better. I had been seasoned by 
adversity, and tutored by experience, and I longed to redeem my lost honour 
in the eyes of those whose opinion was more than that of all the world to me. 

 
 
 
 Chapter VI 
 THE PARSONAGE AGAIN 

FOR a few months I remained peaceably at home, in the quiet enjoyment of 
liberty and rest, and genuine friendship, from all of which I had fasted so 
long, and in the earnest prosecution of my studies to recover what I had lost 
during my stay at Wellwood House, and to lay in new stores for future use. 


 

My father's health was still very infirm, but not materially worse than when 
I last saw him, and I was glad I had it in my power to cheer him by my 
return, and to amuse him with singing his favourite songs. 


 

No one triumphed over my failure, or said I had better have taken his or her 
advice, and quietly stayed at home. All were glad to have me back again, and 
lavished more kindness than ever upon me, to make up for the sufferings I had 
undergone; but not one would touch a shilling of what I had so cheerfully 
earned and so carefully saved, in the hope of sharing it with them. By dint 
of pinching here, and scraping there, our debts, already were nearly paid. 
Mary had had good success with her drawings, but our father had insisted upon 
 her likewise keeping all the produce of her industry to herself. All 
we could spare from the supply of our humble wardrobe, and our little casual 
expenses, he directed us to put into the savings' bank, saying we knew not 
how soon we might be dependent on that alone for support, for he felt he had 
not long to be with us, and what would become of our mother and us when he 
was gone, God only knew! 


 

Dear papa! if he had troubled himself less about the 
afflictions that threatened us in case of his death, I am convinced that 
dreaded event would not have taken place so soon. My mother would never 
suffer him to ponder the subject if she could help it. 


 

&ldquo;Oh, Richard!&rdquo; exclaimed she, on one occasion, &ldquo;if you would but dismiss such 
gloomy thoughts from your mind, you would live as long as any of 
us&mdash;at least you would live to see the girls married, and yourself 
a happy grandfather with a canty old dame for your companion. &ldquo; 


 

My mother laughed, and so did my father; but his laugh soon perished in a 
dreary sigh. 


 

&ldquo; Them married&mdash;poor penniless things!&rdquo; said he, &ldquo;who will 
take them, I wonder!&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Why, nobody shall, that isn't thankful for them&mdash; Wasn't I 
penniless when you took me? and you pretended , at least, to be vastly 
pleased with your acquisition.&mdash; But it's no matter whether they 
get married or not; we can devise a thousand honest ways of making a 
livelihood; and I wonder, Richard, you can think of bothering your head 
about our poverty in case of your death, as if that would be 
anything compared with the calamity of losing you&mdash;an affliction 
that, you well know, would swallow up all others, and which you ought to do 
your utmost to preserve us from; and there is nothing like a cheerful mind 
for keeping the body in health. &ldquo; 


 

&ldquo;I know, Alice, it's wrong to keep repining as I do, but I cannot help it; 
you must bear with me. &ldquo; 


 

&ldquo;I won't bear with you, if I can alter you!&rdquo; replied my mother: but 
the harshness of her words was undone by the earnest affection of her tone 
and pleasant smile that made my father smile again, less sadly, and less 
transiently than was his wont. 


 

&ldquo;Mama,&rdquo; said I, as soon as I could find an opportunity of 
 speaking with her alone, &ldquo;my money is but little, and cannot 
last long; if I could increase it, it would lessen papa's anxiety on one 
subject at least. I cannot draw like Mary, and so the best thing I could do 
would be to look out for another situation.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;And so you would actually try again, Agnes!&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Decidedly, I would.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Why, my dear, I should have thought you had had enough of it. &ldquo; 


 

&ldquo;I know,&rdquo; said I, &ldquo;everybody is not like Mr and Mrs Bloomfield&mdash;&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Some are worse,&rdquo; interrupted my mother. 


 

&ldquo;But not many I think,&rdquo; replied I, &ldquo;and I'm sure all children are not like 
theirs; for I and Mary were not: we always did as you bid us, didn't we?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Generally: but then, I did not spoil you; and you were not perfect angels 
after all: Mary had a fund of quiet obstinacy, and you were somewhat faulty 
in regard to temper; but you were very good children on the whole. &ldquo; 


 

&ldquo;I know I was sulky sometimes, and I should have been glad to see those 
children sulky sometimes too; for then I could have understood them; but they 
never were; for they could not be offended, nor hurt, nor ashamed: 
they could not be unhappy in any way, except when they were in a passion. &ldquo; 


 

&ldquo;Well, if they could not, it was not their fault; you cannot expect 
stone to be as pliable as clay.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;No, but still it is very unpleasant to live with such unimpressionable, 
incomprehensible creatures. You cannot love them; and if you could, your 
love would be utterly thrown away; they could neither return it, nor value, 
nor understand it.&mdash;But however, even if I should stumble on such 
a family again, which is quite unlikely, I have all this experi- 
 ence to begin with, and I should manage better another time; 
and the end and aim of this preamble is, let me try again.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Well, my girl, you are not easily discouraged, I see&mdash;I am glad 
of that&mdash;But, let me tell you, you are a good deal paler and 
thinner than when you first left home, and we cannot have you undermining 
your health to hoard up money either for yourself or others.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Mary tells me I am changed too; and I don't much wonder at it, for I was in 
a constant state of agitation and anxiety all day long; but next time I am 
determined to take things coolly.&rdquo; 


 

After some further discussion, my mother promised once more to assist me, 
provided I would wait and be patient; and I left her to broach the matter to 
my father, when, and how, she deemed it most advisable, never doubting her 
ability to obtain his consent. 


 

Meantime, I searched, with great interest, the advertising columns of the 
newspapers, and wrote answers to every &ldquo;Wanted a Governess,&rdquo; that appeared at 
all eligible; but all my letters, as well as the replies, when I got any, 
were dutifully shewn to my mother; and she, to my chagrin, made me reject the 
situations one after another&mdash;These were low people, these were 
too exacting in their demands, and these too niggardly in their remuneration. 


 

&ldquo;Your talents are not such as every poor clergyman's daughter possesses, 
Agnes,&rdquo; she would say, &ldquo;and you must not throw them away. Remember, you 
promised to be patient&mdash;there is no need of hurry&mdash;you 
have plenty of time before you, and may have many chances yet.&rdquo; 


 

At length, she advised me to put an advertisement, myself, in the paper, 
stating my qualifications, &amp;c. 


 

&ldquo;Music, Singing, Drawing, French, Latin, and German,&rdquo; said she, &ldquo;are no mean 
assemblage; many will be glad to 
have so much in one 
instructor; and this time, you shall try your fortune in a somewhat higher 
family&mdash;in that of some genuine, thorough-bred gentleman, for such 
are far more likely to treat you with proper respect and consideration, than 
those purse-proud trades-people and arrogant upstarts. I have known several 
among the higher ranks, who treated their governesses quite as one of the 
family; though some, I allow, are as insolent and exacting as any one else 
can be: for there are bad and good in all classes.&rdquo; 


 

The advertisement was quickly written and despatched. Of the two parties who 
answered it, but one would consent to give me fifty pounds, the sum my 
mother bade me name as the salary I should require; and here, I hesitated 
about engaging myself, as I feared the children would be too old, and their 
parents would require some one more showy, or more experienced, if not more 
accomplished than I; but my mother dissuaded me from declining it on that 
account: I should do vastly well, she said, if I would only throw aside my 
diffidence, and acquire a little more confidence in myself. I was just to 
give a plain, true statement of my acquirements and qualifications, and name 
what stipulations I chose to make, and then await the result. 


 

The only stipulation I ventured to propose, was that I might be allowed two 
months holidays during the year to visit my friends, at Midsummer and 
Christmas. The unknown lady, in her reply, made no objection to this, and 
stated that, as to my acquirements, she had no doubt I should be able to give 
satisfaction; but in the engagement of governesses, she considered those 
things as but subordinate points, as, being situated in the neighbourhood of 
O&mdash;, she could get masters to supply any deficiencies in that 
respect, but, in her opinion, next to unimpeachable morality, a mild and 
cheerful temper, and obliging disposition were the most essential requisites. 


 

My mother did not relish this at all, and now made many objections to my 
accepting the situation, in which my sister warmly supported her, but, 
unwilling to be baulked again, I overruled them all; and, having first 
obtained the consent of my father, who had, a short time previously, been 
apprised of these transactions, I wrote a most obliging epistle to my 
unknown correspondent, and, finally, the bargain was concluded. 


 

It was decreed that, on the last day of January, I was to enter upon my new 
office, as governess in the family of Mr Murray, of Horton Lodge, near 
O&mdash;, about seventy miles from our village&mdash;a formidable 
distance to me, as I had never been above twenty miles from home in all the 
course of my twenty years sojourn on earth, and as, moreover, every 
individual, in that family and in the neighbourhood, was utterly unknown to 
myself and all my acquaintances. But this rendered it only the more piquant 
to me: I had now, in some measure, got rid of the mauvaise honte that 
had formerly oppressed me so much; there was a pleasing excitement in the 
idea of entering these unknown regions, and making my way alone among its 
strange inhabitants; I now flattered myself I was going to see something of 
the world; Mr Murray's residence was near a large town, and not in a 
manufacturing district, where the people had nothing to do but make money; 
his rank, from what I could gather, appeared to be higher than that of Mr 
Bloomfield, and, doubtless, he was one of those thorough-bred gentry my 
mother spoke of, who would treat his governess with due consideration as a 
respectable well educated lady, the instructor and guide of his children, and 
not a mere upper servant. Then, my pupils, being older, would be more 
rational, more teachable, and less troublesome than the last, they would be 
less confined to the school-room, and not require that constant labour and 
incessant watching, 
and, finally&mdash; bright 
visions mingled with my hopes, with which, the care of children, and the mere 
duties of a governess had little or nothing to do; so that the reader will 
see that I had no claim to be regarded as a martyr to filial piety, going 
forth to sacrifice peace and liberty for the sole purpose of laying up stores 
for the comfort and support of my parents, though, certainly, the comfort of 
my father, and the future support of my mother had a large share in my 
calculations, and fifty pounds appeared to me no ordinary sum. I must have 
decent clothes becoming my station, I must, it seemed, put out my washing, 
and also pay for my four annual journeys between Horton Lodge and home; but, 
with strict attention to economy, surely twenty pounds, or little more, would 
cover those expenses, and then there would be thirty for the bank, or little 
less; what a valuable addition to our stock! Oh! I must struggle to 
keep this situation, whatever it might be! both for my own honour among my 
friends and for the solid services I might render them by my continuance 
there. 

 
 
 
 Chapter VII 
 HORTON LODGE 

THE thirty-first of January was a wild, tempestuous day; there was a strong 
north wind, with a continual storm of snow drifting on the ground, and 
whirling through the air. My friends would have had me delay my departure, 
but fearful of prejudicing my employers against me by such want of 
punctuality at the commencement of my undertaking, I persisted in keeping the 
appointment. 


 

I will not inflict upon my readers an account of my leaving home on that dark 
winter morning, the fond farewells, the long&mdash;long journey to 
O&mdash;, the solitary waitings in inns for coaches or 
trains&mdash;for there were some railways then&mdash;and, 
finally, the meeting at O&mdash; with Mr Murray's servant, who had been 
sent, with the phaeton, to drive me from thence to Horton Lodge. 


 

I will just state that the heavy snow had thrown such impediments in the way 
of both horses and steam-engines, that it was dark some hours before I 
reached my journey's end, and that a most bewildering storm came on at last, 
which made the few miles' space between O&mdash; and Horton Lodge a 
long and formidable passage. I sat resigned, with the cold, sharp snow 
drifting through my veil, and filling my lap, seeing nothing, and wondering 
how the unfortunate horse and driver could make their way even as well as 
they did, and indeed it was but a toilsome, creeping style of progression to 
say the best of it. 


 

At length we paused; and, at the call of the driver, some one unlatched and 
rolled back upon their creaking hinges, what appeared to be, the park gates. 
Then we proceeded 
along a smoother road, whence, 
occasionally, I perceived some huge, hoary mass gleaming through the 
darkness, which I took to be a portion of a snow-clad tree. 


 

After a considerable time, we paused again, before the stately portico of a 
large house with long windows descending to the ground. 


 

I rose with some difficulty from under the superincumbent snowdrift, and 
alighted from the carriage, expecting a kind and hospitable reception would 
indemnify me for the toils and hardships of the day. A gentlemanly person in 
black opened the door, and admitted me into a spacious hall lighted by an 
amber-coloured lamp suspended from the ceiling; he led me through this, along 
a passage, and, opening the door of a back room, told me that was the 
school-room. I entered, and found two young ladies and two young gentlemen, 
my future pupils, I supposed. After a formal greeting, the elder girl, who 
was trifling over apiece of canvass and a basket of German wools, asked if I 
should like to go up-stairs. 


 

I replied in the affirmative, of course. 


 

&ldquo;Matilda, take a candle, and show her her room,&rdquo; said she. 


 

Miss Matilda, a strapping hoyden, of about fourteen, with a short frock and 
trousers, shrugged her shoulders, and made a slight grimace, but took a 
candle and proceeded before me, up the back stairs, a long, steep, double 
flight, and through a long, narrow passage, to a small, but tolerably 
comfortable room. She then asked me if I would take some tea or coffee. I was 
about to answer no, but, remembering that I had taken nothing since seven 
o'clock that morning, and feeling faint in consequence, I said I would take a 
cup of tea. Saying she would tell &ldquo;Brown,&rdquo; the young lady departed; and by 
the time I had divested myself of my heavy, wet cloak, shawl, bonnet, &amp;c., a 
mincing damsel 
came to say, the young ladies desired 
to know whether I would take my tea up there or in the school-room. Under the 
plea of fatigue, I chose to take it there. She withdrew; and, after a while, 
returned again with a small tea-tray, and placed it on the chest of drawers 
which served as a dressing-table. Having civilly thanked her, I asked at what 
time I should be expected to rise in the morning. 


 

&ldquo;The young ladies and gentlemen breakfast at half-past eight ma'am,&rdquo; said 
she; &ldquo;they rise early; but, as they seldom do any lessons before breakfast, I 
should think it will do if you rise soon after seven.&rdquo; 


 

I desired her to be so kind as to call me at seven; and, promising to do so 
she withdrew. Then, having broken my long fast on a cup of tea, and a little 
thin bread and butter, I sat down beside the small, smouldering fire, and 
amused myself with a hearty fit of crying; after which, I said my prayers, 
and then, feeling considerably relieved, began to prepare for bed; but, 
finding that none of my luggage was brought up, I instituted a search for the 
bell; and failing to discover any signs of such a convenience in any corner 
of the room, I took my candle, and ventured through the long passage, and 
down the steep stairs, on a voyage of discovery. Meeting a well dressed 
female on the way, I told her what I wanted, but not without considerable 
hesitation, as I was not quite sure whether it was one of the upper servants, 
or Mrs Murray herself. It happened, however, to be the lady's- maid. 


 

With the air of one conferring an unusual favour, she vouchsafed to undertake 
the sending up of my things; and when I had re-entered my room, and waited 
and wondered a long time, greatly fearing that she had forgotten, or 
neglected to perform her promise, and doubting whether to keep waiting, or go 
to bed, or go down again, my hopes, at length, were revived by the sound of 
voices and laught- 
er, accompanied by the tramp of feet 
along the passage, and presently, the luggage was brought in by a 
rough-looking maid and a man, neither of them very respectful in their 
demeanour to me. 


 

Having shut the door upon their retiring footsteps, and unpacked a few of my 
things, I, at length, betook myself to rest, gladly enough, for I was weary 
in body and mind. 


 

It was with a strange feeling of desolation mingled with a strong sense of 
the novelty of my situation, and a joyless kind of curiosity concerning what 
was yet unknown, that I awoke the next morning feeling like one whirled away 
by enchantment, and suddenly dropped from the clouds into a remote and 
unknown land, widely and completely isolated from all he had ever seen or 
known before; or like a thistle-seed borne on the wind to some strange nook 
of uncongenial soil, where it must lie long enough before it can take root 
and germinate, extracting nourishment from what appears so alien to its 
nature, if indeed, it ever can; but this gives no proper idea of my feelings 
at all; and no one, that has not lived such a retired, stationary life as 
mine, can possibly imagine what they were&mdash;hardly even if he has 
known what it is to awake some morning and find himself in Port Nelson in New 
Zealand, with a world of waters between himself and all that knew him. 


 

I shall not soon forget the peculiar feeling with which I raised my blind and 
looked out upon the unknown world&mdash;a wide, white wilderness was 
all that met my gaze, a waste of&mdash; 


 

 &ldquo;Deserts tossed in snow, And heavy-laden groves.&rdquo; 



 

I descended to the school-room with no remarkable eagerness to join my 
pupils, though not without some feel- 
ing of curiosity 
respecting what a further acquaintance would reveal. One thing, among others 
of more obvious importance, I determined with myself; I must begin with 
calling them Miss and Master. It seemed to me, a chilling and unnatural piece 
of punctilio between the children of a family and their instructor and daily 
companion, especially where the former were in their early childhood, as at 
Wellwood House; but even there, my calling the little Bloomfields by their 
simple names had been regarded as an offensive liberty, as their parents had 
taken care to show me, by carefully designating them Master and 
 Miss Bloomfield, &amp;c., in speaking to me. I had been very slow to take 
the hint, because the whole affair struck me as so very absurd; but now, I 
determined to be wiser, and begin at once with as much form and ceremony as 
any member of the family would be likely to require; and indeed, the 
children being so much older, there would be less difficulty; though the 
little words Miss and Master seemed to have a surprising effect in repressing 
all familiar, open-hearted kindness, and extinguishing every gleam of 
cordiality that might arise between us. 


 

As I cannot, like Dogberry, find it in my heart to bestow all my 
tediousness upon the reader, I will not go on to bore him with a minute 
detail of all the discoveries and proceedings of this and the following day. 
No doubt he will be amply satisfied with a slight sketch of the different 
members of the family, and a general view of the first year or two of my 
sojourn among them. 


 

To begin with the head: Mr Murray was, by all accounts, a blustering, 
roystering country squire, a devoted fox-hunter, a skilful horse-jockey and 
farrier, an active, practical farmer, and a hearty 
 bon-vivant &mdash;by all accounts, I say, for, except on Sundays 
when he went to church, I never saw him from month to month, unless, in 
crossing the hall 
or walking in the grounds, the 
figure of a tall, stout gentleman, with scarlet cheeks and crimson nose, 
happened to come across me; on which occasions, if he passed near enough to 
speak, an unceremonious nod, accompanied by a &ldquo;Morning, Miss Grey,&rdquo; or some 
such brief salutation was usually vouchsafed. Frequently indeed, his loud 
laugh reached me from afar, and oftener still, I heard him swearing and 
blaspheming against the footmen, groom, coachman, or some other hapless 
dependent. 


 

Mrs Murray was a handsome, dashing lady of forty, who certainly required 
neither rouge nor padding to add to her charms, and whose chief enjoyments 
were, or seemed to be, in giving or frequenting parties, and in dressing at 
the very top of the fashion. 


 

I did not see her till eleven o'clock on the morning after my arrival, when 
she honoured me with a visit, just as my mother might step into the kitchen 
to see a new servant girl&mdash;yet not so, either, for my mother would 
have seen her immediately after her arrival, and not waited till next day; 
and, moreover, she would have addressed her in a more kind and friendly 
manner, and given her some words of comfort as well as a plain exposition of 
her duties; but Mrs Murray did neither the one nor the other. She just 
stepped into the school-room, on her return from ordering dinner in the 
housekeeper's room, bid me good-morning, stood for two minutes by the fire, 
said a few words about the weather and the &ldquo;rather rough&rdquo; journey I must have 
had yesterday; petted her youngest child&mdash;a boy of ten, who had 
just been wiping his mouth and hands on her gown, after indulging in some 
savoury morsel from the housekeeper's stores&mdash;told me what a 
sweet, good boy he was, and then sailed out, with a self-complacent smile 
upon her face, thinking, no doubt, that she had done quite enough for the 
present, and had been delightfully con- 
descending into 
the bargain. Her children evidently held the same opinion, and I alone 
thought otherwise. 


 

After this she looked in upon me once or twice, during the absence of my 
pupils, to enlighten me concerning my duties towards them. For the girls she 
seemed anxious only to render them as superficially attractive, and showily 
accomplished, as they could possibly be made without present trouble or 
discomfort to themselves; and I was to act accordingly&mdash;to study 
and strive to amuse and oblige, instruct, refine, and polish, with the least 
possible exertion on their part, and no exercise of authority on mine. With 
regard to the two boys it was much the same, only instead of accomplishments, 
I was to get the greatest possible quantity of Latin grammar and Valpy's 
delectus into their heads, in order to fit them for school&mdash;the 
greatest possible quantity at least, without trouble to themselves. 
John might be a &ldquo;little high-spirited,&rdquo; and Charles might be a &ldquo;little 
nervous and tedious&mdash;&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;But at all events, Miss Grey,&rdquo; said she, &ldquo;I hope you will keep your temper, 
and be mild and patient throughout; especially with the dear little Charles, 
he is so extremely nervous and susceptible, and so utterly unaccustomed to 
anything but the tenderest treatment. You will excuse my naming these things 
to you; for the fact is, I have hitherto found all the governesses, even the 
very best of them, faulty in this particular. They wanted that meek and quiet 
spirit, which St Matthew, or some of them, says is better than the putting on 
of apparel&mdash;you will know the passage to which I allude, for you 
are a clergyman's daughter; but I have no doubt you will give satisfaction in 
this respect as well as the rest. And remember, on all occasions, when any of 
the young people do anything very improper, if persuasion and gentle 
remonstrance will not do, let one of the others come and tell me; for I can 
speak to them more 
plainly than it would be proper for 
you to do. And make them as happy as you can, Miss Grey, and I dare say you 
will do very well.&rdquo; 


 

I observed that while Mrs Murray was so extremely solicitous for the comfort 
and happiness of her children, and continually talking about it, she never 
once mentioned mine, though they were at home surrounded by friends, and I an 
alien among strangers; and I did not yet know enough of the world not to be 
considerably surprised at this anomaly. 


 

Miss Murray, otherwise Rosalie, was about sixteen when I came, and decidedly 
a very pretty girl; and in two years longer, as time more completely 
developed her form, and added grace to her carriage and deportment, she was 
positively beautiful; and that in no common degree. She was tall and slender, 
but not thin, perfectly formed, exquisitely fair, though not without a 
brilliant, healthy bloom; her hair which she wore in a profusion of long 
ringlets, was of a very light brown, strongly inclining to yellow; her eyes 
were pale blue, but so clear and bright, that few would wish them darker; the 
rest of her features were small, not quite regular, and not remarkably 
otherwise, but altogether you could not hesitate to pronounce her, a very 
lovely girl. I wish I could say as much for mind and disposition as I can her 
form and face. 


 

Yet think not I have any dreadful disclosures to make; she was lively, 
light-hearted, and could be very agreeable, with those who did not cross her 
will. Towards me, when I first came she was cold and haughty, then, insolent 
and overbearing; but on a further acquaintance, she gradually laid aside her 
airs, and in time, became as deeply attached to me as it was possible for her 
to be to one of my character and position; for she seldom lost sight, for 
above half-an-hour at a time, of the fact of my being a hireling, and a poor 
curate's daughter; and yet, upon the whole, I believe 
she respected me more than she herself was aware of, because I was the only 
person in the house, who steadily professed good principles, habitually spoke 
the truth, and generally endeavoured to make inclination bow to duty; and 
this I say, not of course in commendation of myself, but to show the 
unfortunate state of the family to which my services were, for the present 
devoted. There was no member of it in whom I regretted this sad want of 
principle so much as Miss Murray herself; not only because she had taken a 
fancy to me, but because there was so much of what was pleasant and 
prepossessing in herself, that, in spite of her failings, I really liked 
her&mdash;when she did not rouse my indignation, or ruffle my temper by 
too great a display of her faults, which however, I would fain persuade 
myself were rather the effect of her education than her disposition; she had 
neve
r been perfectly taught the distinction between right and wrong; she had, 
like her brothers and sisters, been suffered from infancy, to tyrannize over 
nurses, governesses, and servants; she had not been taught to moderate her 
desires, to control her temper or bridle her will, or to sacrifice her own 
pleasure for the good of others; her temper being naturally good, she was 
never violent or morose, but from constant indulgence and habitual scorn of 
reason, she was often testy and capricious; her mind had never been 
cultivated: her intellect at best was somewhat shallow; she possessed 
considerable vivacity, some quickness of perception, and some talent for 
music and the acquisition of languages, but till fifteen, she had troubled 
herself to acquire nothing;&mdash;then the love of display had roused 
her faculties, and induced her to apply herself, but only to the more showy 
accomplishments; and when I came, it was the same&mdash;everything was 
neglected but French, German, music, singing, dancing, fancy-work, and a 
little 
drawing&mdash;such drawing as might produce the greatest show with the 
smallest labour, and the principal parts of which were generally done by me. 
For music and singing, besides my occasional instructions, she had the 
attendance of the best master the country afforded; and in them, as well as 
in dancing, she certainly attained great proficiency. To music, indeed, she 
devoted too much of her time, as, governess though I was I frequently told 
her: but her mother thought that if she liked it, she could not 
give too much time to the acquisition of so attractive an accomplishment. 


 

Of fancy-work I knew nothing but what I gathered from my pupil and my own 
observation; but no sooner was I initiated, than she made me useful in twenty 
different ways: all the tedious parts of her work were shifted onto my 
shoulders; such as, stretching the frames, stitching in the canvass, sorting 
the wools and silks, putting in the grounds, counting the stitches, 
rectifying mistakes, and finishing the pieces she was tired of. 


 

At sixteen, Miss Murray was something of a romp, yet not more so than is 
natural and allowable for a girl of that age; but at seventeen, that 
propensity, like all other things, began to give way to the ruling passion, 
and soon was swallowed up in the all absorbing ambition, to attract and 
dazzle the other sex. But enough of her: now let us turn to her sister. 


 

Miss Matilda Murray was a veritable hoyden, of whom little need be said. She 
was about two years and a half younger than her sister; her features were 
larger, her complexion much darker. She might possibly make a handsome 
woman, but she was far too big-boned and awkward ever to be called a pretty 
girl, and at present, she cared little about it. Rosalie knew all her charms, 
and thought them even greater than they were, and valued them more highly 
than she ought to have done, had they been three times as 
 great; Matilda thought she was well enough, but cared little 
about the matter; still less did she care about the cultivation of her mind, 
and the acquisition of ornamental accomplishments. The manner in which she 
learnt her lessons and practised her music was calculated to drive any 
governess to despair. Short and easy as her tasks were, if done at all, they 
were slurred over at any time, and in any way, but generally at the least 
convenient times, and in the way least beneficial to herself, and least 
satisfactory to me; and the short half-hour of practising was horribly 
strummed through; she, meantime, unsparingly abusing me, either for 
interrupting her with corrections, or for not rectifying her mistakes before 
they were made, or something equally unreasonable. 


 

Once or twice, I ventured to remonstrate with her seriously for such 
irrational conduct; but, on each of those occasions, I received such 
reprehensive expostulations from her mother, as convinced me that, if I 
wished to keep the situation, I must even let Miss Matilda go on in her own 
way. 


 

When her lessons were over, however, her ill-humour was generally over too; 
while riding her spirited pony, or romping with the dogs, or her brothers and 
sister, but specially with her dear brother John, she was as happy as a lark. 


 

As an animal, Matilda was all right, full of life, vigour, and activity; as 
an intelligent being, she was barbarously ignorant, indocile, careless, and 
irrational; and consequently, very distressing to one who had the task of 
cultivating her understanding, reforming her manners, and aiding her to 
acquire those ornamental attainments which, unlike her sister, she despised 
as much as the rest: her mother was partly aware of her deficiencies, and 
gave me many a lecture as to how I should try to form her tastes, and 
endeavour to rouse and cherish her dormant vanity, and, by insinuating, 
skilful flattery, to win her attention to the desired 
objects&mdash;which I would not do&mdash;and how I should prepare 
and smooth the path of learning till she could glide along it without the 
least exertion to herself, which I could not, for nothing can be taught to 
any purpose without some little exertion on the part of the learner. 


 

As a moral agent, she was reckless, headstrong, violent, and unamenable to 
reason. One proof of the deplorable state of her mind, was that from her 
father's example, she had learned to swear like a trooper. 


 

Her mother was greatly shocked at the &ldquo;unlady-like trick,&rdquo; and wondered &ldquo;how 
she had picked it up.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;But you can soon break her of it, Miss Grey,&rdquo; said she; &ldquo;it is only a habit; 
and if you will just gently remind her every time she does so, I am sure she 
will soon lay it aside.&rdquo; 


 

I not only &ldquo;gently reminded&rdquo; her, but I tried to impress upon her how wrong 
it was, and how distressing to the ears of decent people; but all in vain, I 
was only answered by a careless laugh, and,&mdash; 


 

&ldquo;Oh, Miss Grey, how shocked you are! I'm so glad!&rdquo; 


 

Or&mdash; 


 

&ldquo;Well! I can't help it; papa shouldn't have taught me: I learnt it all from 
him; and maybe a bit from the coachman.&rdquo; 


 

Her brother John, alias Master Murray, was about eleven when I came; a fine, 
stout, healthy boy, frank, and good-natured in the main, and might have been 
a decent lad, had he been properly educated, but now, he was as rough as a 
young bear, boisterous, unruly, unprincipled, untaught, 
unteachable&mdash;at least, for a governess under his mother's eye; his 
masters at school might be able to manage him better&mdash;for to 
school he was sent, greatly to my relief, in the course of a year; in a 
state, it is true, of scandalous ignorance, as to Latin, as well as the more 
useful, though more neglected things; and this, doubtless, would all be laid 
to 
the account of his education having been entrusted 
to an ignorant female teacher, who had presumed to take in hand what she was 
wholly incompetent to perform. I was not delivered from his brother till full 
twelve months after, when he also was despatched in the same state of 
disgraceful ignorance as the former. 


 

Master Charles was his mother's peculiar darling. He was a little more than a 
year younger than John, but much smaller, paler, and less active and robust; 
a pettish, cowardly, capricious, selfish little fellow, only active in doing 
mischief, and only clever in inventing falsehoods, not simply to hide his 
faults, but, in mere malicious wantonness, to bring odium upon others; in 
fact, Master Charles was a very great nuisance to me: it was a trial of 
patience to live with him peaceably; to watch over him was worse; and to 
teach him, or pretend to teach him, was inconceivable. 


 

At ten years old, he could not read, correctly, the easiest line in the 
simplest book; and as, according to his mother's principle, he was to be told 
every word, before he had time to hesitate, or examine its orthography, and 
never even to be informed, as a stimulant to exertion, that other boys were 
more forward than he, it is not surprising that he made but little progress 
during the two years I had charge of his education. 


 

His minute portions of Latin grammar, &amp;c., were to be repeated over to him, 
till he chose to say he knew them; and then, he was to be helped to say them: 
if he made mistakes in his little easy sums in arithmetic, they were to be 
shewn him at once, and the sum done for him, instead of his being left to 
exercise his faculties in finding them out himself; so that, of course, he 
took no pains to avoid mistakes, but frequently set down his figures at 
random without any calculation at all. 


 

Yet, I did not invariably confine myself to these rules; it 
 was against my conscience to do so; but I seldom could venture 
to deviate from them, in the slightest degree, without incurring the wrath of 
my little pupil, and subsequently of his mama, to whom he would relate my 
transgressions, maliciously exaggerated, or adorned with embellishments of 
his own; and often, in consequence, was I on the point of losing, or 
resigning my situation; but, for their sakes at home, I smothered my pride 
and suppressed my indignation, and managed to struggle on till my little 
tormentor was despatched to school, his father declaring that home education 
was &ldquo;no go for him, it was plain; his mother spoiled him outrageously, and 
his governess could make no hand of him at all.&rdquo; 


 

A few more observations about Horton Lodge and its on goings, and I have done 
with dry description for the present. 


 

The house was a very respectable one, superior to Mr Bloomfield's both in 
age, size, and magnificence: the garden was not so tastefully laid out; but 
instead of smooth-shaven lawn, the young trees guarded by palings, the grove 
of upstart poplars, and the plantation of firs, there was a wide park, 
stocked with deer, and beautified by fine old trees. The surrounding country 
itself was pleasant, as far as fertile fields, flourishing trees, quiet green 
lanes, and smiling hedges, with wild flowers scattered along their banks, 
could make it; but, it was depressingly flat, to one born and nurtured among 
the rugged hills of &mdash;. 


 

We were situated nearly two miles from the village church, and, consequently, 
the family carriage was put in requisition every Sunday morning, and 
sometimes oftener. 


 

Mr and Mrs Murray generally thought it sufficient to show themselves at 
church once in the course of the day; but frequently the children preferred 
going a second time to wandering about the grounds all the day with nothing 
to do. 


 

If some of my pupils chose to walk and take me with them, it was well for me; 
for otherwise, my position in the carriage was, to be crushed into the corner 
farthest from the open window, and with my back to the horses, a position 
which invariably made me sick; and if I were not actually obliged to leave 
the church in the middle of the service, my devotions were disturbed with a 
feeling of langour and sickliness, and the tormenting fear of its becoming 
worse; and a depressing head-ache was generally my companion throughout the 
day, which would otherwise have been one of welcome rest, and holy, calm 
enjoyment. 


 

&ldquo;It's very odd, Miss Grey, that the carriage should always make you sick; it 
never makes me, &rdquo; remarked Miss Matilda. 


 

&ldquo;Nor me either,&rdquo; said her sister; &ldquo;but I dare say it would, if I sat where 
she does&mdash;such a nasty, horrid place, Miss Grey; I wonder how you 
can bear it!&rdquo; 


 

I am obliged to bear it, since no choice is left me,&mdash;I might have 
answered; but in tenderness for their feelings I only replied&mdash; 


 

&ldquo;Oh! it is but a short way, and if I am not sick in church, I don't mind it.&rdquo; 


 

If I were called upon to give a description of the usual divisions and 
arrangements of the day, I should find it a very difficult matter. I had all 
my meals in the school-room with my pupils, at such times as suited their 
fancy: sometimes they would ring for dinner before it was half-cooked; 
sometimes they would keep it waiting on the table for above an hour, and then 
be out of humour because the potatoes were cold, and the gravy covered with 
cakes of solid fat; sometimes they would have tea at four; frequently, they 
would storm at the servants because it was not in precisely at five; and when 
these orders were obeyed, by way of 
encouragement to 
punctuality, they would keep it on the table till seven or eight. 


 

Their hours of study were managed in much the same way: my judgment or 
convenience was never once consulted. Sometimes Matilda and John would 
determine &ldquo;to get all the plaguy business over before breakfast,&rdquo; and send 
the maid to call me up at half-past five, without any scruple or apology; 
sometimes, I was told to be ready precisely at six, and, having dressed in a 
hurry,came down to an empty room, and after waiting a long time in suspense, 
discovered that they had changed their minds, and were still in bed; or, 
perhaps, if it were a fine summer morning, Brown would come to tell me that 
the young ladies and gentlemen had taken a holiday, and were gone out; and 
then, I was kept waiting for breakfast, till I was almost ready to faint; 
they having fortified themselves with something before they went. 


 

Often they would do their lessons in the open air, which I had nothing to say 
against, except that I frequently caught cold by sitting on the damp grass, 
or from exposure to the evening dew, or some insidious draught, which seemed 
to have no injurious effect on them. It was quite right that they should be 
hardy; yet, surely, they might have been taught some consideration for others 
who were less so. But I must not blame them for what was, perhaps, my own 
fault; for I never made any particular objections to sitting where they 
pleased; foolishly choosing to risk the consequences, rather than trouble 
them for my convenience. 


 

Their indecorous manner of doing their lessons was quite as remarkable as 
the caprice displayed in their choice of time and place. While receiving my 
instruction, or repeating what they had learnt, they would lounge upon the 
sofa, lie on the rug, stretch, yawn, talk to each other or 
 look out of the window; whereas, I could not so much as stir 
the fire, or pick up the handkerchief I had dropped, without being rebuked 
for inattention by one of my pupils, or told that &ldquo;mamma would not like me to 
be so careless.&rdquo; 


 

The servants, seeing in what little estimation the governess was held by both 
parents and children, regulated their behaviour by the same standard. 


 

I frequently stood up for them, at the risk of some injury to myself, against 
the tyranny and injustice of their young masters and mistresses; and I always 
endeavoured to give them as little trouble as possible; but they entirely 
neglected my comfort, despised my requests, and slighted my directions. All 
servants, I am convinced, would not have done so; but domestics in general, 
being ignorant and little accustomed to reason and reflection, are too easily 
corrupted by the carelessness and bad example of those above them; and 
these, I think, were not of the best order to begin with. 


 

I sometimes felt myself degraded by the life I led, and ashamed of submitting 
to so many indignities; and sometimes, I thought myself a precious fool for 
caring so much about them, and feared I must be sadly wanting in christian 
humility, or that charity which &ldquo;suffereth long and is kind, seeketh not her 
own, is not easily provoked, beareth all things, endureth all things.&rdquo; 


 

But, with time and patience, matters began to be slightly ameliorated, 
slowly, it is true, and almost imperceptibly; but I got rid of my male 
pupils, (that was no trifling advantage,) and the girls, as I intimated 
before concerning one of them, became a little less insolent, and began to 
show some symptoms of esteem. 


 

&ldquo;Miss Grey was a queer creature; she never flattered, and did not praise them 
half enough, but whenever she did speak favourably of them, or anything 
belonging to them, they could be quite sure her approbation was sincere. 


 

&ldquo;She was very obliging, quiet, and peaceable in the main, but there were some 
things that put her out of temper; they did not much care for that, to be 
sure, but still, it was better to keep her in tune, as when she was in a good 
humour, she would talk to them, and be very agreeable and amusing sometimes, 
in her way, which was quite different to mamma's, but still very well for a 
change. She had her own opinions on every subject, and kept steadily to 
them&mdash;very tiresome opinions they often were, as she was always 
thinking of what was right and what was wrong, and had a strange reverence 
for matters connected with Religion, and an unaccountable liking to good 
people.&rdquo; 

 
 
 
 Chapter VIII 
 THE &ldquo;COMING-OUT&rdquo; 

AT EIGHTEEN, Miss Murray was to emerge from the quiet obscurity of the 
school-room into the full blaze of the fashionable world&mdash;as much 
of it, at least, as could be had out of London; for her papa could not be 
persuaded to leave his rural pleasures and pursuits, even for a few weeks' 
residence in town. 


 

She was to make her debut on the third of January, at a magnificent ball, 
which her mamma proposed to give to all nobility and choice gentry of O- and 
its neighbourhood for twenty miles round. Of course, she looked forward to it 
with the wildest impatience, and the most extravagant anticipations of 
delight. 


 

&ldquo;Miss Grey,&rdquo; said she, one evening, a month before the all important day, as 
I was perusing a long and extremely interesting letter of my sister's which I 
had just glanced, at in the morning, to see that it contained no very bad 
news, and kept till now, unable before to find a quiet moment for reading it; 
&ldquo;Miss Grey, do put away that dull, stupid letter, and listen to me! I'm sure 
my talk must be far more amusing than that.&rdquo; 


 

She seated herself on the low stool at my feet; and I, suppressing a sigh of 
vexation, began to fold up the epistle. 


 

&ldquo;You should tell the good people at home not to bore you with such long 
letters,&rdquo; said she; &ldquo;and above all, do bid them write on proper note-paper, 
and not on those great vulgar sheets! You should see the charming little 
lady-like notes mamma writes to her friends.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;The good people at home,&rdquo; replied I, &ldquo;know very well that the longer their 
letters are, the better I like them. I should be very sorry 
 to receive a charming little lady-like note from any of them; 
and I thought you were too much of a lady yourself, Miss Murray, to talk 
about the 'vulgarity' of writing on a large sheet of paper.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Well, I only said it to tease you. But now I want to talk about the ball; 
and to tell you that you positively must put off your holidays till it is 
over.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Why so?&mdash;I shall not be present at the ball.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;No, but you will see the rooms decked out before it begins, and hear the 
music, and, above all, see me in my splendid new dress! I shall be so 
charming, you'll be ready to worship me&mdash;you really must stay.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I should like to see you very much; but I shall have many opportunities of 
seeing you equally charming on the occasion of some of the numberless balls 
and parties that are to be, and I cannot disappoint my friends by postponing 
my return so long.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Oh, never mind your friends! Tell them we won't let you go.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;But, to say the truth, it would be a disappointment to myself: I long to see 
them as much as they to see me&mdash;perhaps more.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Well, but it is such a short time.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Nearly a fortnight by my computation; and, besides, I cannot 
bear the thoughts of a Christmas spent from home; and, 
moreover, my sister is going to be married.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Is she&mdash;when?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Not till next month; but I want to be there to assist her in making 
preparations, and to make the best of her company while we have her.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Why didn't you tell me before?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I've only got the news in this letter, which you stigmatize as dull and 
stupid, and won't let me read.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Who is she to be married to?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;To Mr Richardson, the vicar of a neighbouring parish.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Is he rich?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;No,&mdash;only comfortable.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Is he handsome?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;No,&mdash;only decent.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Young?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;No&mdash;only middling.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;O mercy! what a wretch! What sort of a house is it?&rdquo; 


 

A quiet little vicarage, with an ivy-clad porch, an old-fashioned garden, 
and&mdash;&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Oh stop!&mdash;you'll make me sick. How can she bear it?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I expect she'll not only be able to bear it, but to be very happy. You did 
not ask me if Mr Richardson were a good, wise, or amiable man; I could have 
answered yes, to all these questions&mdash;at least so Mary thinks, and 
I hope she will not find herself mistaken.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;But&mdash;miserable creature! how can she think of spending her life 
there, cooped up with that nasty old man; and no hope of change? &ldquo; 


 

&ldquo;He is not old: he's only six or seven and thirty; and she herself is 
twenty-eight, and as sober as if she were fifty. &ldquo; 


 

&ldquo;Oh! that's better then&mdash;they're well matched; but do they call 
him the 'worthy vicar' ?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I don't know; but if they do, I believe he merits the epithet. &ldquo; 


 

&ldquo;Mercy, how shocking! and will she wear a white apron, and make pies and 
puddings?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I don't know about the white apron, but I dare say, she will make pies and 
puddings, now and then; but that will be no great hardship as she had done it 
before.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;And will she go about in a plain shawl, and a large straw bonnet, carrying 
tracts and bone soup to her husband's poor parishioners?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I'm not clear about that, but I dare say she will do her best to make them 
comfortable in body and mind, in accordance with our mother's example.&rdquo; 

 
 
 
 Chapter IX 
 THE BALL 

&ldquo;NOW Miss Grey,&rdquo; exclaimed Miss Murray, immediately as I entered the 
school-room, after having taken off my out-door garments, upon returning from 
my four weeks' recreation, &ldquo;Now shut the door, and sit down, and I'll tell 
you all about the ball.&rdquo; 


 

'No,&mdash;d&mdash;&mdash; it no!&rdquo; shouted Miss Matilda. &ldquo;Hold your tongue, 
can't ye? and let me tell her about my new mare&mdash; such a 
splendour, Miss Grey! a fine blood mare&mdash;&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Do be quiet, Matilda! and let me tell my news first. &ldquo; 


 

'No, no, Rosalie! you'll be such a d&mdash;&mdash;- long time over it&mdash;she 
 shall hear me first&mdash;I'll be hanged if she doesn't! &ldquo; 


 

&ldquo;I'm sorry to hear, Miss Matilda, that you've not got rid of that shocking 
habit yet.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Well I can't help it; but I'll never say a wicked word again, if you'll only 
listen to me, and tell Rosalie to hold her confounded tongue. &ldquo; 


 

Rosalie remonstrated, and I thought I should have been torn in pieces between 
them; but, Miss Matilda having the loudest voice, her sister at length, gave 
in, and suffered her to tell her story first: so I was doomed to hear a long 
account of her splendid mare, its breeding and pedigree, its paces, its 
action, its spirits, &amp;c., and of her own amazing skill and courage in riding 
it, concluding with an assertion that she could clear a five-barred gate 
&ldquo;like winking,&rdquo; that papa said she might hunt the next time the hounds met, 
and mama had ordered a bright scarlet hunting-habit for her. 


 

&ldquo;Oh, Matilda! what stories you are telling!&rdquo; exclaimed her sister. 


 

&ldquo;Well,&rdquo; answered she, no whit abashed, &ldquo;I know I could clear a 
five-barred gate, if I tried, and papa will say I may hunt, and mama 
 will order the habit when I ask them.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Well, now get along,&rdquo; replied Miss Murray; &ldquo;and do, dear Matilda, try to be 
a little more lady-like. Miss Grey, I wish you would tell her not to 
use such shocking words; she will call her horse a mare; it is so 
 inconceivably shocking! and then she uses such dreadful expressions in 
describing it: she must have learnt it from the grooms. It nearly puts 
me into fits when she begins.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I learnt it from papa, you ass! and his jolly friends,&rdquo; said the young lady, 
vigorously cracking a hunting-whip, which she habitually carried in her hand. 
&ldquo;I'm as good a judge of horseflesh as the best of 'em.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Well, now get along, you shocking girl: I really shall take a fit if you go 
on in such a way. And now, Miss Grey, attend to me; I'm going to tell you 
about the ball. You must be dying to hear about it, I know. Oh, such 
a ball! You never saw or heard, or read, or dreamt of anything like it in all 
your life! The decorations, the entertainment, the supper, the music were 
indescribable! and then the guests; There were two noblemen, three baronets, 
and five titled ladies!&mdash;and other ladies and gentlemen 
innumerable. The ladies, of course, were of no consequence to me, except to 
put me, in a good humour with myself, by showing how ugly and awkward most of 
them were; and the best, mama told me,&mdash;the most transcendent 
beauties among them, were nothing to me. As for me, Miss 
Grey&mdash;I'm so sorry you didn't see me! I was 
 charming &mdash;wasn't I, Matilda?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Middling.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;No, but I really was &mdash;at least so mama said ... and Brown 
and Williamson. Brown said she was sure no gentleman could set eyes on me 
without falling in love that minute; and so I may be allowed to be a little 
vain. I know 
you think me a shocking, conceited, 
frivolous girl, but then you know, I don't attribute it all to my 
personal attractions: I give some praise to the hairdresser, and some to my 
exquisitely lovely dress&mdash;you must see it 
to-morrow&mdash;white gauze over pink satin&mdash;and so 
 sweetly made! and a necklace and bracelet of beautiful, large pearls!&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I've no doubt you looked very charming; but should that delight you so very 
much?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Oh, no! ... not that alone: but then, I was so much admired; and I made so 
 many conquests in that one night&mdash;you'd be astonished to 
hear&mdash;&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;But what good will they do you?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;What good! Think of any woman asking that!&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Well, I should think one conquest would be enough, and too much, unless the 
subjugation were mutual.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Oh, but you know I never agree with you on those points. Now wait a bit, and 
I'll tell you my principal admirers&mdash;those who made themselves 
very conspicuous that night and after, for I've been to two parties since. 
Unfortunately the two noblemen, Lord G&mdash;and Lord F&mdash;, 
were married or I might have condescended to be particularly gracious to 
 them; as it was, I did not, though Lord F&mdash; who hates his 
wife, was evidently much struck with me. He asked me to dance with him 
twice&mdash;he is a charming dancer, by the by, and so am I ... you 
can't think how well I did ... I was astonished at myself. My lord was very 
complimentary too&mdash;rather too much so in fact, and I thought 
proper to be a little haughty and repellent; but I had the pleasure of seeing 
his nasty, cross wife ready to perish with spite and vexation&mdash;&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Oh, Miss Murray! you don't mean to say that such a thing could really give 
you pleasure! However cross or&mdash;&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Well, I know it's very wrong;&mdash;but never mind! I mean to be good 
sometime&mdash;only don't preach now, there's a 
good creature&mdash;I haven't told you half yet ... Let me see ... Oh! 
I was going to tell you how many unmistakable admirers I had:&mdash;Sir 
Thomas Ashby was one,&mdash;Sir Hugh Meltham and Sir Broadley Wilson 
are old codgers, only fit companions for papa and mama. Sir Thomas is young, 
rich, and gay, but an ugly beast nevertheless: however, mama says I should 
not mind that after a few months' acquaintance. Then, there was Henry 
Meltham, Sir Hugh's younger son, rather good-looking, and a pleasant fellow 
to flirt with; but being a younger son, that is all he is good for: 
then there was young Mr Green, rich enough, but of no family, and a great 
stupid fellow, a mere country booby; and then, our good rector Mr Hatfield, 
an humble admirer, he ought to consider himself; but I fear he has 
forgotten to number humility among his stock of Christian virtues.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Was Mr Hatfield at the ball ?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Yes, to be sure. Did you think he was too good to go ? &ldquo; 


 

&ldquo;I thought he might consider it unclerical.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;By no means. He did not profane his cloth by dancing; but it was with 
difficulty he could refrain, poor man: he looked as if he were dying to ask 
my hand just for one set; and&mdash;Oh ! by the 
by&mdash;he's got a new curate ... that seedy old fellow Mr Bligh has 
got his long-wished-for living at last, and gone.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;And what is the new one like ? &ldquo; 


 

&ldquo;Oh, such a beast! Weston his name is. I can give you his description 
in three words ... an insensate, ugly, stupid blockhead. That's four, but no 
matter ... enough of him now.&rdquo; 


 

Then she returned to the ball, and gave me a further account of her 
deportment there, and at the several parties she had since attended, and 
further particulars respecting Sir Thomas Ashby and Messrs Meltham, Green, 
and Hatfield, 
and the ineffaceable impression she had 
wrought upon each of them. 


 

&ldquo;Well, which of the four do you like best?&rdquo; said I, suppressing my third or 
fourth yawn. 


 

&ldquo;I detest them all!&rdquo; replied she, shaking her bright ringlets in vivacious 
scorn. 


 

&ldquo;That means, I suppose, I like them all&mdash;but which most?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;No, I really detest them all; but Harry Meltham is the handsomest and most 
amusing, and Mr Hatfield the cleverest, Sir Thomas the wickedest, and Mr 
Green the most stupid. But the one I'm to have, I suppose, if I'm doomed to 
have any of them, is Sir Thomas Ashby.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Surely not, if he's so wicked, and if you dislike him?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Oh, I don't mind his being wicked; he's all the better for that; and as for 
disliking him&mdash;I shouldn't greatly object to being Lady Ashby of 
Ashby Park, if I must marry; but if I could be always young, I would be 
always single. I should like to enjoy myself thoroughly, and coquet with all 
the world, till I am on the verge of being called an old maid; and then, to 
escape the infamy of that, after having made ten thousand conquests, to break 
all their hearts save one, by marrying some high-born, rich, indulgent 
husband, whom, on the other hand, fifty ladies were dying to have.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Well, as long as you entertain those views, keep single by all means, and 
never marry at all, not even to escape the infamy of old-maidenhood.&rdquo; 

 
 
 
 Chapter X 
 THE CHURCH 

&ldquo;WELL, Miss Grey, what do you think of the new curate?&rdquo; asked Miss Murray, on 
our return from church the Sunday after the re-commencement of my duties. 


 

&ldquo;I can scarcely tell,&rdquo; was my reply: &ldquo;I have not even heard him preach.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Well, but you saw him, didn't you?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Yes, but I cannot pretend to judge of a man's character by a single, cursory 
glance at his face.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;But, isn't he ugly?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;He did not strike me as being particularly so; I don't dislike that cast of 
countenance: but the only thing I particularly noticed about him was his 
style of reading, which appeared, to me, good&mdash;infinitely better, 
at least, than Mr Hatfield's. He read the lessons as if he were bent on 
giving full effect to every passage: it seemed as if the most careless person 
could not have 
helped attending, nor the most ignorant have failed to 
understand; and the prayers, he read as if he were not reading at all, but 
praying, earnestly and sincerely from his own heart.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Oh, yes! that's all he is good for: he can plod through the service well 
enough; but he has not a single idea beyond it.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;How do you know?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Oh! I know perfectly well; I am an excellent judge in such matters. Did you 
see how he went out of church? stumping along, as if there was nobody there 
but himself&mdash;never looking to the right hand or the left, and 
evidently 
thinking of nothing but just getting out of 
the church, and, perhaps, home to his dinner&mdash;his great stupid 
head could contain no other idea.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I suppose you would have had him cast a glance into the squire's pew,&rdquo; said 
I, laughing at the vehemence of her hostility. 


 

&ldquo;Indeed! I should have been highly indignant if he had dared to do such a 
thing!&rdquo; replied she, haughtily tossing her head; then, after a moment's 
reflection, she added&mdash;&rdquo;Well, well! I suppose he's good enough 
for his place; but I'm glad I'm not dependent on him for 
amusement&mdash;that's all. Did you see how Mr Hatfield hurried out to 
get a bow from me, and be in time to put us into the carriage?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; answered I, internally adding, &ldquo;and I thought it somewhat derogatory 
to his dignity as a clergyman to come flying from the pulpit in such eager 
haste to shake hands with the squire, and hand his wife and daughters into 
their carriage; and, moreover, I owe him a grudge for nearly shutting me out 
of it;&rdquo; for, in fact, though I was standing before his face, close beside the 
carriage steps, waiting to get in, he would persist in putting them up, and 
closing the door, till one of the family stopped him by calling out that the 
governess was not in yet: then, without a word of apology, he departed, 
wishing them good morning, and leaving the footman to finish the business. 


 

 Nota bene. &mdash;Mr Hatfield never spoke to me, neither did Sir 
Hugh or Lady Meltham, nor Mr Harry or Miss Meltham, nor Mr Green or his 
sisters, nor any other lady or gentleman who frequented that church, nor, in 
fact, any one that visited at Horton Lodge. 


 

Miss Murray ordered the carriage again, in the afternoon, for herself and her 
sister: she said it was too cold for them to enjoy themselves in the garden; 
and, besides, she believed Harry Meltham would be at church. 


 

&ldquo;For,&rdquo; said she, smiling slyly at her own fair image in the glass, &ldquo;he has 
been a most exemplary attendant at church these last few Sundays. You would 
think he was quite a good christian. And you may go with us, Miss Grey, I 
want you to see him; he is so greatly improved since he returned from 
abroad&mdash;you can't think! And besides, then you will have an 
opportunity of seeing the beautiful Mr Weston again, and of hearing him 
preach.&rdquo; 


 

I did hear him preach, and was decidedly pleased with the evangelical truth 
of his doctrine, as well as the earnest simplicity of his manner, and the 
clearness and force of his style. 


 

It was truly refreshing to hear such a sermon, after being so long accustomed 
to the dry, prosy discourses of the former curate, and the still less 
edifying harangues of the rector, who would come sailing up the aisle, or 
rather sweeping along like a whirlwind, with his rich silk gown flying behind 
him and rustling against the pew doors, mount the pulpit like a conqueror 
ascending his triumphal car; then sinking on the velvet cushion in an 
attitude of studied grace, remain in silent prostration for a certain time; 
then, mutter over a Collect, and gabble through the Lord's Prayer, rise, draw 
off one bright lavender glove to give the congregation the benefit of his 
sparkling rings, lightly pass his fingers through his well-curled hair, 
flourish a cambric handkerchief, recite a very short passage, or, perhaps, a 
mere phrase of Scripture, as a head-piece to his discourse, and, finally, 
deliver a composition which, as a composition, might be considered good, 
though far too studied and too artificial to be pleasing to me; the 
propositions were well laid down, the arguments logically conducted; and yet, 
it was sometimes hard to listen quietly throughout, without some slight 
demonstrations of disapproval or impatience. 


 

His favourite subjects were church discipline, rites and ceremonies, 
apostolical succession, the duty of reverence and obedience to the clergy, 
the atrocious criminality of dissent, the absolute necessity of observing all 
the forms of godliness, the reprehensible presumption of individuals who 
attempted to think for themselves in matters connected with religion, or to 
be guided by their own interpretations of Scripture, and, occasionally, (to 
please his wealthy parishioners,) the necessity of deferential obedience 
from the poor to the rich&mdash;supporting his maxims and exhortations 
throughout with quotations from the Fathers, with whom he appeared to be far 
better acquainted than with the Apostles and Evangelists, and whose 
importance he seemed to consider, at least, equal to theirs. 


 

But now and then he gave us a sermon of a different order&mdash;what 
some would call a very good one, but sunless and severe, representing the 
Deity as a terrible task-master, rather than a benevolent father. Yet, as I 
listened, I felt inclined to think the man was sincere in all he said; he 
must have changed his views, and become decidedly religious, gloomy and 
austere, yet still devout; but such illusions were usually dissipated, on 
coming out of church, by hearing his voice in jocund colloquy with some of 
the Melthams or Greens, or, perhaps, the Murrays themselves, probably 
laughing at his own sermon, and hoping that he had given the rascally people 
some thing to think about; perchance, exulting in the thought that old 
Betty Holmes would now lay aside the sinful indulgence of her pipe which had 
been her daily solace for upwards of thirty years, that George Higgins would 
be frightened out of his Sabbath evening walks, and Thomas Jackson would be 
sorely troubled in his conscience, and shaken in his sure and certain hope 
of a joyful resurrection at the last day. 


 

Thus, I could not but conclude that Mr Hatfield was one 
 of those who &ldquo;bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be borne, 
and lay them upon men's shoulders, while they themselves will not move them 
with one of their fingers,&rdquo; and that &ldquo;make the word of God of none effect by 
their traditions, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.&rdquo; I was well 
pleased to observe that the new curate resembled him, as far as I could see, 
in none of these particulars. 


 

&ldquo;Well, Miss Grey! what do you think of him now?&rdquo; said Miss Murray, as we took 
our places in the carriage after service. 


 

&ldquo;No harm still,&rdquo; replied I. 


 

&ldquo;No harm!&rdquo; repeated she in amazement. &ldquo;What do you mean?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I mean, I think no worse of him than I did before.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;No worse! I should think not indeed&mdash;quite the contrary! Is he 
not greatly improved?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Oh, yes! very much indeed,&rdquo; replied I; for I had now discovered it was Harry 
Meltham she meant, not Mr Weston. That gentleman had eagerly come forward to 
speak to the young ladies, a thing he would hardly have ventured to do had 
their mother been present; he had likewise politely handed them into the 
carriage&mdash;he had not attempted to shut me out, like Mr Hatfield; 
neither, of course, had he offered me his assistance, (I should not have 
accepted it if he had,) but as long as the door remained open he had stood 
smirking and chatting with them, and then lifted his hat and departed to his 
own abode:&mdash;but I had scarcely noticed him all the time. My 
companions, however, had been more observant; and, as we rolled along, they 
discussed between them not only his looks, words, and actions, but every 
feature of his face, and every article of his apparel. 


 

&ldquo;You shan't have him all to yourself, Rosalie,&rdquo; said Miss 
 Matilda at the close of this discussion; &ldquo;I like him: I know 
he'd make a nice, jolly companion for me.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Well, you're quite welcome to him, Matilda,&rdquo; replied her sister, in a tone 
of affected indifference. 


 

&ldquo;And I'm sure,&rdquo; continued the other, &ldquo;he admires me quite as much as he does 
you&mdash;doesn't he, Miss Grey?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I don't know; I'm not acquainted with his sentiments.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Well, but he does though!&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;My dear Matilda! nobody will ever admire you till you get rid of your 
rough, awkward manners.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Oh, stuff! Harry Meltham likes such manners; and so do papa's friends.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Well, you may captivate old men, and younger sons; but nobody else, 
I'm sure, will ever take a fancy to you.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I don't care: I'm not always grubbing after money, like you and mamma. If my 
husband is able to keep a few good horses and dogs, I shall be quite 
satisfied; and all the rest may go to the devil !&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Well, if you use such shocking expressions, I'm sure no real gentleman will 
ever venture to come near you&mdash;really, Miss Grey, you should not 
let her do so!&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I can't possibly prevent it, Miss Murray.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;And you're quite mistaken, Matilda, in supposing that Harry Meltham admires 
you: I assure you he does nothing of the kind.&rdquo; 


 

Matilda was beginning an angry reply; but, happily, our journey was now at an 
end; and the contention was cut short by the footman opening the carriage 
door, and letting down the steps for our descent. 

 
 
 
 Chapter XI 
 THE COTTAGERS 

AS I had now only one regular pupil&mdash;though she contrived to give 
me as much trouble as three or four ordinary ones, and though her sister 
still took lessons in German and drawing&mdash;I had considerably more 
time at my own disposal than I had ever been blessed with before, since I 
had taken upon me the governess's yoke; which time, I devoted, partly to 
correspondence with my friends, partly to reading, study, and the practice 
of music, singing, &amp;c., partly to wandering in the grounds or adjacent 
fields, with my pupils, if they wanted me, alone if they did not. 


 

Often, when they had no more agreeable occupation at hand, the Misses Murray 
would amuse themselves with visiting the poor cottagers on their father's 
estate to receive their flattering homage, or to hear the old stories, or 
gossiping news of the garrulous old women; or, perhaps, to enjoy the purer 
pleasure of making the poor people happy with their cheering presence and 
their occasional gifts, so easily bestowed, so thankfully received. 
Sometimes, I was called upon to accompany one or both of the sisters in these 
visits; and sometimes, I was desired to go alone to fulfil some promise, 
which they had been more ready to make than to perform, to carry some small 
donation, or read to one who was sick, or seriously disposed: and thus I made 
a few acquaintances among the cottagers; and, occasionally, I went to see 
them on my own account. 


 

I generally had more satisfaction in going alone than with either of the 
young ladies, for they, chiefly owing to 
their 
defective education, comported themselves towards their inferiors in a manner 
that was highly disagreeable for me to witness. They never in thought 
exchanged places with them; and, consequently, had no consideration for 
their feelings, regarding them as an order of beings entirely different from 
themselves. 


 

They would watch the poor creatures at their meals, making uncivil remarks 
about their food, and their manner of eating; they would laugh at their 
simple notions and provincial expressions, till some of them scarcely durst 
venture to speak; they would call the grave, elderly men and women old fools, 
and silly old blockheads to their faces; and all this without meaning to 
offend. 


 

I could see that the people were often hurt and annoyed by such conduct, 
though their fear of the &ldquo;grand ladies&rdquo; prevented them from testifying any 
resentment; but they never perceived it. They thought that, as these 
cottagers were poor and untaught, they must be stupid and brutish; and as 
long as they, their superiors, condescended to talk to them, and to give them 
shillings and half-crowns, or articles of clothing, they had a right to amuse 
themselves, even at their expense; and the people must adore them as angels 
of light, condescending to minister to their necessities, and enlighten their 
humble dwellings. 


 

I made many and various attempts to deliver my pupils from these delusive 
notions without alarming their pride, which was easily offended, and not soon 
appeased, but with little apparent result; and I know not which was the more 
reprehensible of the two; Matilda was more rude and boisterous; but from 
Rosalie's womanly age and lady-like exterior better things were expected: yet 
she was as provokingly careless and inconsiderate as a giddy child of twelve. 


 

One bright day in the last week of February, I was walking 
in the park, enjoying the threefold luxury of solitude, a 
book, and pleasant weather, for Miss Matilda had set out on her daily ride, 
and Miss Murray was gone in the carriage with her mamma to pay some morning 
calls. But it struck me that I ought to leave these selfish pleasures, and 
the park with its glorious canopy of bright blue sky, the west wind sounding 
through its yet leafless branches, the snow-wreaths still lingering in its 
hollows, but melting fast beneath the sun, and the graceful deer browsing on 
its moist herbage already assuming the freshness and verdure of spring ... 
and go to the cottage of one Nancy Brown, a widow, whose son was at work all 
day in the fields, and who was afflicted with an inflammation in the eyes 
which had, for some time, incapacitated her from reading, to her own great 
grief, for she was a woman of a serious, thoughtful turn of mind. 


 

I accordingly went, and found her alone, as usual, in her little close, dark 
cottage, redolent of smoke and confined air, but as tidy and clean as she 
could make it. She was seated beside her little fire (consisting of a few red 
cinders and a bit of stick), busily knitting, with a small sackcloth cushion 
at her feet, placed for the accommodation of her gentle friend the cat who 
was seated thereon, with her long tail half encircling her velvet paws, and 
her half-closed eyes dreamily gazing on the low, crooked fender. 


 

&ldquo;Well, Nancy, how are you to-day?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Why, middling, miss, i' myseln&mdash;my eyes is no better, but I'm a 
deal easier i' my mind nor I have been,&rdquo; replied she, rising to welcome me 
with a contented smile which I was glad to see, for Nancy had been somewhat 
afflicted with religious melancholy. 


 

I congratulated her upon the change. She agreed that it was a great 
blessing, and expressed herself &ldquo;right down thankful for it;&rdquo; adding, &ldquo;If it 
please God to spare my sight, 
and make me so as I can 
read my Bible again, I think I shall be as happy as a queen.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I hope he will, Nancy,&rdquo; replied l; &ldquo;and, meantime, I'll come and read to you 
now and then, when I have a little time to spare.&rdquo; 


 

With expressions of grateful pleasure, the poor woman moved to get me a 
chair; but, as I saved her the trouble, she busied herself with stirring the 
fire, and adding a few more sticks to the decaying embers; and then, taking 
her well-used Bible from the shelf, dusted it carefully, and gave it me. On 
my asking if there was any particular part she should like me to read, she 
answered&mdash; 


 

&ldquo;Well, Miss Grey, if it's all the same to you, I'd like to hear that chapter 
in the First Epistle of St John, that says, 'God is love, and he that 
dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him.' &ldquo; 


 

With a little searching I found these words in the fourth chapter. When I 
came to the seventh verse she interrupted me, .and with needless apologies 
for such a liberty, desired me to read it very slowly, that she might take it 
all in, and dwell on every word; hoping I would excuse her, as she was but a 
&ldquo;simple body.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;The wisest person,&rdquo; I replied, &ldquo;might think over each of these verses for an 
hour, and be all the better for it; and I would rather read them slowly than 
not.&rdquo; 


 

Accordingly, I finished the chapter as slowly as need be, and at the same 
time as impressively as I could. My auditor listened most attentively all 
the while, and sincerely thanked me when I had done. I sat still about half a 
minute to give her time to reflect upon it; when, somewhat to my surprise, 
she broke the pause by asking me how I liked Mr Weston? 


 

&ldquo;I don't know,&rdquo; I replied, a little startled by the suddenness of the 
question; &ldquo;I think he preaches very well.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Ay, he does so; and talks well too!&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Does he?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;He does. May be you haven't seen him&mdash;not to talk to much, yet?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;No, I never see any one to talk to&mdash;except the young ladies of 
the hall.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Ah; they're nice, kind young ladies; but they can't talk as he does!&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Then he comes to see you, Nancy?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;He does, Miss; and I'se thankful for it. He comes to see all us poor bodies 
a deal ofter nor Maister Bligh, or th' Rector ever did; and it's well he 
does, for he's always welcome and we can't say as much for th' 
Rector&mdash;there is 'at says they're fair feared on him. When he 
comes into a house, they say he's sure to find summut wrong, and begin a 
calling 'em as soon as he crossed th' doorstuns: but maybe he thinks it his 
duty-like to tell 'em what's wrong; and very oft, he comes o' purpose to 
reprove folk for not coming to church, or not kneeling an' standing when 
other folk does, or going to th' Methody chapel, or summut o' that sort; but 
I can't say 'at he ever fund much fault wi' me. He came to see me once or 
twice, afore Maister Weston come, when I was so ill troubled in my mind; and 
as I had only very poor health besides, I made bold to send for 
him&mdash;and he came right enough. I was sore distressed, Miss 
Grey&mdash;thank God, it's owered now&mdash;but when I took my 
bible, I could get no comfort of it at all. That very chapter 'at you've just 
been reading troubled me as much as aught&mdash;'He that loveth not, 
knoweth not God.' It seemed 
fearsome to me; for I felt that I loved neither God nor man as I should do, 
and could not, if I tried ever so. And th' chapter afore, where it 
says&mdash;'He that is born of God cannot commit sin.' And another 
place where it says&mdash;'Love is the fulfilling of the Law.' And 
many&mdash;many others, Miss; I should fair weary you out, if I was to 
tell them all.&mdash;But all seemed to 
condemn 
me, and to show me 'at I was not in the right way; and as I knew not how to 
get into it, I sent our Bill to beg Maister Hatfield to be as kind as look in 
on me some day; and when he came, I telled him all my troubles.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;And what did he say, Nancy?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Why, Miss, he liked seemed to scorn me. I might be mista'en&mdash;but 
he like gave a sort of a whistle, and I saw a bit of a smile on his face; and 
he said, 'Oh, it's all stuff! You've been among the Methodists, my good 
woman.' But I telled him I'd never been near the Methodies. And then he said, 


 

&ldquo;'Well,' says he, 'you must come to church, where you'll hear the scriptures 
properly explained, instead of sitting poring over your bible at home.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;But I telled him, I always used coming to church when I had my health; but 
this very cold winter weather I hardly durst venture so far&mdash;and 
me so bad wi' th' rheumatiz an' all. 


 

&ldquo;But he says, 'It'll do your rheumatiz good to hobble to church; there's 
nothing like exercise for the rheumatiz. You can walk about the house well 
enough; why can't you walk to church? The fact is,' says he, 'you're getting 
too fond of your ease. It's always easy to find excuses for shirking one's 
duty.' &ldquo; 


 

&ldquo;But then, you know, Miss Grey, it wasn't so. However I telled him I'd try. 
'But please, sir,' says I, 'If I do go to church, what the better shall I 
be? I want to have my sins blotted out, and to feel that they are remembered 
no more against me, and that the love of God is shed abroad in my heart; and 
if I can get no good by reading my bible, an' saying my prayers at home, what 
good shall I get by going to church?' &ldquo; 


 

&ldquo;'The church,' says he, 'is the place appointed by God for his worship. It's 
your duty to go there as often as you can. If you want comfort, you must seek 
it in the path of 
duty'&mdash;an' a deal more 
he said, but I cannot remember all his fine words. However, it all came to 
this, that I was to come to church as oft as ever I could, and bring my 
prayer-book with me, an' read up all the sponsers after th' clerk, an' stand, 
an' kneel, an' sit, an' do&mdash;all as I should, an' take the Lord's 
supper at every opportunity, an' hearken his sermons, an' Maister Bligh's, 
an' it 'ud be all right: if I went on doing my duty, I should get a blessing 
at last. 


 

&ldquo;'But if you get no comfort that way,' says he, 'it's all up.' 


 

&ldquo;'Then, sir,' says I, 'should you think I'm a reprobate?' 


 

&ldquo;'Why,' says he&mdash;he says, 'if you do your best to get to Heaven 
and can't manage it, you must be one of those that seek to enter in at the 
strait gate and shall not be able.' 


 

&ldquo;An' then he asked me if I'd seen any of the ladies o' th' Hall about that 
mornin'; so I telled him where I'd seen the young Misses go on th' 
Moss-lane;&mdash;an' he kicked my poor cat right across th' floor, an' 
went off after 'em as gay as a lark; but I was very sad. That last word o' 
his, fair sunk into my heart, an' lay there like a lump o' lead, till I was 
weary to bear it. 


 

&ldquo;Howsoever, I follered his advice: I thought he meant it all for th' best 
though he had a queer way with him. But you know, Miss, he's rich an' 
young, and such like cannot right understand the thoughts of a poor old woman 
such as me. But howsever, I did my best to do all as he bade 
me&mdash;but may-be I'm plaguing you, miss, wi' my chatter.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Oh, no, Nancy! Go on, and tell me all.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Well, my rheumatiz got better&mdash;I know not whether wi' going to 
church or not, but one frosty Sunday I got this cold i' my eyes. Th' 
inflammation didn't come on all at once like, but bit by bit&mdash;but 
I wasn't going to tell you about my eyes, I was talking about my trouble o' 
mind;&mdash;and to tell the truth, Miss Grey, I don't think it was 
any-ways eased by 
coming to church&mdash;nought 
to speak on at least: I like got my health better; but that didn't mend my 
soul. I hearkened and hearkened the ministers, and read an' read at my 
prayer-book, but it was all like sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal: the 
sermons I couldn't understand, an' th' prayer-book only served to shew me how 
wicked I was, that I could read such good words an' never be no better for 
it, and oftens feel it a sore labour an' a heavy task beside, instead of a 
blessing and a privilege as all good christians does. It seemed like as all 
were barren an' dark to me. And then, them dreadful words, 'Many shall seek 
to enter in, and shall not be able.' They like as they fair dried up my 
sperrit. 


 

&ldquo;But one Sunday, when Maister Hatfield gave out about the sacrament, I 
noticed where he said, 'If there be any of you that cannot quiet his own 
conscience, but requireth further comfort or counsel, let him come to me, or 
some other discreet and learned minister of God's word, and open his grief!' 
So next Sunday morning, afore service, I just looked in to th' vestry, an' 
began a talking to th' rector again ... I hardly could fashion to take such a 
liberty, but I thought when my soul was at stake, I shouldn't stick at a 
trifle. But he said he hadn't time to attend to me then.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;'And, indeed,' says he, 'I've nothing to say to you, but what I've said 
before ... take the sacrament of course, and go on doing your duty; if that 
won't serve you, nothing will. So don't bother me anymore.' 


 

&ldquo;So then, I went away. But I heard Maister Weston ... Maister Weston was 
there, Miss&mdash;this was his first Sunday at Horton, you know, an' he 
was i' th' vestry in his surplice helping th' rector on with his gown.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Yes, Nancy.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;And I heard him ask Maister Hatfield who I was; an' he said, 'Oh! she's a 
canting old fool.' 


 

&ldquo;And I was very ill grieved, Miss Grey; but I went to my 
 seat, and I tried to do my duty as afore time; but I like got 
no peace. An' I even took the sacrament; but I felt as though I were eating 
an' drinking to my own damnation all th' time. So I went home, sorely 
troubled. 


 

&ldquo;But next day, afore I'd gotten fettled up&mdash;for indeed, Miss, I'd 
no heart to sweeping an' fettling, an' washing pots; so I sat me down i' th' 
muck&mdash;who should come in but Maister Weston! I started siding 
stuff then, an' sweeping an' doing; and I expected he'd begin a calling me 
for my idle ways as Maister Hatfield would a' done; but I was mista'en: he 
only bid me good mornin' like, in a quiet dacent way. So I dusted him a 
chair, an' fettled up th' fire place a bit; but I hadn't forgotten th' 
rector's words, so says I, 


 

&ldquo; 'I wonder sir, you should give yourself that trouble, to come so far to see 
a 'canting old fool,' such as me. 


 

&ldquo;He liked seemed taken aback at that; but he would fain persuade me 'at the 
rector was only in jest; and when that wouldn't do, he says, 


 

&ldquo; 'Well, Nancy, you shouldn't think so much about it: Mr Hatfield was a 
little out of humour just then; you know we're none of us 
perfect&mdash;even Moses spoke unadvisedly with his lips. But now sit 
down a minute, if you can spare the time, and tell me all your doubts and 
fears; and I'll try to remove them.' 


 

&ldquo;So I sat me down anent him. He was quite a stranger you know Miss Grey, and 
even younger nor Maister Hatfield, I believe; an' I had thought him 
not so pleasant looking as him, and rather a bit crossish, at first, to look 
at; but he spake so civil like&mdash;and when th' cat, poor thing, 
jumped on to his knee, he only stroked her, and gave a bit of a smile: so I 
thought that was a good sign; for once, when she did so to th' rector, he 
knocked her off, like as it might be in scorn and anger, poor thing. But you 
can't expect 
a cat to know manners like a christian, 
you know, Miss Grey.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;No; of course not, Nancy. But what did Mr Weston say then ? &ldquo; 


 

&ldquo;He said naught; but he listened to me as steady an' patient as could be, an' 
never a bit o' scorn about him; so I went on, an' telled him all, just as 
I've telled you&mdash;an' more too. 


 

&ldquo;'Well,' says he, 'Mr Hatfield was quite right in telling you to persevere in 
doing your duty; but in advising you to go to church and attend to the 
service, and so on, he didn't mean that was the whole of a christian's duty; 
he only thought you might there learn what more was to be done, and be led to 
take delight in those exercises, instead of finding them a task and a burden. 
And if you had asked him to explain those words that trouble you so much, I 
think he would have told you that, if many shall seek to enter in at the 
strait gate and shall not be able, it is their own sins that hinder them; 
just as a man with a large sack on his back might wish to pass through a 
narrow doorway, and find it impossible to do so, unless, he would leave his 
sack behind him. But you, Nancy, I dare say, have no sins that you would not 
gladly throw aside, if you knew how?' 


 

&ldquo;'Indeed, sir, you speak truth,' says I. 


 

&ldquo;'Well,' says he, 'you know the first, and greatest 
commandment&mdash;and the second which is like unto it- on which two 
commandments hang all the law and the prophets? You say you cannot love God; 
but it strikes me, that if you rightly consider who and what He is, you 
cannot help it. He is your father, your best friend; every blessing, 
everything good, pleasant, or useful comes from him; and everything evil, 
everything you have reason to hate, to shun, or to fear comes from Satan, 
 His enemy as well as ours; and for this cause was God manifest 
in the flesh, that he might 
destroy the works of the 
devil: in one word, God IS LOVE; and the more of love we have within us, the 
nearer we are to him, and the more of his spirit we possess.' 


 

&ldquo;'Well, sir,' I said, 'if I can always think on these things, I think I might 
well love God; but how can I love my neighbours&mdash;when they vex me, 
and be so contrairy and sinful as some on 'em is?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;'It may seem a hard matter,' says he, 'to love our neighbours, who have so 
much of what is evil about them, and whose faults so often awaken the evil 
that lingers within ourselves, but remember that He made them, and 
 He loves them; and whosoever loveth him that begat, loveth him that is 
begotten also. And if God so loveth us that He gave His only begotten Son 
to die for us, we ought also to love one another. But if you cannot feel 
positive affection for those who do not care for you, you can at least, try 
to do to them as you would they should do unto you; you can endeavour to pity 
their failings and excuse their offences, and to do all the good you can to 
those about you. And if you accustom yourself to this, Nancy, the very 
effort itself will make you love them in some degree&mdash;to say 
nothing of the goodwill your kindness would beget in them, though they might 
have little else that is good about them. If we love God and wish to serve 
him, let us try to be like Him, to do His work, to labour for His glory, 
which is the good of man, to hasten the coming of His kingdom, which is the 
peace and happiness of all the world&mdash;however powerless we may 
seem to be, in doing all the good we can through life, the humblest of us 
may do much towards it; and let us dwell in love, that He may dwell in us, 
and we in Him. The more happiness we bestow, the more we shall receive, even 
here, and the greater will be our reward in heaven when we rest from our 
labours.' 


 

&ldquo;I believe, Miss, them is his very words, for I've thought 'em ower many a 
time. An' then he took that Bible, an' read bits here and there, an' 
explained 'em as clear as the day: and it seemed like as a new light broke 
in on my soul; an' I felt a fair glow about my heart, an' only wished poor 
Bill an' all the world could ha' been there an' heard it all, an' rejoiced 
wi' me. 


 

&ldquo;After he was gone, Hannah Rogers, one o' th' neighbours came in and wanted 
me to help her to wash. I telled her I couldn't just then, for I hadn't set 
on th' potaties for th' dinner, nor washed up th' breakfast stuff yet. So 
then she began a calling me for my nasty idle ways. I was a little bit vexed 
at first; but I never said nothing wrong to her: I only telled her, like all 
in a quiet way, 'at I'd had th' new parson to see me; but I'd get done as 
quick as ever I could, an' then come an' help her. So then she softened 
down; and my heart like as it warmed towards her, an' in a bit we was very 
good friends. 


 

&ldquo;An' so it is, Miss Grey, 'a soft answer turneth away wrath; but grievous 
words stir up anger.' It isn't only in them you speak to, but in yourself.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Very true, Nancy, if we could always remember it.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Ay, if we could!&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;And did Mr Weston ever come to see you again?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Yes, many a time; and since my eyes has been so bad, he's sat an' read to 
me by the half hour together; but you know, Miss, he has other folks to see, 
and other things to do&mdash;God bless him! An' that next Sunday he 
preached such a sermon! His text was, 'Come unto me all ye that labour and 
are heavy laden, and I will give 
you rest,' and them two blessed verses that 
follows. You wasn't there, Miss, you was with your friends 
then&mdash;but it made me so happy! And I am happy now, 
thank God! an' I take a pleasure, now, in 
doing 
little bits o' jobs for my neighbours&mdash;such as a poor old body 
'at's half blind can do ... and they take it kindly of me, just as he said. 
You see, Miss, I'm knitting a pair o' stockings now:&mdash;they're for 
Thomas Jackson: he's a queerish old body, an' we've had many a bout at 
threaping one anent t' other; an' at times we've differed sorely. So I 
thought I couldn't do better nor knit him a pair o' warm stockings; an' I've 
felt to like him a deal better, poor old man, sin' I began. It's turned out 
just as Maister Weston said.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Well, I'm very glad to see you so happy, Nancy, and so wise: but I must go 
now; I shall be wanted at the Hall,&rdquo; said I; and bidding her good bye, I 
departed, promising to come again when I had time, and feeling nearly as 
happy as herself. 


 

At another time, I went to read to a poor labourer who was in the last 
stage of a consumption. The young ladies had been to see him, and somehow, a 
promise of reading had been extracted from them; but it was too much 
trouble, so they begged me to do it instead. I went, willingly enough, 
and there too I was gratified with the praises of Mr Weston, both from the 
sick man and his wife. The former told me that he derived great comfort and 
benefit, from the visits of the new parson, who frequently came to see him, 
and was &ldquo;another guess sort of man&rdquo; to Mr Hatfield; who before the other's 
arrival at Horton, had now and then paid him a visit; on which occasions, he 
would always insist upon having the cottage door kept open to admit the 
fresh air for his own convenience, without considering how it might injure 
the sufferer: and having opened his prayer-book, and hastily read over a 
part of the service for the sick, would hurry away again, if he did not stay 
to administer some harsh rebuke to the afflicted wife, 
 or to make some thoughtless, not to say heartless, 
observation rather calculated to increase than diminish the troubles of the 
suffering pair. 


 

&ldquo;Whereas,&rdquo; said the man, &ldquo;Maister Weston 'ull pray with me quite in a 
different fashion, an' talk to me as kind as owt; an' oft read to me too, an' 
sit beside me just like a brother.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Just for all the world!&rdquo; exclaimed his wife; &ldquo;an' about three wik sin', 
when he seed how poor Jem shivered wi' cold, an' what pitiful fires we kept, 
he axed if wer stock of coals was nearly done. I telled him it was, an' we 
was ill set to get more&mdash;but you know mum I didn't think o' him 
helping us&mdash;but howsever, he sent us a sack o' coals next day; 
an' we've had good fires ever sin'; an' a great blessing it is, this winter 
time. But that's his way, Miss Grey&mdash;when he comes into a poor 
body's house a seein' sick folk, he like notices what they most stand i' need 
on; an' if he thinks they can't readily get it therseln, he never says nowt 
about it, but just gets it for 'em:&mdash;an' it isn't everybody 'at 
'ud do that, 'at has as little as he has; for you know mum, he's nowt at all 
to live on, but what he gets fra' th' rector; an' that's little enough they 
say.&rdquo; 


 

I remembered then, with a species of exultation, that he had frequently been 
styled a vulgar brute by the amiable Miss Murray, because he sported a silver 
watch, and clothes not quite so bright and fresh as Mr Hatfield's. 


 

In returning to the lodge, I felt very happy, and thanked God that I had now 
something to think about, something to dwell on as a relief from the weary 
monotony, the lonely drudgery of my present life&mdash;for I was 
lonely&mdash;never, from month to month, from year to year, except 
during my brief intervals of rest at home, did I see one creature to whom I 
could open my heart, or freely speak my thoughts with any 
 hope of sympathy, or even comprehension; never one, unless it 
were poor Nancy Brown, with whom I could enjoy a single moment of real social 
intercourse, or whose conversation was calculated to render me better, wiser, 
or happier than before; or who, as far as I could see, could be greatly 
benefited by mine. My only companions had been unamiable children, and 
ignorant, wrong-headed girls, from whose fatiguing folly, unbroken solitude 
was often a relief most earnestly desired, and dearly prized. But to be 
restricted to such associates was a serious evil, both in its immediate 
effects, and the consequences that were likely to ensue. 


 

Never a new idea or a stirring thought came to me from without; and such as 
rose within me were, for the most part, miserably crushed at once, or doomed 
to sicken and fade away, because they could not see the light. 


 

Habitual associates are known to exercise a great influence over each other's 
minds and manners. Those whose actions are for ever before our eyes, whose 
words are ever in our ears, will naturally lead us, albeit against our 
will&mdash;slowly&mdash;gradually&mdash;imperceptibly, 
perhaps, to act and speak as they do. I will not presume to say how far this 
irresistible power of assimilation extends; but if one civilized man were 
doomed to pass a dozen years amid a race of intractable savages, unless he 
had power to improve them, I greatly question whether, at the close of that 
period, he would not have become, at least, a barbarian himself. And I, as I 
could not make my young companions better, feared exceedingly that they would 
make me worse&mdash;would gradually bring my feelings, habits, 
capacities, to the level of their own; without, however, imparting to me 
their lightheartedness and cheerful vivacity. Already, I seemed to feel my 
intellect deteriorating, my heart petrifying, my soul contracting, and I 
trembled lest my very moral perceptions 
should become 
deadened, my distinctions of right and wrong confounded, and all my better 
faculties be sunk at last, beneath the baleful influence of such a mode of 
life. The gross vapours of earth were gathering around me, and closing in 
upon my inward heaven; and thus it was that Mr Weston rose, at length, upon 
me, appearing, like the morning star in my horizon, to save me from the fear 
of utter darkness; and I rejoiced that I had now a subject for contemplation, 
that was above me, not beneath. I was glad to see that all the world was not 
made up of Bloomfields, Murrays, Hatfields, Ashbys, &amp;c.; and that human 
excellence was not a mere dream of the imagination. When we hear a little 
good and no harm of a person, it is easy and pleasant to imagine 
more&mdash;in short, it is needless to analyze all my thoughts, but 
Sunday was now become a day of peculiar delight to me, (I was now almost 
broken in to the back corner in the carriage,) for I liked to hear 
him&mdash;and I liked to see him too, though I knew he was not 
handsome, or even, what is called, agreeable, in outward aspect, but, 
certainly, he was not ugly. 


 

In stature he was a little&mdash;a very little above the middle size; 
perfectly symmetrical in figure, deep chested, and strongly built; the 
outline of his face would be pronounced too square for beauty, but, to me, it 
announced decision of character; his dark brown hair was not carefully curled 
like Mr Hatfield's, but simply brushed aside over a broad white forehead; the 
eyebrows, I suppose, were too projecting, but from under those dark brows, 
there gleamed an eye of singular power, brown in colour, not large, and 
somewhat deepset, but strikingly brilliant, and full of expression; there was 
character, too, in the mouth, something that bespoke a man of firm purpose, 
and an habitual thinker, and when he smiled&mdash;but I will not speak 
of that yet, for, at 
the time I mention, I had never 
seen him smile; and, indeed, his general appearance did not impress me with 
the idea of a man given to such a relaxation, nor of such an individual as 
the cottagers described him. I had early formed my opinion of him, and, in 
spite of Miss Murray's objurgations, was fully convinced that he was a man of 
strong sense, firm faith, and ardent piety, but thoughtful and stern: and 
when I found that, to his other good qualities, was added that of true 
benevolence, and gentle, considerate kindness, the discovery, perhaps, 
delighted me the more, as I had not been prepared to expect it. 

 
 
 
 Chapter XII 
 THE SHOWER 

THE next visit I paid to Nancy Brown, was in the second week in March, for, 
though I had many spare minutes during the day, I seldom could look upon an 
hour as entirely my own, since, where everything was left to the caprices of 
Miss Matilda and her sister, there could be no order or regularity, and 
whatever occupation I chose, when not actually busied about them, or their 
concerns, I had, as it were, to keep my loins girded, my shoes on my feet, 
and my staff in my hand; for, not to be immediately forthcoming when called 
for, was regarded as a grave and inexcusable offence, not only by my pupils 
and their mother, but by the very servant who came in breathless haste to 
call me, exclaiming&mdash; 


 

&ldquo;You're to go to the school-room directly , mum&mdash;the young 
ladies is WAITING!!&rdquo; 


 

Climax of horror! actually waiting for their governess ! ! ! 


 

But this time, I was pretty sure of an hour or two to myself, for Matilda was 
preparing for a long ride, and Rosalie was dressing for a dinner party at 
Lady Ashby's: so I took the opportunity of repairing to the widow's cottage, 
where I found her in some anxiety about her cat, which had been absent all 
day. I comforted her with as many anecdotes of that animal's roving 
propensities as I could recollect. 


 

&ldquo;I'm feared o' th' gamekeepers,&rdquo; said she, &ldquo;that's all 'at I think on. If th' 
young gentlemen had been at home, I should a' thought they'd been setting 
their dogs at her, an' worried her, poor thing, as they did many a 
poor thing's cat; but I haven't that to be feared on now.&rdquo; 


 

Nancy's eyes were better, but still far from well: she had been trying to 
make a Sunday shirt for her son, but told me she could only bear to do a 
little bit at it now and then; so that it progressed but slowly, though the 
poor lad wanted it sadly. So I proposed to help her a little, after I had 
read to her, for I had plenty of time that evening, and need not return till 
dusk. She thankfully accepted the offer. 


 

&ldquo;An' you'll be a bit o' company for me too, Miss,&rdquo; said she; &ldquo;I like as I 
feel lonesome without my cat.&rdquo; 


 

But when I had finished reading, and done the half of a seam, with Nancy's 
capacious brass thimble fitted on to my finger by means of a roll of paper, I 
was disturbed by the entrance of Mr Weston with the identical cat in his 
arms. I now saw that he could smile, and very pleasantly too. 


 

&ldquo;I've done you a piece of good service, Nancy,&rdquo; he began; then seeing me, he 
acknowledged my presence by a slight bow. I should have been invisible to 
Hatfield, or any other gentleman of those parts. &ldquo;I've delivered your cat,&rdquo; 
he continued, &ldquo;from the hands, or rather the gun of Mr Murray's gamekeeper.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;God bless you, sir!&rdquo; cried the grateful old woman, ready to weep for joy as 
she received her favourite from his arms. 


 

&ldquo;Take care of it,&rdquo; said he, &ldquo;and don't let it go near the rabbit warren, for 
the gamekeeper swears he'll shoot it if he sees it there again. He would have 
done so to-day, if I had not been in time to stop him. I believe it is 
raining, Miss Grey,&rdquo; added he, more quietly, observing that I had put aside 
my work and was preparing to depart. &ldquo;Don't let me disturb you&mdash;I 
shan't stay two minutes.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;You'll both stay while this shower gets owered,&rdquo; said Nancy, as she 
stirred the fire, and placed another chair beside it; &ldquo;what! there's room for 
all.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I can see better here, thank you, Nancy,&rdquo; replied I, taking my work to the 
window, where she had the good- 
ness to suffer me to 
remain unmolested, while she got a brush to remove the cat's hairs from Mr 
Weston's coat, carefully wiped the rain from his hat, and gave the cat its 
supper, busily talking all the time; now thanking her clerical friend for 
what he had done; now wondering how the cat had found out the warren; and now 
lamenting the probable consequences of such a discovery. He listened with a 
quiet, good-natured smile, and at length took a seat in compliance with her 
pressing invitations, but repeated that he did not mean to stay. 


 

&ldquo;I have another place to go to,&rdquo; said he, &ldquo;and I see&rdquo; (glancing at the book 
on the table) &ldquo;some one else has been reading to you.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Yes, sir; Miss Grey has been as kind as read me a chapter; an' now she's 
helping me with a shirt for our Bill&mdash;but I'm feared she'll be 
cold there. Won't you come to th' fire, Miss?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;No, thank you, Nancy, I'm quite warm. I must go as soon as this shower is 
over.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Aw, Miss! You said you could stop while dusk!' cried the provoking old 
woman, and Mr Weston seized his hat. 


 

&ldquo;Nay, sir,&rdquo; exclaimed she, &ldquo;pray don't go now, while it rains so fast.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;But it strikes me I'm keeping your visiter away from the fire.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;No, you're not, Mr Weston,&rdquo; replied I, hoping there was no harm in a 
falsehood of that description. 


 

&ldquo;No, sure!&rdquo; cried Nancy. &ldquo;What, there's lots o' room!&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Miss Grey,&rdquo; said he, half jestingly, as if he felt it necessary to change 
the present subject, whether he had anything particular to say or not, &ldquo;I 
wish you would make my peace with the squire, when you see him. He was by 
when I rescued Nancy's cat, and did not quite approve of the deed. I told him 
I thought he might better spare all his rabbits 
than 
she her cat, for which audacious assertion, he treated me to some rather 
ungentlemanly language, and, I fear, I retorted a trifle too warmly.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Oh lawful sir! I hope you didn't fall out wi' th' maister for sake o' my 
cat! he cannot bide answering again&mdash;can th' maister. &ldquo; 


 

&ldquo;Oh! it's no matter, Nancy: I don't care about it, really: I said nothing 
 very uncivil; and I suppose Mr Murray is accustomed to use rather 
strong language when he's heated.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Ay, sir, it's a pity!&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;And now, I really must go. I have to visit a place a mile beyond this; and 
you would not have me return in the dark: besides, It has nearly done raining 
now&mdash;so good evening, Nancy.&mdash;Good evening, Miss Grey.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Good evening, Mr Weston ... but don't depend upon me for making your peace 
with Mr Murray, for I never see him&mdash;to speak to.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Don't you? it can't be helped then!&rdquo; replied he in dolorous resignation: 
then, with a peculiar half smile, he added, &ldquo;But never mind; I imagine the 
squire has more to apologize for than I,&rdquo; and left the cottage. 


 

I went on with my sewing as long as I could see, and then bid Nancy 
good-evening, checking her too lively gratitude by the undeniable assurance, 
that I had only done for her, what she would have done for me, if she had 
been in my place, and I in hers. I hastened back to Horton Lodge; where, 
having entered the school-room, I found the tea-table all in confusion, the 
tray flooded with slops, and Miss Matilda in a most ferocious humour. 


 

&ldquo;Miss Grey, whatever have you been about? I've had tea half an hour ago, and 
had to make it myself, and drink it all alone! I wish you would come 
in sooner! &ldquo; 


 

&ldquo;I've been to see Nancy Brown. I thought you would not be back from your 
ride.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;How could I ride in the rain, I should like to know? That d&mdash;&mdash;d pelting 
shower was vexatious enough&mdash;coming on when I was just in full 
swing; and then to come and find nobody in to tea!&mdash;and you know I 
can't make the tea as I like it.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I didn't think of the shower,&rdquo; replied I, (and, indeed, the thought of its 
driving her home had never entered my head.) 


 

&ldquo;No, of course, you were under shelter yourself, and you never thought of 
other people.&rdquo; 


 

I bore her coarse reproaches with astonishing equanimity, even with 
cheerfulness; for I was sensible that I had done more good to Nancy Brown 
than harm to her; and perhaps some other thoughts assisted to keep up my 
spirits, and impart a relish to the cup of cold, overdrawn tea, and a charm 
to the otherwise unsightly table, and&mdash;I had almost 
said&mdash;to Miss Matilda's unamiable face. But she soon betook 
herself to the stables, and left me to the quiet enjoyment of my solitary 
meal. 

 
 
 
 Chapter XIII 
 THE PRIMROSES 

MISS MURRAY now always went twice to church, for she so loved admiration that 
she could not bear to lose a single opportunity of obtaining it; and she was 
so sure of it, wherever she showed herself, that whether Harry Meltham and Mr 
Green were there or not, there was certain to be somebody present who would 
not be insensible to her charms, besides the rector, whose official capacity 
generally obliged him to attend. 


 

Usually, also, if the weather permitted, both she and her sister would walk 
home; Matilda, because she hated the confinement of the carriage; she, 
because she disliked the privacy of it, and enjoyed the company that 
generally enlivened the first mile of the journey in walking from the church 
to Mr Green's park-gates, near which, commenced the private road to Horton 
Lodge, which lay in the opposite direction; while the highway conducted, in a 
straight- forward course to the still more distant mansion of Sir Hugh 
Meltham. Thus, there was always a chance of being accompanied, so far, 
either by Harry Meltham with or without Miss Meltham, or Mr Green, with 
perhaps one or both of his sisters, and any gentlemen visitors they might 
have. 


 

Whether I walked with the young ladies or rode with their parents, depended 
upon their own capricious will: if they chose to &ldquo;take&rdquo; me, I went; if, for 
reasons best known to themselves, they chose to go alone, I took my seat in 
the carriage: I liked walking better, but a sense of reluctance to obtrude my 
presence on any one who did not desire it, always kept me passive on these 
and similar occasions; 
and I never inquired into the 
causes of their varying whims. And indeed, this was the best 
policy&mdash;for to submit and oblige was the governess's part, to 
consult their own pleasure was that of the pupils. But when I did walk, the 
first half of the journey was generally a great nuisance to me. As none of 
the before-mentioned ladies and gentlemen ever noticed me, it was 
disagreeable to walk beside them, as if listening to what they said, or 
wishing to be thought one of them, while they talked over me or across; and 
if their eyes, in speaking, chanced to fall on me, it seemed as if they 
looked on vacancy&mdash;as if they either did not see me, or were very 
desirous to make it appear so. 


 

It was disagreeable, too, to walk behind, and thus appear to acknowledge my 
own inferiority; for in truth, I considered myself pretty nearly as good as 
the best of them, and wished them to know that I did so, and not to imagine 
that I looked upon myself as a mere domestic, who knew her own place too well 
to walk beside such fine ladies and gentlemen as they were ... though her 
young ladies might choose to have her with them, and even condescend to 
converse with her, when no better company were at hand. 


 

Thus&mdash;I am almost ashamed to confess it&mdash;but indeed I 
gave myself no little trouble in my endeavours (if I did keep up with them) 
to appear perfectly unconscious or regardless of their presence, as if I were 
wholly absorbed in my own reflections or the contemplation of surrounding 
objects; or if I lingered behind, it was some bird or insect, some tree or 
flower, that attracted my attention, and having duly examined that, I would 
pursue my walk alone, at a leisurely pace, until my pupils had bidden adieu 
to their companions, and turned off into the quiet, private road. 


 

One such occasion I particularly well remember, it was a lovely afternoon 
about the close of March; Mr Green and his sisters had sent their carriage 
back empty, in order to 
enjoy the bright sunshine and 
balmy air in a sociable walk home along with their visitors, Captain Somebody 
and Lieutenant Somebody else (a couple of military fops,) and the Misses 
Murray, who of course, contrived to join them. 


 

Such a party was highly agreeable to Rosalie; but not finding it equally 
suitable to my taste, I presently fell back, and began to botanize and 
entomologize along the green banks and budding hedges, till the company was 
considerably in advance of me, and I could hear the sweet song of the happy 
lark: then my spirit of misanthropy began to melt away beneath the soft, pure 
air and genial sunshine; but sad thoughts of early childhood, and yearnings 
for departed joys, or for a brighter future lot, arose instead. 


 

As my eyes wandered over the steep banks covered with young grass and 
green-leaved plants, and surmounted by budding hedges, I longed intensely for 
some familiar flower that might recall the woody dales or green hill-sides of 
home&mdash;the brown moorlands, of course, were out of the question. 
Such a discovery would make my eyes gush out with water, no doubt; but that 
was one of my greatest enjoyments now. 


 

At length, I descried, high up between the twisted roots of an oak, three 
lovely primroses, peeping so sweetly from their hiding-place that the tears 
already started at the sight, but they grew so high above me, that I tried in 
vain to gather one or two to dream over and to carry with me; I could not 
reach them, unless I climbed the bank, which I was deterred from doing by 
hearing a footstep, at that moment behind me, and was therefore, about to 
turn away, when I was startled by the words, &ldquo;Allow me to gather them for 
you, Miss Grey,&rdquo; spoken in the grave, low tones of a well-known voice. 


 

Immediately the flowers were gathered, and in my hand. 
 It was Mr Weston, of course&mdash;who else would trouble 
himself to do so much for me ? 


 

I thanked him; whether warmly or coldly, I cannot tell: but certain I am, 
that I did not express half the gratitude I felt. It was foolish perhaps, to 
feel any gratitude at all, but it seemed to me, at that moment, as if this 
were a remarkable instance of his good nature, an act of kindness which I 
could not repay, but never should forget: so utterly unaccustomed was I to 
receive such civilities, so little prepared to expect them&mdash;from 
anyone within fifty miles of Horton Lodge. 


 

Yet this did not prevent me from feeling a little uncomfortable in his 
presence; and I proceeded to follow my pupils at a much quicker pace than 
before; though perhaps, if Mr Weston had taken the hint, and let me pass 
without another word, I might have repented it an hour after: but he did 
not. A somewhat rapid walk for me, was but an ordinary pace for him. 


 

&ldquo;Your young ladies have left you alone,&rdquo; said he. 


 

&ldquo;Yes; they are occupied with more agreeable company.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Then don't trouble yourself to overtake them.&rdquo; 


 

I slackened my pace; but next moment regretted having done so; my companion 
did not speak: and I had nothing in the world to say, and feared he might be 
in the same predicament. At length, however, he broke the pause by asking, 
with a certain quiet abruptness peculiar to himself if I liked flowers. 


 

&ldquo;Yes, very much,&rdquo; I answered, &ldquo;wild flowers especially.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo; I like wild flowers,&rdquo; said he; &ldquo;others I don't care about, because I 
have no particular associations connected with them&mdash;except one or 
two. What are your favourite flowers?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Primroses, blue-bells, and heath-blossoms.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Not violets?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;No, because, as you say, I have no particular associations connected with 
them; for there are no sweet violets among the hills and valleys round my 
home.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;It must be a great consolation to you to have a home, Miss Grey,&rdquo; observed 
my companion after a short pause: &ldquo;however remote, or however seldom visited, 
still it is something to look to.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;It is so much, that I think I could not live without it,&rdquo; replied I, with an 
enthusiasm of which I immediately repented, for I thought it must have 
sounded essentially silly. 


 

&ldquo;Oh yes, you could!&rdquo; said he with a thoughtful smile. &ldquo;The ties that bind us 
to life are tougher than you imagine, or than any one can, who has not felt 
how roughly they may be pulled without breaking. You might be miserable 
without a home, but even you could live, and not so miserably 
as you suppose. The human heart is like india-rubber, a little swells it, but 
great deal will not burst it. If 'little more than nothing' will disturb it, 
'little less than all things will suffice,' to break it. As in the outer 
members of our frame, there is a vital power inherent in itself, that 
strengthens it against external violence. Every blow that shakes it, will 
serve to harden it against a future stroke; as constant labour thickens the 
skin of the hand, and strengthens its muscles instead of wasting them away: 
so that a day of arduous toil that might excoriate a lady's palm, would make 
no sensible impression on that of a hardy ploughman. 


 

&ldquo;I speak from experience&mdash;partly my own. There was a time when I 
thought as you do&mdash;at least, I was fully persuaded that Home and 
its affections were the only things that made life tolerable ... that if 
deprived of these, existence would become a burden hard to be endured; but 
now, I have no home ... unless you would dignify my two hired rooms at Horton 
by such a name; ... and not twelve months ago, I lost the last and dearest of 
my early friends: and yet, 
not only I live, but I am 
not wholly destitute of hope and comfort, even for this life; though I must 
acknowledge that I can seldom enter even an humble cottage, at the close of 
day, and see its inhabitants peaceably gathered around their cheerful hearth, 
without a feeling almost of envy at their domestic enjoyment.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;You don't know what happiness lies before you yet,&rdquo; said I, &ldquo;you are now 
only in the commencement of your journey.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;The best of happiness,&rdquo; replied he, &ldquo;is mine already ... the power and the 
will to be useful.&rdquo; 


 

We now approached a stile communicating with a footpath that conducted to a 
farm-house, where I suppose, Mr Weston purposed to make himself &ldquo;useful,&rdquo; for 
he presently took leave of me, crossed the stile, and traversed the path with 
his usual firm, elastic tread, leaving me to ponder his words as I continued 
my course alone. 


 

I had heard before that he had lost his mother not many months before he 
came. She then, was the last and dearest of his early friends; and he had 
 no home. I pitied him from my heart; I almost wept for sympathy. And 
this, I thought, accounted for the shade of premature thoughtfulness that so 
frequently clouded his brow, and obtained for him the reputation of a morose 
and sullen disposition with the charitable Miss Murray and all her kin. 


 

&ldquo;But,&rdquo; thought I, &ldquo;he is not so miserable as I should be under such a 
deprivation: he leads an active life; and a wide field for useful exertion 
lies before him, he can make friends&mdash;and he can make a 
home too, if he pleases, and doubtless he will please some time; and God 
grant the partner of that home may be worthy of his choice, and make it a 
happy one ... such a home as he deserves to have! And how delightful it would 
be to&mdash;&rdquo; But no matter what I thought. 


 

I began this book with the intention of concealing nothing, 
that those who liked might have the benefit of perusing 
a fellow creature's heart: but we have some thoughts that all the 
angels in heaven are welcome to behold&mdash;but not our 
brother-men&mdash;not even the best and kindest amongst them. 


 

By this time the Greens had taken themselves to their own abode, and the 
Murrays had turned down the private road, whither I hastened to follow them. 
I found the two girls lost in an animated discussion on the respective merits 
of the two young officers; but on seeing me Rosalie broke off in the middle 
of a sentence to exclaim, with malicious glee, 


 

&ldquo;Oh ho, Miss Grey! you're come at last, are you? No wonder you 
lingered so long behind! and no wonder you always stand up so 
vigorously for Mr Weston when I abuse him&mdash;Ah, ha! I see it all 
now!&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Now come, Miss Murray, don't be foolish,&rdquo; said I attempting a good-natured 
laugh, &ldquo;you know such nonsense can make no impression on me.&rdquo; 


 

But she still went on talking such intolerable stuff&mdash;her sister 
helping her with appropriate fiction coined for the occasion&mdash;that 
I thought it necessary to say something in my own justification. 


 

&ldquo;What humbug all this is!&rdquo; I exclaimed. &ldquo;If Mr Weston's road happened to be 
the same as mine for a few yards, and if he chose to exchange a word or two 
in passing, what is there so remarkable in that? I assure you I never spoke 
to him before; except once.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Where ? where ? and when ?&rdquo; cried they eagerly. 


 

&ldquo;In Nancy's cottage.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Ah ha! you've met him there have you?&rdquo; exclaimed Rosalie, with exultant 
laughter. &ldquo;Ah! now Matilda, I've found out why she's so fond of going to 
Nancy Brown's! she goes there to flirt with Mr Weston.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Really that is not worth contradicting! ... I only saw him there once, I 
tell you ... and how could I know he was coming?&rdquo; 


 

Irritated as I was at their foolish mirth and vexatious imputations, the 
uneasiness did not continue long: when they had had their laugh out, they 
returned again to the Captain and Lieutenant; and, while they disputed and 
commented upon them, my indignation rapidly cooled; the cause of it was 
quickly forgotten, and I turned my thoughts into a pleasanter channel. 


 

Thus we proceeded up the park, and entered the hall; and as I ascended the 
stairs to my own chamber, I had but one thought within me, my heart was 
filled to overflowing with one single earnest wish. Having entered the room, 
and shut the door, I fell upon my knees and offered up a fervent but not 
impetuous prayer: &ldquo;Thy will be done,&rdquo; I strove to say throughout; but, 
&ldquo;Father, all things are possible with Thee, and may it be thy will,&rdquo; was sure 
to follow. That wish ... that prayer both men and women would have scorned me 
for ... &ldquo;But Father, Thou wilt not despise!&rdquo; I 
said&mdash;and felt that it was true. It seemed to me, that another's 
welfare was at least as ardently implored as my own&mdash;nay, even 
that that was the principal object of my heart's desire. I might have 
been deceiving myself; but that idea gave me confidence to ask, and power to 
hope I did not ask in vain. 


 

As for the primroses, I kept two of them in a glass in my room until they 
were completely withered, and the housemaid threw them out, and the petals of 
the other, I pressed between the leaves of my bible&mdash;I have them 
still, and mean to keep them always. 

 
 
 
 Chapter XIV 
 THE RECTOR 

THE following day was as fine as the preceding one. Soon after breakfast, 
Miss Matilda, having gallopped and blundered through a few unprofitable 
lessons, and vengeably thumped the piano for an hour, in a terrible humour 
with both me and it, because her mama would not give her a holiday, had 
betaken herself to her favorite places of resort, the yards, the stables, and 
the dog-kennels: and Miss Murray, was gone forth to enjoy a quiet ramble with 
a new fashionable novel for her companion, leaving me in the school-room, 
hard at work upon a water-colour drawing I had prom
ised to do for her, and 
which she insisted upon my finishing that day. 


 

At my feet lay a little rough terrier. It was the property of Miss Matilda; 
but she hated the animal, and intended to sell it, alleging that it was quite 
spoiled. It was really an excellent dog of its kind; but she affirmed it was 
fit for nothing, and had not even the sense to know its own mistress. 


 

The fact was, she had purchased it when but a small puppy, insisting, at 
first, that no one should touch it but herself; but, soon becoming tired of 
so helpless and troublesome a nursling, she had gladly yielded to my 
entreaties to be allowed to take charge of it; and I, by carefully nursing 
the little creature from infancy to adolescence, of course, had obtained its 
affections; a reward, I should have greatly valued and looked upon as far 
outweighing all the trouble I had had with it, had not poor Snap's grateful 
feelings exposed him to many a harsh word and many a spiteful kick and pinch 
from his owner, and were he not now in danger 
of 
being &ldquo;put away,&rdquo; in consequence, or transferred to some rough, stony-hearted 
master. But how could I help it? I could not make the dog hate me by cruel 
treatment; and she would not propitiate him by kindness. 


 

However, while I thus sat, working away with my pencil, Mrs Murray came, half 
sailing, half bustling, into the room. 


 

&ldquo;Miss Grey,&rdquo; she began,&mdash;&rdquo;Dear! how can you sit at your drawing 
such a day as this?&rdquo; (she thought I was doing it for my own pleasure.) &ldquo;I 
 wonder you don't put on your bonnet and go out with the young ladies.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I think, ma'am, Miss Murray is reading; and Miss Matilda is amusing herself 
with her dogs.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;If you would try to amuse Miss Matilda yourself a little more, I think she 
would not be driven to seek amusement in the companionship of dogs 
and horses, and grooms, so much as she is; and if you would be a little more 
cheerful and conversable with Miss Murray, she would not so often go 
wandering in the fields with a book in her hand. However, I don't want to 
vex you,&rdquo; added she, seeing I suppose, that my cheeks burned and my hand 
trembled with some unamiable emotion. &ldquo;Do, pray, try not to be so 
touchy!&mdash;there's no speaking to you else. And tell me if you know 
where Rosalie is gone: and why she likes to be so much alone?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;She says she likes to be alone when she has a new book to read.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;But why can't she read it in the park or the garden;&mdash;why should 
she go into the fields and lanes? and how is it that that Mr Hatfield so 
often finds her out? She told me last week he'd walked his horse by her side 
all up Moss-lane; and now I'm sure it was he I saw from my dressing-room 
window, walking so briskly past the park gates, and on towards the field 
where she so frequently goes. I wish you would go and see if she is there; 
and just gently remind her 
that it is not proper for 
a young lady of her rank and prospects to be wandering about by herself in 
that manner, exposed to the attentions of any one that presumes to address 
her; like some poor neglected girl that has no park to walk in, and no 
friends to take care of her; and tell her that her papa would be extremely 
angry if he knew of her treating Mr Hatfield in that familiar manner that I 
fear she does; and&mdash;Oh! if you&mdash;if any 
governess had but half a mother's watchfulness&mdash;half a mother's 
anxious care, I should be saved this trouble; and you would see at once the 
necessity of keeping your eye upon her, and making your company agreeable 
to&mdash;Well, go&mdash;go; there's no time to be lost,&rdquo; cried 
she, seeing that I had put away my drawing materials, and was waiting in the 
door-way for the conclusion of her address. 


 

According to her prognostications, I found Miss Murray in her favourite 
field just without the park; and, unfortunately, not alone; for the tall, 
stately figure of Mr Hatfield was slowly sauntering by her side. 


 

Here was a poser for me. It was my duty to interrupt the 
 t&ecirc;te-&agrave;-t&ecirc;te: but how was it to be done? Mr Hatfield 
could not be driven away by so insignificant a person as I; and to go and 
place myself on the other side of Miss Murray, and intrude my unwelcome 
presence upon her without noticing her companion, was a piece of rudeness I 
could not be guilty of: neither had I the courage to cry aloud from the top 
of the field that she was wanted elsewhere. So I took the intermediate course 
of walking slowly, but steadily towards them, resolving, if my approach 
failed to scare away the beau, to pass by and tell Miss Murray her mama 
wanted her. 


 

She certainly looked very charming as she strolled lingering along under the 
budding horse-chestnut trees that stretched their long arms over the 
park-palings, with her closed book in one hand, and in the other, a graceful 
sprig 
of myrtle which served her as a very pretty 
plaything ... her bright ringlets escaping profusely from her little bonnet, 
and gently stirred by the breeze, her fair cheek flushed with gratified 
vanity, her smiling blue eyes, now slyly glancing towards her admirer, now 
gazing downward at her myrtle sprig. But Snap, running before me, interrupted 
her in the middle of some half pert, half playful repartee, by catching hold 
of her dress and vehemently tugging thereat; till Mr Hatfield, with his cane 
administered a resounding thwack upon the animal's skull, and sent it 
yelping back to me, with a clamorous outcry that afforded the reverend 
gentleman great amusement; but seeing me so near, he thought, I suppose, he 
might as well be taking his departure; and as I stooped to caress the dog, 
with ostentatious pity to show my disapproval of his severity, I heard him 
say, 


 

&ldquo;When shall I see you again, Miss Murray?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;At church, I suppose,&rdquo; replied she, &ldquo;unless your business chances to bring 
you here again, at the precise moment when I happen to be walking by.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I could always manage to have business here, if I knew precisely when and 
where to find you.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;But if I would, I could not inform you, for I am so immethodical, I never 
can tell to-day what I shall do to-morrow.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Then give me that, meantime, to comfort me,&rdquo; said he, half jestingly and 
half in earnest, extending his hand for the sprig of myrtle. 


 

&ldquo;No indeed, I shan't.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Do! Pray do! I shall be the most miserable of men if you don't. You 
cannot be so cruel as to deny me a favour so easily granted, and yet so 
highly prized!&rdquo; pleaded he as ardently as if his life depended on it. 


 

By this time I stood within a very few yards of them, impatiently waiting his 
departure. 


 

&ldquo;There then! take it and go,&rdquo; said Rosalie. 


 

He joyfully received the gift, murmured something that made her blush and 
toss aside her head, but with a little laugh that shewed her displeasure was 
entirely affected; and then with a courteous salutation withdrew. 


 

&ldquo;Did you ever see such a man, Miss Grey?&rdquo; said she turning to me, &ldquo;I'm so 
 glad you came! I thought I never should get rid of 
him;&mdash;and I was so terribly afraid of papa seeing him.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Has he been with you long?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;No; not long, but he's so extremely impertinent: and he's always hanging 
about, pretending his business or his clerical duties require his attendance 
in these parts, and really watching for poor me, and pouncing upon me 
wherever he sees me.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Well, your mama thinks you ought not to go beyond the park or garden without 
some discreet, matronly person like me to accompany you, and keep off all 
intruders. She descried Mr Hatfield hurrying past the park-gates, and 
forthwith dispatched me with instructions to seek you up and to take care of 
you, and likewise to warn&mdash;&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Oh, mama's so tiresome! As if I couldn't take care of myself! She bothered 
me before about Mr Hatfield; and I told her she might trust me&mdash;I 
never should forget my rank and station for the most delightful man that ever 
breathed.&mdash;I wish he would go down on his knees tomorrow, and 
implore me to be his wife; that I might just shew her how mistaken she is in 
supposing that I could ever&mdash;Oh! it provokes me so&mdash;To 
think that I could be such a fool as to fall in love! It is quite 
beneath the dignity of a woman to do such a thing. Love! I detest the word! 
as applied to one of our sex, I think it a perfect insult! a preference I 
 might acknowledge; but never for one like poor Mr Hatfield, who has 
not seven hundred a year to bless himself with. I like to 
 talk to him, because he's so clever and amusing&mdash;I 
wish Sir Thomas Ashby were half as nice&mdash;besides, I must have 
 somebody to flirt with, and no one else has the sense to come here; 
and when we go out, mama won't let me flirt with anybody but Sir 
Thomas&mdash;if he's there, and if he's not there, I'm bound 
hand and foot, for fear somebody should go and make up some exaggerated 
story, and put it into his head that I'm engaged, or likely to be engaged to 
somebody else; or, what is more probable, for fear his nasty old mother 
should see, or hear of my ongoings, and conclude that I'm not a fit wife for 
her excellent son; as if the said son were not the greatest scamp in 
Christendom; and as if any woman of common decency were not a world too good 
for him.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Is it really so, Miss Murray? and does your mama know it, and yet wish you 
to marry him?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;To be sure she does! She knows more against him than I do, I believe: she 
keeps it from me lest I should be discouraged; not knowing how little I care 
about such things. For it's no great matter, really: he'll be all right when 
he's married, as mama says; and reformed rakes make the best husbands, 
 every body knows. I only wish he were not so 
ugly&mdash; that's all I think about&mdash;but then there's 
no choice here in the country, and papa will not let us go to 
London&mdash;&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;But I should think Mr Hatfield would be far better.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;And so he would, if he were lord of Ashby Park&mdash;there's not a 
doubt of it; but the fact is, I must have Ashby Park, whoever shares 
it with me.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;But Mr Hatfield thinks you like him all this time; you don't consider how 
bitterly he will be disappointed when he finds himself mistaken.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo; No indeed! It will be a proper punishment for his 
presumption&mdash;for ever daring to think I could like him. I 
should enjoy nothing so much as lifting the veil from his eyes.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;The sooner you do it the better, then.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;No;&mdash;I tell you, I like to amuse myself with him. Besides, he 
doesn't really think I like him. I take good care of that; you don't know how 
cleverly I manage. He may presume to think he can induce me to like 
him, for which I shall punish him as he deserves.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Well, mind you don't give too much reason for such 
presumption&mdash;that's all,&rdquo; replied I. 


 

But all my exhortations were in vain: they only made her somewhat more 
solicitous to disguise her wishes and her thoughts from me. She talked no 
more to me about the rector; but I could see that her mind, if not her heart, 
was fixed upon him still, and that she was intent upon obtaining another 
interview; for though, in compliance with her mother's request, I was now 
constituted the companion of her rambles for a time, she still persisted in 
wandering in the fields and lanes that lay in the nearest proximity to the 
road; and, whether she talked to me, or read the book she carried in her 
hand, she kept continually pausing to look round her, or gaze up the road to 
see if any one was coming; and if a horseman trotted by, I could tell by her 
unqualified abuse of the poor equestrian whoever he might be, that she hated 
him because, he was not Mr Hatfield. 


 

&ldquo;Surely,&rdquo; thought I, &ldquo;she is not so indifferent to him as she believes 
herself to be, or would have others to believe her; and her mother's anxiety 
is not so wholly causeless as she affirms.&rdquo; 


 

Three days passed away, and he did not make his appearance. On the afternoon 
of the fourth, as we were walking beside the park palings in the memorable 
field, each furnished with a book (for I always took care to provide myself 
with something to be doing when she did not require me to talk), she suddenly 
interrupted my studies by exclaiming, 


 

&ldquo;Oh, Miss Grey! do be so kind as to go and see Mark 
Wood, and take his wife half a crown from me&mdash;I should have given 
or sent it a week ago, but quite forgot. There!&rdquo; said she, throwing me her 
purse, and speaking very fast- &ldquo;Never mind getting it out now, but take the 
purse and give them what you like&mdash;I would go with you, but I want 
to finish this volume. I'll come and meet you when I've done it. Be quick, 
will you&mdash;and&mdash;Oh, wait; Hadn't you better read to him 
a bit? Run to the house and get some sort of a good book&mdash;Anything 
will do.&rdquo; 


 

I did as I was desired; but, suspecting something from her hurried manner and 
the suddenness of the request, I just glanced back before I quitted the 
field, and there was Mr Hatfield about to enter at the gate below. By sending 
me to the house for a book, she had just prevented my meeting him on the 
road. 


 

&ldquo;Never mind!&rdquo; thought I, &ldquo;there'll be no great harm done. Poor Mark will be 
glad of the half-crown, and perhaps of the good book too; and if the rector 
does steal Miss Rosalie's heart, it will only humble her pride a little; and 
if they do get married at last, it will only save her from a worse fate; and 
she will be quite a good enough partner for him, and he for her.&rdquo; 


 

Mark Wood was the consumptive labourer whom I mentioned before. He was now 
rapidly wearing away. Miss Murray, by her liberality, obtained literally the 
blessing of him that was ready to perish; for though the half-crown could be 
of very little service to him, he was glad of it for the sake of his wife and 
children, so soon to be widowed and fatherless. 


 

After I had sat a few minutes, and read a little for the comfort and 
edification of himself and his afflicted wife, I left them; but I had not 
proceeded fifty yards before I encountered Mr Weston, apparently on his way 
to the same abode. 


 

He greeted me in his usual quiet, unaffected way, stopped to inquire about 
the condition of the sick man and his family, and with a sort of 
unconscious, brotherly disregard to ceremony, took from my hand the book 
out of which I had been reading, turned over the pages, made a few brief, 
but very sensible remarks, and restored it; then told me about some poor 
sufferer he had just been visiting, talked a little about Nancy Brown, made 
a few observations upon my little rough friend the terrier, that was 
frisking at his feet, and finally upon the beauty of the weather, and 
departed. 


 

I have omitted to give a detail of his words, from a notion that they would 
not interest the reader as they did me, and not because I have forgotten 
them. No; I remember them well; for I thought them over and over again in the 
course of that day and many succeeding ones, I know not how often; and 
recalled every intonation of his deep, clear voice, every flash of his 
quick, brown eye, and every gleam of his pleasant, but too transient smile. 
Such a confession will look very absurd, I fear&mdash;but no 
matter&mdash;I have written it; and they that read it will not know the 
writer. 


 

While I was walking along, happy within, and pleased with all around, Miss 
Murray came hastening to meet me; her buoyant step, flushed cheek, and 
radiant smiles shewing that she, too, was happy, in her own way. Running up 
to me, she put her arm through mine, and without waiting to recover breath, 
began&mdash; 


 

&ldquo;Now, Miss Grey, think yourself highly honoured, for I'm come to tell you my 
news before I've breathed a word of it to any one else.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Well, what is it?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Oh, such news! In the first place, you must know that Mr Hatfield 
came upon me just after you were gone. I was in such a way for fear 
papa or mama should see him!&mdash;but 
you know 
I couldn't call you back again; and so I&mdash;Oh, dear! I can't tell 
you all about it now, for there's Matilda, I see, in the park, and I must go 
and open my budget to her. But however, Hatfield was most uncommonly 
audacious, unspeakably complimentary, and unprecedentedly 
tender&mdash;tried to be so, at least&mdash;he didn't succeed 
very well in that, because it's not his vein. I'll tell you all he 
said another time.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;But what did you say&mdash;I'm more interested in that?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I'll tell you that, too, at some future period. I happened to be in a very 
good humour just then; but, though I was complaisant and gracious enough, I 
took care not to compromise myself in any possible way. But, however, the 
conceited wretch chose to interpret my amiability of temper in his own way, 
and at length presumed upon my indulgence so far, that&mdash;what do 
you think?&mdash;he actually&mdash;made me an offer!&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;And you&mdash;&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I proudly drew myself up, and with the greatest coolness expressed my 
astonishment at such an occurrence, and hoped he had seen nothing in my 
conduct to justify his expectations. You should have seen how his 
countenance fell! He went perfectly white in the face. I assured him that I 
esteemed him and all that, but could not possibly accede to his proposals; 
and if I did, papa and mama could never be brought to give their consent.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;'But if they could,' said he, 'would yours be wanting?' 


 

&ldquo;'Certainly, Mr Hatfield,&rdquo; I replied with a cool decision which quelled all 
hope at once. Oh, if you had seen how dreadfully mortified he 
was&mdash;how crushed to the earth by his disappointment! really, I 
almost pitied him myself. 


 

&ldquo;One more desperate attempt, however, he made. After a silence of 
considerable duration, during which he struggled to be calm, and I to be 
grave&mdash;for I felt a strong propensity 
to laugh&mdash;which would have ruined all&mdash;he said, with the 
ghost of a smile; 


 

&ldquo;'But tell me plainly, Miss Murray; if I had the wealth of Sir Hugh Meltham, 
or the prospects of his eldest son, would you still refuse me? answer me 
truly, upon your honour.' 


 

&ldquo;'Certainly,' said I. 'That would make no difference whatever.' 


 

&ldquo;It was a great lie, but he looked so confident in his own attractions still, 
that I determined not to leave him one stone upon another. He looked me full 
in the face; but I kept my countenance so well that he could not imagine I 
was saying anything more than the actual truth. 


 

&ldquo;'Then it's all over, I suppose,' he said, looking as if he could have died 
on the spot with vexation and the intensity of his despair. But he was angry 
as well as disappointed. There was he, suffering so unspeakably, and there 
was I, the pitiless cause of it all, so utterly impenetrable to all the 
artillery of his looks and words, so calmly cold and proud, he could not but 
feel some resentment; and with singular bitterness he began, 


 

&ldquo;'I certainly did not expect this, Miss Murray. I might say something about 
your past conduct, and the hopes you have led me to foster, but I forbear, on 
condition&mdash;' 


 

&ldquo;'No conditions, Mr Hatfield!' said I, now truly indignant at his insolence. 


 

&ldquo;'Then let me beg it as a favour,' he replied, lowering his voice at once, 
and taking a humbler tone; 'let me entreat that you will not mention this 
affair to any one whatever. If you will keep silence about it, there need be 
no unpleasantness on either side&mdash;nothing, I mean beyond what is 
quite unavoidable, for my own feelings, I will endeavour to keep to myself, 
if I cannot annihilate; I will try to forgive, if I cannot forget the cause 
of my sufferings. I 
will not suppose, Miss Murray, 
that you know how deeply you have injured me. I would not have you aware of 
it; but if, in addition to the injury you have already done 
me&mdash;pardon me; but whether innocently or not, you have done 
it&mdash;and if you add to it by giving publicity to this unfortunate 
affair, or naming it at all, you will find that I too can speak; and 
though you scorned my love, you will hardly scorn my&mdash;' 


 

&ldquo;He stopped, but he bit his bloodless lip, and looked so terribly 
fierce that I was quite frightened. However, my pride upheld me still, and I 
answered disdainfully, 


 

&ldquo;'I do not know what motive you suppose I could have for naming it to any 
one, Mr Hatfield; but if I were disposed to do so, you would not deter me by 
threats; and it is scarcely the part of a gentleman to attempt it.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;'Pardon me, Miss Murray,' said he, 'I have loved you so 
intensely&mdash;I do still adore you so deeply, that I would not 
willingly offend you; but though I never have loved, and never can 
love any woman as I have loved you, it is equally certain that I never was so 
ill-treated by any. On the contrary, I have always found your sex the 
kindest, and most tender and obliging of God's creation, till now.' (Think of 
the conceited fellow saying that!) 'And the novelty and harshness of the 
lesson you have taught me to-day, and the bitterness of being disappointed in 
the only quarter on which the happiness of my life depended, must excuse any 
appearance of asperity. If my presence is disagreeable to you, Miss Murray,' 
he said (for I was looking about me to show how little I cared for him, so he 
thought I was tired of him, I suppose,) 'if my presence is disagreeable to 
you, Miss Murray, you have only to promise me the favour I named, and I will 
relieve you at once. There are many ladies- some even in this 
parish&mdash;who would be delighted to accept what you have so 
scornfully trampled under your 
feet. They would be 
naturally inclined to hate one whose surpassing loveliness has so completely 
estranged my heart from them and blinded me to their attractions; and a 
single hint of the truth from me to one of these, would be sufficient to 
raise such a talk against you as would seriously injure your prospects, and 
diminish your chance of success with any other gentleman you, or your mama 
might design to entangle.' 


 

&ldquo;'What do you mean, sir?' said I, ready to stamp with passion. 


 

&ldquo;'I mean that this affair from beginning to end appears to me like a case of 
arrant&mdash;flirtation, to say the least of it- such a case as you 
would find it rather inconvenient to have blazoned through the 
world&mdash;especially with the additions and exaggerations of your 
female rivals, who would be too glad to publish the matter, if I only gave 
them a handle to it. But I promise you, on the faith of a gentleman, that no 
word or syllable that could tend to your prejudice shall ever escape my lips, 
provided you will&mdash;&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;'Well, well, I won't mention it,' said I, 'You may rely upon my silence, if 
that can afford you any consolation.' 


 

&ldquo;'You promise it?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;'Yes,' I answered, for I wanted to get rid of him now. 


 

&ldquo;'Farewell, then!' said he, in a most doleful heart-sick tone; and with a 
look where pride vainly struggled against despair, he turned and went away, 
longing, no doubt, to get home, that he might shut himself up in his study 
and cry&mdash;if he doesn't burst into tears before he gets there.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;But you have broken your promise already,&rdquo; said I, truly horrified at her 
perfidy. 


 

&ldquo;Oh! it's only to you&mdash;I know you won't repeat it.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Certainly, I shall not; but you say you were going to tell your sister; and 
she will tell your brothers when they come home, and Brown immediately, if 
you do not tell her your- 
self, and Brown will blazon 
it, or be the means of blazoning it, throughout the country.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;No, indeed, she won't&mdash;We shall not tell her at all, unless it be 
under the promise of the strictest secrecy.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;But how can you expect her to keep her promises better than her more 
enlightened mistress?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Well, well, she shan't hear it then,&rdquo; said Miss Murray, somewhat snappishly. 


 

&ldquo;But you will tell your mamma, of course,&rdquo; pursued I; &ldquo;and she will tell your 
papa.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Of course, I shall tell mamma, that is the very thing that pleases me so 
much. I shall now be able to convince her how mistaken she was in her fears 
about me.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Oh, that's it, is it? I was wondering what it was that delighted you 
so much.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Yes; and another thing is, that I've humbled Mr Hatfield so charmingly; and 
another&mdash;why, you must allow me some share of female vanity; I 
don't pretend to be without that most essential attribute of our 
sex&mdash;and if you had seen poor Hatfield's intense eagerness of 
making his ardent declaration and his flattering proposal, and his agony of 
mind, that no effort of pride could conceal, on being refused, you would have 
allowed I had some cause to be gratified.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;The greater his agony, I should think, the less your cause for 
gratification.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Oh, nonsense!&rdquo; cried the young lady, shaking herself with vexation. &ldquo;You 
either can't understand me or you won't. If I had not confidence in your 
magnanimity, I should think you envied me. But you will perhaps comprehend 
this cause of pleasure&mdash;which is as great as 
any&mdash;namely, that I am delighted with myself for my prudence, my 
self-command, my heartlessness, if you please; I was not a bit taken by 
surprise, not a bit confused, or awkward, or 
foolish; 
I just acted and spoke as I ought to have done, and was completely my own 
mistress throughout. And here was a man, decidedly 
good-looking&mdash;Jane and Susan Green call him bewitchingly 
handsome&mdash;I suppose they're two of the ladies he pretends would be 
so glad to have him&mdash;but, however, he was certainly a very clever, 
witty, agreeable companion&mdash;not what you call clever, but 
just enough to make him entertaining; and a man one needn't be ashamed of 
anywhere, and would not soon grow tired of; and&mdash;,to confess the 
truth, I rather liked him&mdash;better even, of late, than Harry 
Meltham&mdash;and he evidently idolized me; and yet, though he came 
upon me all alone and unprepared, I had the wisdom, and the pride, and the 
strength to refuse him&mdash;and so scornfully and coolly as I did: I 
have good reason to be proud of that!&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;And are you equally proud of having told him that his having the wealth of 
Sir Hugh Meltham would make no difference to you when that was not the case; 
and of having promised to tell no one of his misadventure, apparently without 
the slightest intention of keeping your promise?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Of course! what else could I do? You would not have had me&mdash;but I 
see, Miss Grey, you're not in a good temper.&mdash;Here's Matilda; I'll 
see what she and mamma have to say about it.&rdquo; 


 

She left me, offended at my want of sympathy, and thinking, no doubt, that I 
envied her. I did not- at least, I firmly believe I did not. I was sorry for 
her; I was amazed, disgusted at her heartless vanity; I wondered why so much 
beauty should be given to those who made so bad a use of it, and denied to 
some who would make it a benefit to both themselves and others. 


 

But, God knows best, I concluded. There are, I suppose, some men as vain, as 
selfish, and as heartless as she is, and perhaps such women may be useful to 
punish them. 

 
 
 
 Chapter XV 
 THE WALK 

&ldquo;O DEAR! I wish Hatfield had not been so precipitate!&rdquo; said Rosalie next day 
at four p.m., as, with a portentous yawn, she laid down her worsted-work and 
looked listlessly towards the window. 


 

&ldquo;There's no inducement to go out now; and nothing to look forward to. The 
days will be so long and dull when there are no parties to enliven them; and 
there are none this week, or next either, that I know of.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Pity you were so cross to him,&rdquo; observed Matilda, to whom: this lamentation 
was addressed. &ldquo;He'll never come again; and I suspect you liked him after 
all. I hoped you would have taken him for your beau, and left dear Harry to 
me.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Humph! my beau must be an Adonis, indeed, Matilda, the admired of all 
beholders, if I am to be contented with him alone. I'm sorry to lose 
Hatfield, I confess; but the first decent man, or number of men that come to 
supply his place will be more than welcome. It's Sunday 
to-morrow&mdash;I do wonder how he'll look, and whether he'll be able 
to go through the service. Most likely he'll pretend he's got a cold and make 
Mr Weston do it all.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Not he!&rdquo; exclaimed Matilda, somewhat contemptuously. &ldquo;Fool as he is, he's 
not so soft as that comes to.&rdquo; 


 

Her sister was slightly offended; but the event proved Matilda. was right. 
The disappointed lover performed his pastoral duties as usual. Rosalie, 
indeed, affirmed he looked very pale and dejected: he might be a little 
paler, but the difference, if any, was scarcely perceptible. As for his 
dejec- 
tion, I certainly did not hear his laugh 
ringing from the vestry as usual, nor his voice loud in hilarious discourse, 
though I did hear it uplifted in rating the sexton in a manner that made the 
congregation stare; and in his transits to and from the pulpit and the 
communion-table, there was more of solemn pomp, and less of that irreverent, 
self-confident, or rather self-delighted imperiousness with which he usually 
swept along&mdash;that air that seemed to say, &ldquo;You all reverence and 
adore me I know; but if any one does not, I defy him to the teeth!&rdquo; 


 

But the most remarkable change was that he never once suffered his eyes to 
wander in the direction of Mr Murray's pew, and did not leave the church till 
we were gone. 


 

Mr Hatfield had doubtless received a very severe blow; but his pride impelled 
him to use every effort to conceal the effects of it. He had been 
disappointed in his certain hope of obtaining not only a beautiful and, to 
him, highly attractive wife, but one whose rank and fortune might give 
brilliance to far inferior charms: he was likewise, no doubt, intensely 
mortified by his repulse, and deeply offended at the conduct of Miss Murray 
throughout. 


 

It would have given him no little consolation to have known how disappointed 
she was to find him apparently so little moved, and to see that he was able 
to refrain from casting a single glance at her throughout both the services, 
though, she declared, it showed he was thinking of her all the time, or his 
eyes would have fallen upon her, if it were only by chance; but if they had 
so chanced to fall, she would have affirmed it was because they could not 
resist the attraction. It might have pleased him too, in some degree, to have 
seen how dull and dissatisfied she was throughout that week, (the greater 
part of it, at least,) for lack of her usual source of excitement; and how 
often she regretted having &ldquo;used him up so soon,&rdquo; like a child that, having 
devoured its plum-cake too hastily, sits sucking its 
fingers, and vainly lamenting its greediness. 


 

At length, I was called upon, one fine morning, to accompany her in a walk to 
the village. Ostensibly she went to get some shades of Berlin wool at a 
tolerably respectable shop that was chiefly supported by the ladies of the 
vicinity: really&mdash;I trust there is no breach of charity in 
supposing, that she went with the idea of meeting with either the rector 
himself, or some other admirer by the way; for as we went along, she kept 
wondering &ldquo;what Hatfield would do or say, if we met him,&rdquo; &amp;c., &amp;c.; as we 
passed Mr Green's park-gates, she &ldquo;wondered whether he was at 
home&mdash;great stupid blockhead;&rdquo; as Lady Meltham's carriage passed 
u
s, she &ldquo;wondered what Mr Harry was doing this fine day;&rdquo; and then began to 
abuse his elder brother for being &ldquo;such a fool as to get married and go and 
live in London.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Why,&rdquo; said I, &ldquo;I thought you wanted to live in London yourself.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Yes, because it's so dull here; but then he makes it still duller by taking 
himself off; and if he were not married I might have him instead of that 
odious Sir Thomas.&rdquo; 


 

Then, observing the prints of a horse's feet on the somewhat miry road, she 
&ldquo;wondered whether it was a gentleman's horse,&rdquo; and finally concluded it was, 
for the impressions were too small to have been made by a &ldquo;great, clumsy 
cart-horse;&rdquo; and then she &ldquo;wondered who the rider could be,&rdquo; and whether we 
should meet him coming back, for she was sure he had only passed that 
morning; and lastly, when we entered the village and saw only a few of its 
humble inhabitants moving about, she &ldquo;wondered why the stupid people couldn't 
keep in their houses; she was sure she didn't want to see their ugly faces, 
and dirty, vulgar clothes&mdash;it wasn't for that she came to Horton!&rdquo; 


 

Amid all this, I confess, I wondered too, in secret, whe- 
ther we should meet, or catch a glimpse of somebody else; and 
as we passed his lodgings, I even went so far as to wonder whether he was at 
the window. 


 

On entering the shop, Miss Murray desired me to stand in the doorway while 
she transacted her business, and tell her if anyone passed. But alas! there 
was no one visible besides the villagers, except Jane and Susan Green coming 
down the single street, apparently returning from a walk. 


 

&ldquo;Stupid things!&rdquo; muttered she, as she came out after having concluded her 
bargain. &ldquo;Why couldn't they have their dolt of a brother with them? even he 
would be better than nothing.&rdquo; 


 

She greeted them, however, with a cheerful smile, and protestations of 
pleasure at the happy meeting equal to their own. They placed themselves one 
on each side of her; and all three walked away chatting and laughing as young 
ladies do when they get together, if they be but on tolerably intimate terms. 
But I, feeling myself to be one too many, left them to their merriment and 
lagged behind, as usual on such occasions: I had no relish for walking beside 
Miss Green or Miss Susan like one deaf and dumb, who could neither speak nor 
be spoken to. 


 

But this time I was not long alone. It struck me, at first, as very odd, that 
just as I was thinking about Mr Weston he should come up and accost me; but 
afterwards, on due reflection, I thought there was nothing odd about it, 
unless it were the fact of his speaking to me, for, on such a morning, and so 
near his own abode, it was natural enough that he should be about; and as for 
my thinking of him, I had been doing that, with little intermission, ever 
since we set out on our journey; so there was nothing remarkable in that. 


 

&ldquo;You are alone again, Miss Grey!&rdquo; said he. 


 

&ldquo;Yes.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;What kind of people are those ladies&mdash;the Misses Green?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I really don't know.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;That's strange&mdash;when you live so near and see them so often!&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Well, I suppose they are lively, good-tempered girls; but I imagine you must 
know them better than I do, yourself, for I never exchanged a word with 
either of them.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Indeed! They don't strike me as being particularly reserved.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Very likely they are not so to people of their own class; but they consider 
themselves as moving in quite a different sphere from me!&rdquo; 


 

He made no reply to this; but after a short pause, he said, 


 

&ldquo;I suppose it's these things, Miss Grey, that make you think you could not 
live without a home?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Not exactly. The fact is I am too socially disposed to be able to live 
contentedly without a friend, and as the only friends I have, or am likely to 
have, are at home, if it&mdash;or rather, if they were 
gone&mdash;I will not say I could not live&mdash;but I would 
rather not live in such a desolate world.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;But why do you say the only friends you are likely to have? Are you so 
unsociable that you cannot make friends?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;No, but I never made one yet; and in my present position there is no 
possibility of doing so, or even of forming a common acquaintance. The fault 
may be partly in myself, but I hope not altogether.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;The fault is partly in society, and partly, I should think, in your 
immediate neighbours, and partly, too, in yourself; for many ladies, in your 
position, would make themselves be noticed and accounted of. But your pupils 
should be companions for you in some degree; they cannot be many years 
younger than yourself.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Oh yes, they are good company sometimes; but I can- 
not call them friends, nor would they think of bestowing such a name on 
me&mdash;they have other companions better suited to their tastes.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Perhaps you are too wise for them. How do you amuse yourself when 
alone&mdash;do you read much?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Reading is my favourite occupation when I have leisure for it, and books to 
read.&rdquo; 


 

From speaking of books in general, he passed to different books in 
particular, and proceeded by rapid transitions from topic to topic, till 
several matters, both of taste and opinion, had been discussed considerably 
within the space of half an hour, but without the embellishment of many 
observations from himself; he being evidently less bent upon communicating 
his own thoughts and predilections, than on discovering mine. He had not the 
tact or the art to effect such a purpose by skilfully drawing out my 
sentiments or ideas through the real or apparent statement of his own, or 
leading the conversation by imperceptible gradations to such topics as he 
wished to advert to. But such gentle abruptness, and such single-minded 
straightforwardness could not possibly offend me. 


 

&ldquo;And why should he interest himself at all in my moral and intellectual 
capacities: what is it to him what I think or feel?&rdquo; I asked myself. 


 

And my heart throbbed in answer to the question. 


 

But Jane and Susan Green soon reached their home. As they stood parleying at 
the park-gates, attempting to persuade Miss Murray to come in, I wished Mr 
Weston would go, that she might not see him with me when she turned round; 
but, unfortunately, his business, which was to pay one more visit to poor 
Mark Wood, led him to pursue the same path as we did, till nearly the close 
of our journey. 


 

When, however, he saw that Rosalie had taken leave of 
her friends, and I was about to join her, he would have left me and passed on 
at a quicker pace; but, as he civilly lifted his hat in passing her, to my 
surprise, instead of returning the salute with a stiff, ungracious bow, she 
accosted him with one of her sweetest smiles, and, walking by his side, began 
to talk to him with all imaginable cheerfulness and affability; and so we 
proceeded all three together. 


 

After a short pause in the conversation, Mr Weston made some remark addressed 
particularly to me, as referring to something we had been talking of before; 
but, before I could answer, Miss Murray replied to the observation and 
enlarged upon it: he rejoined; and, from thence to the close of the 
interview, she engrossed him entirely to herself. 


 

It might be partly owing to my own stupidity, my want of tact and assurance; 
but I felt myself wronged; I trembled with apprehension; and I listened with 
envy to her easy, rapid flow of utterance, and saw with anxiety the bright 
smile with which she looked into his face from time to time: for she was 
walking a little in advance for the purpose (as I judged) of being seen as 
well as heard. 


 

If her conversation was light and trivial, it was amusing, and she was never 
at a loss for something to say, or for suitable words to express it in. There 
was nothing pert or flippant in her manner now, as when she walked with Mr 
Hatfield; there was only a gentle, playful kind of vivacity, which I thought 
must be peculiarly pleasing to a man of Mr Weston's disposition and 
temperament. 


 

When he was gone she began to laugh, and muttered to herself. 


 

&ldquo;I thought I could do it!&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Do what?&rdquo; I asked. 


 

&ldquo;Fix that man.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;What in the world do you mean?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I mean that he will go home and dream of me. I have shot him through the 
heart!&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;How do you know?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;By many infallible proofs: more especially the look he gave me when he went 
away. It was not an impudent look&mdash;I exonerate him from 
that&mdash;it was a look of reverential, tender adoration. Ha, ha! he's 
not quite such a stupid blockhead as I thought him!&rdquo; 


 

I made no answer, for my heart was in my throat, or something like it, and I 
could not trust myself to speak. 


 

&ldquo;Oh, God, avert it!&rdquo; I cried internally&mdash;&rdquo;for his sake, not for 
mine!&rdquo; 


 

Miss Murray made several trivial observations as we passed up the park, to 
which, (in spite of my reluctance to let one glimpse of my feelings appear,) 
I could only answer by monosyllables. 


 

Whether she intended to torment me, or merely to amuse herself, I could not 
tell&mdash;and did not much care; but I thought of the poor man and his 
one lamb, and the rich man with his thousand flocks; and I dreaded I knew not 
what for Mr Weston, independently of my own blighted hopes. 


 

Right glad was I to get into the house, and find myself alone once more in my 
own room. My first impulse was to sink into the chair beside the bed, and 
laying my head on the pillow, to seek relief in a passionate burst of tears: 
there was an imperative craving for such an indulgence; but alas! I must 
restrain and swallow back my feelings still: there was the 
bell&mdash;the odious bell for the school-room dinner; and I must go 
down with a calm face, and smile, and laugh, and talk 
nonsense&mdash;yes, and eat, too, if possible, as if all was right, and 
I was just returned from a pleasant walk. 

 
 
 
 Chapter XVI 
 THE SUBSTITUTION 

NEXT Sunday was one of the gloomiest of April days, a day of thick, dark 
clouds, and heavy showers. None of the Murrays were disposed to attend church 
in the afternoon, excepting Rosalie: she was bent upon going as usual; so she 
ordered the carriage, and I went with her, nothing loth of course, for at 
church I might look without fear of scorn or censure upon a form and face 
more pleasing to me than the most beautiful of God's creations; I might 
listen without disturbance to a voice more charming than the sweetest music 
to my ears; I might seem to hold communion with that soul in which I felt so 
deeply interested, and imbibe its purest thoughts and holiest aspirations, 
with no alloy to such felicity, except the secret reproaches of my conscience 
which would too often whisper that I was deceiving my own self, and mocking 
God with the service of a heart more bent upon the creature than the creator. 


 

Sometimes, such thoughts would give me trouble enough; but sometimes I could 
quiet them with thinking, 


 

It is not the man, it is his goodness that I love. 


 

&ldquo;Whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things 
are honest and of good report, think on these things.&rdquo; 


 

We do well to worship God in his works; and I know none of them in which so 
many of his attributes&mdash;so much of his own spirit shines, as in 
this his faithful servant, whom to know and not to appreciate, were obtuse 
insensibility in me, who have so little else to occupy my heart. 


 

Almost immediately after the conclusion of the service, 
 Miss Murray left the church. We had to stand in the porch; for 
it was raining, and the carriage was not yet come. I wondered at her coming 
forth so hastily, for neither young Meltham nor Squire Green was there; but I 
soon found it was to secure an interview with Mr Weston as he came out, which 
he presently did, and, having saluted us both, would have passed on, but she 
detained him; first with observations upon the disagreeable weather, and then 
with asking if he would be so kind as to come some time to-morrow to see the 
granddaughter of the old woman who kept the porter's lodge, for the girl was 
ill of a fever, and wished to see him. He promised to do so. 


 

&ldquo;And at what time will you be most likely to come, Mr Weston? The old woman 
will like to know when to expect you&mdash;you know such people think 
more about having their cottages in order when decent people come to see them 
than we are apt to suppose.&rdquo; 


 

Here was a wonderful instance of consideration from the thoughtless Miss 
Murray. 


 

Mr Weston named an hour in the morning at which he would endeavour to be 
there. By this time the carriage was ready, and the footman was waiting, with 
an open umbrella, to escort Miss Murray through the churchyard. I was about 
to follow; but Mr Weston had an umbrella too, and offered me the benefit of 
its shelter, for it was raining heavily. 


 

&ldquo;No, thank you, I don't mind the rain,&rdquo; I said. 


 

I always lacked common sense when taken by surprise. 


 

&ldquo;But you don't like it, I suppose?&mdash;an umbrella will do you 
no harm at any rate,&rdquo; he replied, with a smile that showed he was not 
offended, as a man of worse temper or less penetration would have been at 
such a refusal of his aid. 


 

I could not deny the truth of his assertion, and so went with him to the 
carriage; he even offered me his hand on 
getting in, 
an unnecessary piece of civility, but I accepted that too for fear of giving 
offence. One glance he gave, one little smile at parting&mdash;it was 
but for a moment, but therein I read, or thought I read a meaning that 
kindled in my heart a brighter flame of hope than had ever yet arisen. 


 

&ldquo;I would have sent the footman back for you, Miss Grey, if you'd waited a 
moment&mdash;you needn't to have taken Mr Weston's umbrella,&rdquo; observed 
Rosalie, with a very unamiable cloud upon her pretty face. 


 

&ldquo;I would have come without an umbrella, but Mr Weston offered me the benefit 
of his and I could not have refused it, more than I did, without offending 
him,&rdquo; replied I, smiling placidly, for my inward happiness made that amusing, 
which would have wounded me at another time. 


 

The carriage was now in motion. Miss Murray bent forwards, and looked out of 
the window as we were passing Mr Weston. He was pacing homewards along the 
causeway, and did not turn his head. 


 

&ldquo;Stupid ass!&rdquo; cried she, throwing herself back again in the seat. &ldquo;You don't 
know what you've lost by not looking this way!&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;What has he lost?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;A bow from me, that would have raised him to the seventh heaven!&rdquo; 


 

I made no answer. I saw she was out of humour, and I derived a secret 
gratification from the fact; not that she was vexed, but that she thought she 
had reason to be so. It made me think my hopes were not entirely the 
offspring of my wishes and imaginations. 


 

&ldquo;I mean to take up Mr Weston instead of Mr Hatfield,&rdquo; said my companion after 
a short pause, resuming something of her usual cheerfulness. &ldquo;The ball at 
Ashby Park takes place on Tuesday you know; and mama thinks it very likely 
that Sir Thomas will propose to me then&mdash;such things are 
 often done in the privacy of the ball-room, when gentlemen are 
most easily ensnared, and ladies most enchanting. But if I am to be married 
so soon, I must make the best of the present time: I am determined Hatfield 
shall not be the only man who shall lay his heart at my feet, and implore me 
to accept the worthless gift in vain.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;If you mean Mr Weston to be one of your victims,&rdquo; said I, with affected 
indifference, &ldquo;you will have to make such overtures yourself, that you will 
find it difficult to draw back when he asks you to fulfil the expectations 
you have raised.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I don't suppose he will ask me to marry him&mdash;nor should I 
desire it ... that would be rather too much presumption! but I intend 
him to feel my power&mdash;he has felt it already, 
indeed&mdash;but he shall acknowledge it too; and what visionary 
hopes he may have, he must keep to himself, and only amuse me with the result 
of them&mdash;for a time.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Oh! that some kind spirit would whisper those words in his ear!&rdquo; I inwardly 
exclaimed. I was far too indignant to hazard a reply to her observation 
aloud; and nothing more was said about Mr Weston that day, by me or in my 
hearing. 


 

But next morning, soon after breakfast, Miss Murray came into the school-room 
where her sister was employed with me at her studies ... or rather her 
lessons, for studies they were not ... and said, 


 

&ldquo;Matilda, I want you to take a walk with me about eleven o'clock.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Oh, I can't, Rosalie! I have to give orders about my new bridle and 
saddle-cloth, and speak to the rat-catcher about his dogs ... Miss Grey must 
go with you.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;No, I want you, &rdquo; said Rosalie; and calling her sister to the window, 
she whispered an explanation in her ear, upon which the latter consented to 
go. 


 

I remembered that eleven was the hour at which Mr Weston proposed to come to 
the porter's lodge; and remembering that, I beheld the whole contrivance. 


 

Accordingly, at dinner, I was entertained with a long account of how Mr 
Weston had overtaken them as they were walking along the road; and how they 
had had a long walk and talk with him, and really found him quite an 
agreeable companion; and how he must have been, and evidently was, delighted 
with them and their amazing condescension, &amp;c., &amp;c. 

 
 
 
 Chapter XVII 
 CONFESSIONS 

AS I am in the way of confessions, I may as well acknowledge that, about this 
time, I paid more attention to dress than ever I had done before ... this is 
not saying much, for hitherto I had been a little neglectful in that 
particular ... but now, also, it was no uncommon thing to spend as much as 
two minutes in the contemplation of my own image in the glass; though I never 
could derive any consolation from such a study: I could discover no beauty in 
those marked features, that pale hollow cheek, and ordinary dark brown hair; 
there might be intellect in the forehead, there might be expression in the 
dark grey eyes, but what of that? ... a low Grecian brow and large black eyes 
devoid of sentiment would be esteemed far preferable. 


 

It is foolish to wish for beauty. Sensible people never either desire it for 
themselves or care about it in others. If the mind be but well cultivated, 
and the heart well disposed, no one ever cares for the exterior. 


 

So said the teachers of our childhood; and so say we to the children of the 
present day. All very judicious and proper no doubt; but are such assertions 
supported by actual experience? 


 

We are naturally disposed to love what gives us pleasure, and what more 
pleasing than a beautiful face ... when we know no harm of the possessor at 
least? A little girl loves her bird ... Why? ... Because it lives and feels, 
because it is helpless and harmless. A toad, likewise, lives and feels, and 
is equally helpless and harmless; but though she would not hurt a toad, she 
cannot love it like the bird with 
its graceful form, 
soft feathers, and bright, speaking eyes. If a woman is fair and amiable, she 
is praised for both qualities, but especially the former, by the bulk of 
mankind: if, on the other hand, she is disagreeable in person and character, 
her plainness is commonly inveighed against as her greatest crime, because to 
common observers, it gives the greatest offence; while, if she is plain and 
good, provided she is a person of retired manners and secluded life, no one 
ever knows of her goodness, except her immediate connections; others, on the 
contrary, are disposed to form unfavourable opinions of her mind and 
disposition, if it be but to excuse themselves for their instinctive dislike 
of one so unfavoured by nature; and vice versa with her whose angel 
form conceals a vicious heart, or sheds a false, deceitful charm over defects 
and foibles that would not be tolerated in another. 


 

They that have beauty, let them be thankful for it, and make a good use of 
it, like any other talent: they that have it not, let them console 
themselves, and do the best they can without it&mdash;certainly, though 
liable to be over-estimated, it is a gift of God, and not to be despised. 
Many will feel this, who have felt that they could love, and whose hearts 
tell them that they are worthy to be loved again, while yet they are 
debarred, by the lack of this, or some such seeming trifle from giving and 
receiving that happiness they seem almost made to feel and to impart. As well 
might the humble glow-worm despise that power of giving light, without which, 
the roving fly might pass her and repass her a thousand times, and never 
light beside her: she might hear her winged darling buzzing over and around 
her; he vainly seeking her, she longing to be found, but with no power to 
make her presence known, no voice to call him, no wings to follow his flight; 
... the fly must seek another mate, the worm must live and die alone. 


 

Such were some of my reflections about this period. I might go on prosing 
more and more, I might dive much deeper, and disclose other thoughts, propose 
questions the reader might be puzzled to answer, and deduce arguments that 
might startle his prejudices, or perhaps provoke his ridicule, because he 
could not comprehend them; but I forbear. 


 

Now, therefore, let us return to Miss Murray. She accompanied her mama to the 
ball on Tuesday; of course, splendidly attired, and delighted with her 
prospects and her charms. As Ashby Park was nearly ten miles distant from 
Horton Lodge, they had to set out pretty early, and I intended to have spent 
the evening with Nancy Brown, whom I had not seen for a long time; but my 
kind pupil took care I should spend it neither there nor anywhere else beyond 
the limits of the school-room by giving me a piece of music to copy, which 
kept me closely occupied till bed-time. 


 

About eleven next morning, as soon as she had left her room, she came to tell 
me her news. Sir Thomas had indeed proposed to her at the ball, an event 
which reflected great credit on her mama's sagacity, if not upon her skill in 
contrivance; I rather incline to the belief that she had first laid her 
plans, and then predicted their success. 


 

The offer had been accepted of course, and the bridegroom elect was coming 
that day to settle matters with Mr Murray. 


 

Rosalie was pleased with the thoughts of becoming mistress of Ashby Park; she 
was elated with the prospect of the bridal ceremony and its attendant 
splendour and eclat, the honey-moon spent abroad, and the subsequent gaieties 
she expected to enjoy in London and elsewhere; she appeared pretty well 
pleased too, for the time being, with Sir Thomas himself, because she had so 
lately seen him, danced with him, and been flattered by him; but, after all, 
she seemed to 
shrink from the idea of being so soon 
united: she wished the ceremony to be delayed some months, at least; and I 
wished it too. It seemed a horrible thing to hurry on the inauspicious match, 
and not to give the poor creature time to think and reason on the irrevocable 
step she was about to take. I made no pretension to &ldquo;a mother's watchful, 
anxious care,&rdquo; but I was amazed and horrified at Mrs Murray's heartlessness, 
or want of thought for the real good of her child; and, by my unheeded 
warnings and exhortations, I vainly strove to remedy the evil. Miss Murray 
only laughed at what I said; and I soon found that her reluctance to an 
immediate union arose chiefly from a desire to do what execution she could 
among the young gentlemen of her acquaintance before she was incapacitated 
from further mischief of the kind. It was for this cause that, before 
confiding to me the secret of her engagement, she had extracted a promise 
that I would not mention a word on the subject to any one. And when I saw 
this, and when I beheld her plunge more recklessly than ever into the depths 
of heartless coquetry, I had no more pity for her. 


 

&ldquo;Come what will,&rdquo; I thought, &ldquo;she deserves it. Sir Thomas cannot be too bad 
for her; and the sooner she is incapacitated from deceiving and injuring 
others the better.&rdquo; 


 

The wedding was fixed for the first of June. Between that and the critical 
ball was little more than six weeks; but, with Rosalie's accomplished skill 
and resolute exertion, much might be done, even within that period, 
especially as Sir Thomas spent most of the interim in London, whither he went 
up, it was said, to settle affairs with his lawyer, and make other 
preparations for the approaching nuptials. 


 

He endeavoured to supply the want of his presence by a pretty constant fire 
of billets-doux; but these did not attract the neighbours' attention, and 
open their eyes as personal visits would have done; and old Lady Ashby's 
haughty, 
sour spirit of reserve withheld her from 
spreading the news, while her indifferent health prevented her coming to 
visit her future daughter-in-law; so that, altogether, this affair was kept 
far closer than such things usually are. 


 

Rosalie would sometimes show her lover's epistles to me to convince me what a 
kind, devoted husband he would make. She shewed me the letters of another 
individual too, the unfortunate Mr Green, who had not the courage, or, as she 
expressed it, the &ldquo;spunk&rdquo; to plead his cause in person, but whom one denial 
would not satisfy; he must write again and again. 


 

He would not have done so if he could have seen the grimaces his fair idol 
made over his moving appeals to her feelings, and heard her scornful 
laughter, and the opprobrious epithets she heaped upon him for his 
perseverance. 


 

&ldquo;Why don't you tell him, at once, that you are engaged?&rdquo; I asked. 


 

&ldquo;Oh, I don't want him to know that!&rdquo; replied she. &ldquo;If he knew it, his sisters 
and everybody would know it, and then there would be an end of 
my&mdash;ahem&mdash;And besides, if I told him that, he would 
think my engagement was the only obstacle, and that I would have him if I 
were free, which I could not bear that any man should think, and he, of all 
others, at least. Besides, I don't care for his letters,&rdquo; she added, 
contemptuously; &ldquo;he may write as often as he pleases, and look as great a 
calf as he likes when I meet him; it only amuses me.&rdquo; 


 

Meantime, young Meltham was pretty frequent in his visits to the house or 
transits past it; and, judging by Matilda's execrations and reproaches, her 
sister paid more attention to him than civility required&mdash;in other 
words she carried on as animated a flirtation as the presence of her parents 
would admit. 


 

She made some attempts to bring Mr Hatfield once more 
to her feet; but finding them unsuccessful, she repaid his haughty 
indifference with still loftier scorn, and spoke of him with as much disdain 
and detestation as she had formerly done of his curate. 


 

But, amid all this, she never for a moment lost sight of Mr Weston. She 
embraced every opportunity of meeting him, tried every art to fascinate him, 
and pursued him with as much perseverance as if she really loved 
him&mdash;and no other, and the happiness of her life depended upon 
eliciting a return of affection. Such conduct was completely beyond my 
comprehension. Had I seen it depicted in a novel I should have thought it 
unnatural; had I heard it described by others, I should have deemed it a 
mistake or an exaggeration; but when I saw it with my own eyes, and suffered 
from it too, I could only conclude that excessive vanity, like drunkenness, 
hardens the heart, enslaves the faculties, and perverts the feelings, and 
that dogs are not the only creatures which, when gorged to the throat, will 
yet gloat over what they cannot devour, and grudge the smallest morsel to a 
starving brother. 


 

She now became extremely beneficent to the poor cottagers. Her acquaintance 
among them was more widely extended, her visits to their humble dwellings 
were more frequent and excursive than they had ever been before. Hereby she 
earned among them the reputation of a condescending and very charitable young 
lady; and their encomiums were sure to be repeated to Mr Weston, whom also, 
she had, thus, a daily chance of meeting in one or other of their abodes, or 
in her transits to and fro; and often, likewise, she could gather, through 
their gossip, to what places he was likely to go at such and such a time, 
whether to baptize a child, or to visit the aged, the sick, the sad, or the 
dying; and most skilfully she laid her plans accordingly. 


 

In these excursions she would sometimes go with her sister, whom, by some 
means, she had persuaded or bribed to enter into her schemes, sometimes 
alone, never, now, with me; so that I was debarred the pleasure of seeing Mr 
Weston, or hearing his voice, even in conversation with another, which would 
certainly have been a very great pleasure, however hurtful or however fraught 
with pain. 


 

I could not even see him at church, for Miss Murray, under some trivial 
pretext, chose to take possession of that corner in the family pew, which had 
been mine ever since I came; and, unless I had the presumption to station 
myself between Mr and Mrs Murray, I must sit with my back to the pulpit, 
which I accordingly did. 


 

Now, also, I never walked home with my pupils: they said their mama thought 
it did not look well to see three people out of the family walking, and only 
two going in the carriage; and, as they greatly preferred walking in fine 
weather, I should be honoured by going with the seniors. 


 

&ldquo;And, besides,&rdquo; said they, &ldquo;you can't walk as fast as we do; you know you're 
always lagging behind.&rdquo; 


 

I knew these were false excuses, but I made no objections, and never 
contradicted such assertions, well knowing the motives which dictated them. 


 

And in the afternoons, during those six memorable weeks, I never went to 
church at all. If I had a cold, or any slight indisposition, they took 
advantage of that to make me stay at home; and often they would tell me they 
were not going again that day, themselves, and then pretend to change their 
minds, and set off without telling me, so managing their departure that I 
never discovered the change of purpose till too late. 


 

Upon their return home, on one of these occasions, they entertained me with 
an animated account of a conversation they had had with Mr Weston as they 
came along. 


 

&ldquo;And he asked if you were ill, Miss Grey,&rdquo; said Matilda; 
 &ldquo;but we told him you were quite well, only you didn't want to 
come to church&mdash;so he'll think you're turned wicked.&rdquo; 


 

All chance meetings on week-days were likewise carefully prevented; for, lest 
I should go to see poor Nancy Brown or any other person, Miss Murray took 
good care to provide sufficient employment for all my leisure hours. There 
was always some drawing to finish, some music to copy, or some work to do, 
sufficient to incapacitate me from indulging in anything beyond a short walk 
about the grounds, however she or her sister might be occupied. 


 

One morning, having sought and waylaid Mr Weston, they returned in high glee 
to give me an account of their interview. 


 

&ldquo;And he asked after you again,&rdquo; said Matilda, in spite of her sister's 
silent, but imperative intimation that she should hold her tongue. &ldquo;He 
wondered why you were never with us, and thought you must have delicate 
health as you came out so seldom.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;He didn't, Matilda&mdash;what nonsense you're talking!&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Oh, Rosalie, what a lie! He did, you know; and you said&mdash;Don't 
Rosalie&mdash;hang it!&mdash;I won't be pinched so! And, Miss 
Grey, Rosalie
 told him you were quite well, but you were always so buried in 
your books that you had no pleasure in anything else.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;What an idea he must have of me!&rdquo; I thought. 


 

&ldquo;And,&rdquo; I asked, &ldquo;does old Nancy ever inquire about me?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Yes, and we tell her you are so fond of reading and drawing that you can do 
nothing else.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;That is not the case though; if you had told her I was so busy I 
 could not come to see her, it would have been nearer the truth.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I don't think it would,&rdquo; replied Miss Murray, suddenly kindling up; &ldquo;I'm 
sure you've plenty of time to yourself now, when you have so little teaching 
to do.&rdquo; 


 

It was no use beginning to dispute with such indulged, 
 unreasoning creatures; so l held my peace. I was accustomed, 
now, to keeping silence when things distasteful to my ear were uttered; and 
now, too, I was used to wearing a placid smiling countenance when my heart 
was bitter within me. Only those who have felt the like can imagine my 
feelings, as I sat with an assumption of smiling indifference, listening to 
the accounts of those meetings and interviews with Mr Weston, which they 
seemed to find such pleasure in describing to me, and hearing things asserted 
of him which, from the character of the man, I knew to be exaggerations and 
perversions of the truth, if not entirely false&mdash;things derogatory 
to him and flattering to them&mdash;especially to Miss 
Murray&mdash;which I burned to contradict, or, at least, to show my 
doubts about, but dared not, lest, in expressing my disbelief, I should 
display my interest too. 


 

Other things I heard, which I felt or feared were indeed too true; but I must 
still conceal my anxiety respecting him, in indignation against them beneath 
a careless aspect; others again&mdash;mere hints of something said or 
done, which I longed to hear more of&mdash;but could not venture to 
inquire. 


 

So passed the weary time. I could not even comfort myself with saying, &ldquo;She 
will soon be married; and then, there may be hope.&rdquo; 


 

Soon after her marriage the holidays would come; and when I returned from 
home, most likely, Mr Weston would be gone, for, I was told that he and the 
rector could not agree, (the rector's fault, of course,) and he was about to 
remove to another place. 


 

No&mdash;besides my hope in God, my only consolation was in thinking 
that, though he knew it not, I was more worthy of his love than Rosalie 
Murray, charming and engaging as she was; for I could appreciate his 
excellence, which she could not; I would devote my life to the promotion of 
his happiness; she would destroy his happiness for the momentary 
gratification of her own vanity. 


 

&ldquo;Oh, if he could but know the difference!&rdquo; I would earnestly exclaim. &ldquo;But 
no! I would not have him see my heart&mdash;yet, if he could but know 
her hollowness, her worthless, heartless frivolity&mdash;he would then 
be safe, and I should be&mdash; almost happy, though I might 
never see him more!&rdquo; 


 

I fear, by this time, the reader is well nigh disgusted with the folly and 
weakness I have so freely laid before him. I never disclosed it then, and 
would not have done so had my own sister or my mother been with me in the 
house. 


 

I was a close and resolute dissembler&mdash;in this one case at least. 
My prayers, my tears, my wishes, fears, and lamentations were witnessed by 
myself and Heaven alone. 


 

When we are harassed by sorrows or anxieties, or long oppressed by any 
powerful feelings which we must keep to ourselves, for which we can obtain 
and seek no sympathy from any living creature, and which, yet, we cannot, or 
will not wholly crush, we often, naturally, seek relief in 
poetry&mdash;and often find it too&mdash;whether in the effusions 
of others, which seem to harmonize with our existing case, or in our own 
attempts to give utterance to those thoughts and feelings in strains less 
musical, perchance, but more appropriate, and, therefore more penetrating and 
sympathetic, and, for the time, more soothing, or more powerful to rouse and 
to unburden the oppressed and swollen heart. 


 

Before this time, at Wellwood House and here, when suffering from home-sick 
melancholy, I had sought relief twice or thrice at this secret source of 
consolation; and now I flew to it again, with greater avidity than ever, 
because I seemed to need it more. I still preserve those relics of past 
sufferings and experience, like pillars of witness set up, in travelling 
through the vale of life, to mark particular occurrences. 


 

The footsteps are obliterated now; the face of the country may be changed, 
but the pillar is still there to remind me how all things were when it was 
reared. 


 

Lest the reader should be curious to see any of these effusions, I will 
favour him with one short specimen: cold and languid as the lines may seem, 
it was almost a passion of grief to which they owed their being. 


 

 &ldquo;O, they have robbed me of the hope My spirit held so dear; They will not let me hear that voice My soul delights to hear. They will not let me see that face I so delight to see; And they have taken all thy smiles, And all thy love from me. Well, let them seize on all they can;&mdash; One treasure still is mine,&mdash; A heart that loves to think on thee, And feels the worth of thine. 



 

Yes! at least, they could not deprive me of that; I could think of him day 
and night; and I could feel that he was worthy to be thought of. Nobody knew 
him as I did; nobody could appreciate him as I did; nobody could love him as 
I ... could, if I might; but there was the evil. What business had I to think 
so much of one that never thought of me? Was it not foolish? ... was it not 
wrong? 


 

Yet, if I found such deep delight in thinking of him, and if I kept those 
thoughts to myself, and troubled no one else with them, where was the harm of 
it? I would ask myself. 


 

And such reasoning prevented me from making any sufficient effort to shake 
off my fetters. 


 

But, if those thoughts brought delight, it was a painful, troubled pleasure, 
too near akin to anguish; and one that did me more injury than I was aware 
of. It was an indulgence 
that a person of more wisdom 
or more experience would doubtless have denied herself. 


 

And yet ... how dreary to turn my eyes from the contemplation of that bright 
object, and force them to dwell on the dull, grey, desolate prospect around, 
the joyless, hopeless, solitary path that lay before me. 


 

It was wrong to be so joyless, so desponding; I should have made God my 
friend, and to do His will the pleasure and the business of my life; but 
Faith was weak, and Passion was too strong. 


 

In this time of trouble I had two other causes of affliction. The first may 
seem a trifle, but it cost me many a tear: Snap, my little dumb, 
rough-visaged, but bright-eyed, warmhearted companion, the only thing I had 
to love me, was taken away, and delivered over to the tender mercies of the 
village ratcatcher, a man notorious for his brutal treatment of his canine 
slaves. 


 

The other was serious enough: my letters from home gave intimation that my 
father's health was worse. No boding fears were expressed, but I was grown 
timid and despondent, and could not help fearing that some dreadful calamity 
awaited us there. I seemed to see the black clouds gathering round my native 
hills, and to hear the angry muttering of a storm that was about to burst, 
and desolate our hearth. 

 
 
 
 Chapter XVIII 
 MIRTH AND MOURNING 

THE first of June arrived at last; and Rosalie Murray was transmuted into 
Lady Ashby. Most splendidly beautiful she looked in her bridal costume. 


 

Upon her return from church after the ceremony, she came flying into the 
school-room, flushed with excitement, and laughing ... half in mirth, and 
half in reckless desperation ... as it seemed to me. 


 

&ldquo;Now, Miss Grey, I'm Lady Ashby!&rdquo; she exclaimed. &ldquo;It's done ... my fate is 
sealed! ... there's no drawing back now! I'm come to receive your 
congratulations, and bid you good bye; and then I'm off ... for Paris ... 
Rome ... Naples ... Switzerland ... London ... Oh, dear! what a deal I shall 
see and hear before I come back again! But don't forget me; I shan't forget 
you, though I've been a naughty girl. Come! why don't you congratulate me?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I cannot congratulate you,&rdquo; I replied, &ldquo;till I know whether this change is 
really for the better; but I sincerely hope it is; and I wish you true 
happiness and the best of blessings.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Well, good-bye&mdash;the carriage is waiting, and they're calling me.&rdquo; 


 

She gave me a hasty kiss, and was hurrying away, but, suddenly returning, 
embraced me with more affection than I thought her capable of evincing, and 
departed with tears in her eyes. 


 

Poor girl! I really loved her then; and forgave her from my heart, all the 
injury she had done me&mdash;and others also; 
she had not half known it, I was sure; and I prayed God to pardon her too. 


 

During the remainder of that day of festal sadness, I was left to my own 
devices. Being too much unhinged for any steady occupation, I wandered about 
with a book in my hand for several hours&mdash;more thinking than 
reading, for I had many things to think about; and in the evening I made use 
of my liberty to go and see my old friend Nancy once again; to apologize for 
my long absence, which must have seemed so neglectful and unkind, by telling 
her how busy I had been, and to talk, or read, or work for her, whichever 
might be most acceptable; and also of course, to tell her the news of this 
important day, and perhaps to obtain a little information from her in return, 
respecting Mr Weston's expected departure. But of this, she seemed to know 
nothing, and I hoped, as she did, that it was all a false report. 


 

She was very glad to see me; but, happily, her eyes were now so nearly well 
that she was almost independent of my services. She was deeply interested in 
the wedding; but while I amused her with the details of the festive day, the 
splendours of the bridal party and of the bride herself, she often sighed and 
shook her head, and wished good might come of it: she seemed like me to 
regard it rather as a theme for sorrow than rejoicing. I sat a long time 
talking to her about that and other things;&mdash;but no one 
came. 


 

Shall I confess&mdash;that I sometimes looked towards the door with a 
half expectant wish to see it open and give entrance to Mr Weston, as had 
happened once before? and that, returning through the lanes and fields, I 
often paused to look round me, and walked more slowly than was at all 
necessary&mdash;for, though a fine evening, it was not a hot 
one&mdash;and, finally, felt a sense of emptiness and disappointment at 
having reached the house without meeting or even catching 
a distant glimpse of any one, except a few labourers 
returning from their work? 


 

Sunday however was approaching: I should see him then; for now that Miss 
Murray was gone, I could have my old corner again&mdash;I should see 
him; and by look, speech, and manner I might judge whether the circumstance 
of her marriage had very much afflicted him. 


 

Happily I could perceive no shadow of a difference: he wore the same aspect 
as he had worn two months ago&mdash;voice, look, manner&mdash;all 
alike unchanged: there was the same keen-sighted, unclouded truthfulness in 
his discourse, the same forcible clearness in his style, the same earnest 
simplicity in all he said and did, that made itself, not marked by the eye 
and ear, but felt upon the hearts of his audience. 


 

I walked home with Miss Matilda; but he did not join us. Matilda was 
now sadly at a loss for amusement, and woefully in want of a companion. Her 
brothers at school&mdash;her sister married and gone&mdash;she 
too young to be admitted into society; for which, from Rosalie's example, she 
was in some degree beginning to acquire a taste&mdash;a taste at least 
for the company of certain classes of gentlemen&mdash;at this dull time 
of year&mdash;no hunting going on ... no shooting even ... for, though 
she might not join in that, it was something to see her father or the 
gamekeeper go out with the dogs, and to talk with them, on their return, 
about the different birds they had bagged. Now also she was denied the solace 
which the companionship of the coachman, grooms, horses, greyhounds and 
pointers might have afforded; for her mother, having notwithstanding the 
disadvantages of a country life so satisfactorily disposed of her elder 
daughter, the pride of her heart, had begun seriously to turn her attention 
to the younger, and being truly alarmed at the roughness of her manners, and 
thinking it high time to work a reform, had been roused at length to exert 
her authority, and prohibited 
entirely, the yards, 
stables, kennels, and coach-house. Of course, she was not implicitly obeyed; 
but indulgent as she had hitherto been, when once her spirit was roused, her 
temper was not so gentle as she required that of her governesses to be, and 
her will was not to be thwarted with impunity; and after many a scene of 
contention between mother and daughter, many a violent outbreak which I was 
ashamed to witness, in which the father's authority was often called in to 
confirm, with oaths and threats, the mother's slighted prohibitions ... for 
even he could see that &ldquo;Tilly, though she would have made a fine lad, 
was not quite what a young lady ought to be&rdquo;&mdash;Matilda at length 
found that her easiest plan was to keep clear of the forbidden regions, 
unless she could now and then steal a visit without her watchful mother's 
knowledge. 


 

Amid all this, let it not be imagined that I escaped without many a 
reprimand, and many an implied reproach that lost none of its sting from not 
being openly worded, but rather wounded the more deeply, because from that 
very reason, it seemed to preclude self-defence. Frequently, I was told to 
amuse Miss Matilda with other things, and to remind her of her 
mother's precepts and prohibitions. I did so to the best of my power; but she 
could not be amused against her will and could not against her taste, and 
though I went beyond mere reminding, such gentle remonstrances as I could use 
were utterly ineffectual. 


 

&ldquo; Dear Miss Grey! it is the strangest thing. I suppose you can't 
help it, if it's not in your nature&mdash;but I wonder you can't 
win the confidence of that girl, and make your society at least as 
agreeable to her as that of Robert or Joseph!&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;They can talk the best about the things in which she is most interested,&rdquo; I 
replied. 


 

&ldquo;Well! that is a strange confession however, to come from her 
 governess! Who is to form a young lady's tastes, I wonder, 
if the governess doesn't do it? I have known 
governesses who have so completely identified themselves with the reputation 
of their young ladies for elegance and propriety in mind and manners, that 
they would blush to speak a word against them; and to hear the 
slightest blame imputed to their pupils was worse than to be censured in 
their own persons,&mdash;and I really think it very natural for my 
part.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Do you, ma'am?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Yes: of course, the young lady's proficiency and elegance is of more 
consequence to the governess than her own, as well as to the world. If she 
wishes to prosper in her vocation she must devote all her energies to her 
business; all her ideas and all her ambition will tend to the accomplishment 
of that one object. When we wish to decide upon the merits of a governess, we 
naturally look at the young ladies she professes to have educated, and judge 
accordingly. The judicious governess knows this: she knows that, while 
she lives in obscurity herself, her pupil's virtues and defects will be open 
to every eye, and, that unless she loses sight of herself in their 
cultivation, she need not hope for success. You see, Miss Grey, it is just 
the same as any other trade or profession; they that wish to prosper must 
devote themselves body and soul to their calling, and if they begin to yield 
to indolence or self-indulgence they are speedily distanced by wiser 
competitors: there is little to choose between a person that ruins her pupils 
by neglect, and one that corrupts them by her example. You will excuse my 
dropping these little hints ... you know it is all for your own good. Many 
ladies would speak to you much more strongly; and many would not trouble 
themselves to speak at all, but quietly look out for a substitute. That, of 
course would be the easiest plan; but I know the advantages of a place 
like this to a person in your situation; and I have no desire to part with 
you, as I am sure you would do very well 
if you will 
only think of these things and try to exert yourself a little more; 
and then, I am convinced, you would soon acquire that delicate tact 
which alone is wanting to give you a proper influence over the mind of your 
pupil.&rdquo; 


 

I was about to give the lady some idea of the fallacy of her expectations; 
but she sailed away as soon as she had concluded her speech. Having said what 
she wished, it was no part of her plan to wait my answer: it was my business 
to hear, and not to speak. 


 

However, as I have said, Matilda at length yielded, in some degree, to her 
mother's authority (pity it had not been exerted before), and being thus 
deprived of almost every source of amusement, there was nothing for it but to 
take long rides with the groom and long walks with the governess, and to 
visit the cottages and farm-houses on her father's estate, to kill time in 
chatting with the old men and women that inhabited them. 


 

In one of these walks, it was our chance to meet Mr Weston. This was what I 
had long desired; but now, for a moment, I wished either he or I were away: I 
felt my heart throb so violently that I dreaded lest some outward signs of 
emotion should appear; but I think he hardly glanced at me, and I was soon 
calm enough. After a brief salutation to both, he asked Matilda if she had 
lately heard from her sister. 


 

&ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; replied she. &ldquo;She was at Paris when she wrote, and very well, and very 
happy.&rdquo; 


 

She spoke the last word emphatically, and with a glance impertinently sly. He 
did not seem to notice it, but replied, with equal emphasis, and very 
seriously, 


 

&ldquo;I hope she will continue to be so.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Do you think it likely?&rdquo; I ventured to inquire, for Matilda had started off 
in pursuit of her dog that was chasing a leveret. 


 

&ldquo;I cannot tell,&rdquo; replied he. &ldquo;Sir Thomas may be a better man than I may 
suppose, but, from all I have heard and 
seen, it 
seems a pity that one so young, and gay, and ... and interesting, to 
express many things by one ... whose greatest, if not her only fault, appears 
to be thoughtlessness ... no trifling fault to be sure, since it renders the 
possessor liable to almost every other, and exposes him to so many 
temptations; but it seems a pity that she should be thrown away on such a 
man. It was her mother's wish, I suppose?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Yes; and her own too, I think, for she always laughed at my attempts to 
dissuade her from the step.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;You did attempt it? Then, at least, you will have the satisfaction of 
knowing that it is no fault of yours, if any harm should come of it; as for 
Mrs Murray, I don't know how she can justify her conduct; if I had sufficient 
acquaintance with her I'd ask her.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;It seems unnatural; but some people think rank and wealth the chief good; 
and, if they can secure that to their children, they think they have done 
their duty.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;True; but is it not strange that persons of experience who have been married 
themselves should judge so falsely?&rdquo; 


 

Matilda now came panting back, with the lacerated body of the young hare in 
her hand. 


 

&ldquo;Was it your intention to kill that hare, or to save it, Miss Murray?&rdquo; asked 
Mr Weston, apparently puzzled at her gleeful countenance. 


 

&ldquo;I pretended to want to save it,&rdquo; she answered, honestly enough, &ldquo;as it was 
so glaringly out of season; but I was better pleased to see it killed. 
However, you can both witness that I couldn't help it; Prince was determined 
to have her; and he clutched her by the back, and killed her in a minute! 
Wasn't it a noble chase?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Very! for a young lady after a leveret.&rdquo; 


 

There was a quiet sarcasm in the tone of his reply which was not lost upon 
her; she shrugged her shoulders, and, turning away with a significant 
&ldquo;Humph!&rdquo; asked me how I had enjoyed the fun. 


 

I replied that I saw no fun in the matter; but admitted that I had not 
observed the transaction very narrowly. 


 

&ldquo;Didn't you see how it doubled&mdash;just like an old hare? and didn't 
you hear it scream?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I'm happy to say I did not.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;It cried out just like a child.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Poor little thing! What will you do with it?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Come along&mdash;I shall leave it in the first house we come 
to&mdash;I don't want to take it home, for fear papa should scold me 
for letting the dog kill it.&rdquo; 


 

Mr Weston was now gone, and we too went on our way; but as we returned, after 
having deposited the hare in a farmhouse, and demolished some spice cake and 
currant wine in exchange, we met him returning also from the execution of his 
mission, whatever it might be. He carried in his hand a cluster of beautiful 
bluebells which he offered to me, observing, with a smile, that though he had 
seen so little of me for the last two months, he had not forgotten that 
bluebells were numbered among my favourite flowers. 


 

It was done as a simple act of good will, without compliment, or remarkable 
courtesy, or any look that could be construed into &ldquo;reverential, tender 
adoration&rdquo; (vide Rosalie Murray); but still, it was something to find my 
unimportant saying so well remembered; it was something that he had noticed 
so accurately the time I had ceased to be visible. 


 

&ldquo;I was told,&rdquo; said he, &ldquo;that you were a perfect book-worm, Miss Grey, so 
completely absorbed in your studies that you were lost to every other 
pleasure.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Yes, and it's quite true!&rdquo; cried Matilda. 


 

&ldquo;No, Mr Weston; don't believe it; it's a scandalous libel. These young ladies 
are too fond of making random assertions at the expense of their friends; and 
you ought to be careful how you listen to them.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I hope this assertion is groundless, at any rate.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Why? Do you particularly object to ladies studying?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;No; but I object to any one so devoting himself or herself to study as to 
lose sight of everything else. Except under peculiar circumstances, I 
consider very close and constant study as a waste of time, and an injury to 
the mind as well as the body.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Well, I have neither the time nor the inclination for such transgressions.&rdquo; 


 

We parted again. 


 

Well! what is there remarkable in all this? Why have I recorded it? Because, 
reader, it was important enough to give me a cheerful evening, a night of 
pleasing dreams, and a morning of felicitous hopes. Shallow-brained 
cheerfulness&mdash;foolish dreams&mdash;unfounded 
hopes&mdash;you would say; and I will not venture to deny it: suspicion 
to that effect arose too frequently in my own mind; but our wishes are like 
tinder: the flint and steel of circumstances are continually striking out 
sparks, which vanish immediately, unless they chance to fall upon the tinder 
of our wishes; then they instantly ignite, and the flame of hope is kindled 
in a moment. 


 

But alas! that very morning, my flickering flame of hope was dismally 
quenched by a letter from my mother, which spoke so seriously of my father's 
increasing illness, that I feared there was little or no chance of his 
recovery; and, close at hand as the holidays were, I almost trembled lest 
they should come too late for me to meet him in this world. Two days after, a 
letter from Mary told me his life was despaired of, and his end seemed fast 
approaching. 


 

Then, immediately, I sought permission to anticipate the vacation, and go 
without delay. 


 

Mrs Murray stared, and wondered at the unwonted energy and boldness with 
which I urged the request, and thought there was no occasion to hurry; but 
finally gave me leave, stating, however, that there was &ldquo;no need to be in 
such agitation about the matter&mdash;it might prove a false alarm 
after all; and if not&mdash;why, it was only in the common 
 course of nature; we must all die some time; and I was not to 
suppose myself the only afflicted person in the world;&rdquo; and concluded with 
saying I might have the phaeton to take me to O&mdash;. 


 

&ldquo;And instead of repining, Miss Grey, be thankful for the 
 privileges you enjoy. There's many a poor clergyman whose family would 
be plunged into ruin by the event of his death; but you, you see, have 
influential friends ready to continue their patronage, and to show you every 
consideration.&rdquo; 


 

I thanked her for her &ldquo;consideration,&rdquo; and flew to my room to make some 
hurried preparations for my departure. My bonnet and shawl being on, and a 
few things hastily crammed into my largest trunk, I descended. But I might 
have done the work more leisurely, for no one else was in a hurry; and I had 
still a considerable time to wait for the phaeton. 


 

At length it came to the door, and I was off; but oh, what a dreary journey 
was that! how utterly different from my former passages homewards! 


 

Being too late for the last coach to &mdash;, I had to hire a cab for 
ten miles, and then a car to take me over the rugged hills. It was half-past 
ten before I reached home. They were not in bed. 


 

My mother and sister both met me in the 
passage&mdash;sad&mdash;silent&mdash;pale! I was so much 
shocked and terror-stricken that I could not speak to ask the information I 
so much longed yet dreaded to obtain. 


 

&ldquo;Agnes!&rdquo; said my mother, struggling to repress some strong emotion. 


 

&ldquo;Oh, Agnes!&rdquo; cried Mary, and burst into tears. 


 

&ldquo;How is he?&rdquo; I asked, gasping for the answer. 


 

&ldquo;Dead!&rdquo; 


 

It was the reply I had anticipated; but the shock seemed none the less 
tremendous. 

 
 
 
 Chapter XIX 
 THE LETTER 

MY FATHER'S mortal remains had been consigned to the tomb; and we, with sad 
faces and sombre garments, sat lingering over the frugal breakfast-table, 
revolving plans for our future life. 


 

My mother's strong mind had not given way beneath even this affliction: her 
spirit, though crushed, was not broken. Mary's wish was that I should go back 
to Horton Lodge, and that our mother should come and live with her and Mr 
Richardson at the vicarage: she affirmed that he wished it no less than 
herself, and that such an arrangement could not fail to benefit all parties, 
for my mother's society and experience would be of inestimable value to them, 
and they would do all they could to make her happy. But no arguments or 
entreaties could prevail: my mother was determined not to go; not that she 
questioned, for a moment, the kind wishes and intentions of her daughter; but 
she affirmed that so long as God spared her health and strength, she would 
make use of them to earn her own livelihood, and be chargeable to no one, 
whether her dependence would be felt as a burden or not. If she could afford 
to reside as a lodger in &mdash; vicarage, she would choose that house 
before all others as the place of her abode; but, not being so circumstanced, 
she would never come under its roof, except as an occasional visitor, unless 
sickness or calamity should render her assistance really needful, or until 
age or infirmity made her incapable of maintaining herself. 


 

&ldquo;No, Mary,&rdquo; said she, &ldquo;if Richardson and you have anything 
to spare, you must lay it aside for your family; and 
Agnes and I must gather honey for ourselves. Thanks to my having had 
daughters to educate, I have not forgotten my accomplishments ... God willing 
I will check this vain repining,&rdquo;&mdash;she said, while the tears 
coursed one another down her cheeks in spite of her efforts; but she wiped 
them away, and resolutely shaking back her head, continued, &ldquo;I will exert 
myself and look out for a small house commodiously situated in some populous 
but healthy district, where we will take a few young ladies to board and 
educate&mdash;if we can get them&mdash;and as many day-pupils as 
will come, or as we can manage to instruct. Your father's relations and old 
friends will be able to send us some pupils or to assist us with their 
recommendations no doubt: I shall not apply to my own. What say you to it, 
Agnes&mdash;will you be willing to leave your present situation and 
try?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Quite willing, mama; and the money I have saved will do to furnish the 
house. It shall be taken from the bank directly.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;When it is wanted; we must get the house, and settle on preliminaries 
first.&rdquo; 


 

Mary offered to lend the little she possessed; but my mother declined it, 
saying that we must begin on an economical plan, and she hoped that the whole 
or part of mine added to what we could get by the sale of the furniture, and 
what little our dear papa had contrived to lay aside for her since the debts 
were paid, would be sufficient to last us till Christmas, when it was hoped, 
something would accrue from our united labours. 


 

It was finally settled that this should be our plan; and that inquiries and 
preparations should immediately be set on foot; and while my mother busied 
herself with these, I should return to Horton Lodge at the close of my four 
weeks' vacation, and give notice for my final 
departure when things were in train for the speedy commencement of our 
school. 


 

We were discussing these affairs on the morning I have mentioned, about a 
fortnight after my father's death, when a letter was brought in for my 
mother, on beholding which the colour mounted to her face&mdash;lately 
pale enough with anxious watchings and excessive sorrow. 


 

&ldquo;From my father!&rdquo; murmured she, as she hastily tore off the cover. 


 

It was many years since she had heard from any of her own relations before. 
Naturally wondering what the letter might contain, I watched her countenance 
while she read it, and was somewhat surprised to see her bite her lip and 
knit her brows as if in anger. When she had done, she somewhat irreverently, 
cast it on the table, saying with a scornful smile, 


 

&ldquo;Your grandpapa has been so kind as to write to me. He says he has no doubt I 
have long repented of my 'unfortunate marriage,' and if I will only 
acknowledge this, and confess I was wrong in neglecting his advice, and that 
I have justly suffered for it, he will make a lady of me once 
again&mdash;if that be possible after my long 
degradation&mdash;and remember my girls in his will. Get my desk, 
Agnes&mdash;and send these things away&mdash;I will answer the 
letter directly&mdash;but first as I may be depriving you both of a 
legacy, it is just that I should tell you what I mean to say. 


 

&ldquo;I shall say that he is mistaken in supposing that I can regret the birth of 
my daughters, (who have been the pride of my life, and are likely to be the 
comfort of my old age), or the thirty years I have passed in the company of 
my best and dearest friend;&mdash;that, had our misfortunes been three 
times as great as they were, (unless they had been of my bringing on,) I 
should still the more rejoice to have shared them 
with your father, and administered what consolation I was able; and, had his 
sufferings in illness been ten times what they were, I could not regret 
having watched over and laboured to relieve them&mdash;that, if he had 
married a richer wife, misfortunes and trials would no doubt have come upon 
him still, while&mdash;I am egotist enough to imagine that no other 
woman could have c
heered him through them so well&mdash;not that I am 
superior to the rest, but I was made for him, and he for me; and I can no 
more repent the hours&mdash;days&mdash;years of happiness we have 
spent together, and which neither could have had without the other, than I 
can the privilege of having been his nurse in sickness, and his comfort in 
affliction. 


 

&ldquo;Will this do, children?&mdash;or shall I say we are all very sorry for 
what has happened during the last thirty years; and my daughters wish they 
had never been born; but since they have had that misfortune, they will be 
thankful for any trifle their grandpapa will be kind enough to bestow?&rdquo; 


 

Of course, we both applauded our mother's resolution; Mary cleared away the 
breakfast things; I brought the desk; the letter was quickly written and 
despatched; and, from that day, we heard no more of our grandfather till we 
saw his death announced in the newspaper a considerable time 
after&mdash;all his worldly possessions, of course, being left to our 
wealthy, unknown cousins. 

 
 
 
 Chapter XX 
 THE FAREWELL 

A house in A&mdash;, the fashionable watering-place, was hired for our 
seminary; and a promise of two or three pupils was obtained to commence with. 
I returned to Horton Lodge about the middle of July, leaving my mother to 
conclude the bargain for the house, to obtain more pupils, to sell off the 
furniture of our old abode, and to fit out the new one. . 


 

We often pity the poor, because they have no leisure to mourn their departed 
relatives, and necessity obliges them to labour through their severest 
afflictions; but is not active employment the best remedy for overwhelming 
sorrow ... the surest antidote for despair? It may be a rough comforter: it 
may seem hard to be harassed with the cares of life when we have no relish 
for its enjoyments, to be goaded to labour when the heart is ready to break, 
and the vexed spirit implores for rest only to weep in silence; but is not 
labour better than the rest we covet? and are not those petty, tormenting 
cares less hurtful than a continual brooding over the great affliction that 
oppresses us?&mdash; Besides, we cannot have cares, and anxieties, and 
toil, without hope&mdash;if it be but the hope of fulfilling our 
joyless task, accomplishing some needful project, or escaping some further 
annoyance. 


 

At any rate, I was glad my mother had so much employment for every faculty of 
her action-loving frame. Our kind neighbours lamented that she, once so 
exalted in wealth and station, should be reduced to such extremity in her 
time of sorrow; but I am persuaded that she would have suffered thrice as 
much had she been left in affluence, with 
liberty to 
remain in that house, the scene of her early happiness and late affliction, 
and no stern necessity to prevent her from incessantly brooding over, and 
lamenting her bereavement. 


 

I will not dilate upon the feelings with which I left the old house, the 
well-known garden, the little village church&mdash;then doubly dear to 
me, because my father, who for thirty years had taught and prayed within its 
walls lay slumbering now beneath its flags&mdash;and the old bare 
hills, delightful in their very desolation, with the narrow vales between, 
smiling in green wood and sparkling water&mdash;the house where I was 
born, the scene of all my early associations, the place where, throughout 
life, my earthly affections had been centred; and left them to return no 
more! True, I was going back to Horton Lodge where, amid many evils, one 
source of pleasure yet remained; but it was pleasure mingled with excessive 
pain, and my stay, alas! was limited to six weeks. 


 

And even of that precious time, day after day slipped by and I did not see 
him:&mdash;except at church, I never saw him for a fortnight after my 
return. It seemed a long time to me: and, as I was often out with my rambling 
pupil, of course hopes would keep rising, and disappointments would ensue; 
and then I would say to my own heart, &ldquo;Here is a convincing 
proof&mdash;if you would but have the sense to see it, or the candour 
to acknowledge it&mdash;that he does not care for you. If he only 
thought half as much about you, as you do about him, he would have 
contrived to meet you many times ere this&mdash;you must know that by 
consulting your own feelings. Therefore have done with this nonsense; you 
have no ground for hope; dismiss, at once, these hurtful thoughts and foolish 
wishes from your mind and turn to your own duty and the dull, blank life that 
lies before you. You might have known such happiness was not for you.&rdquo; 


 

But I saw him at last. He came suddenly upon me as I was crossing a field in 
returning from a visit to Nancy Brown, which I had taken the opportunity of 
paying while Matilda Murray was riding her matchless mare. 


 

He must have heard of the heavy loss I had sustained; he expressed no 
sympathy, offered no condolence, but almost the first words he uttered were, 
&ldquo;How is your mother?&rdquo; And this was no matter of course question, for I never 
told him that I had a mother, he must have learnt the fact from 
others, if he knew it at all&mdash;and besides, there was sincere 
good-will, and even deep, touching, unobtrusive sympathy in the tone and 
manner of the inquiry. 


 

I thanked him with due civility, and told him she was as well as could be 
expected. 


 

&ldquo;What will she do?&rdquo; was the next question. Many would have deemed it an 
impertinent one, and given an evasive reply; but such an idea never entered 
my head, and I gave a brief, but plain statement of mother's plans and 
prospects. 


 

&ldquo;Then you will leave this place shortly?&rdquo; said he. 


 

&ldquo;Yes, in a month.&rdquo; 


 

He paused a minute, as if in thought. When he spoke again I hoped it would be 
to express his concern at my departure; but it was only to say, 


 

&ldquo;I should think you will be willing enough to go?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Yes&mdash;for some things,&rdquo; I replied. 


 

&ldquo;For some things only&mdash;I wonder what should make you regret 
it!&rdquo; 


 

I was annoyed at this, in some degree because it embarrassed me; I had 
only one reason for regretting it; and that was a profound secret, which he 
had no business to trouble me about. 


 

&ldquo;Why,&rdquo; said I&mdash;&rdquo;why should you suppose that I dislike the place?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;You told me so yourself,&rdquo; was the decisive reply. &ldquo;You said, at least, that 
you could not live contentedly without a friend; and that you had no friend 
here, and no possibility of making one&mdash;and besides, I know you 
 must dislike it.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;But, if you remember rightly, I said&mdash;or meant to say, I could 
not live contentedly without a friend in the world: I was not so 
unreasonable as to require one always near me. I think I could be happy in a 
house full of enemies,&mdash;if&rdquo; but no; that sentence must not be 
continued&mdash;I paused, and hastily added, &ldquo;And besides, we cannot 
well leave a place where we have lived for two or three years, without some 
feeling of regret.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Will you regret to part with Miss Murray ... your sole remaining pupil and 
companion?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I dare say I shall in some degree&mdash;it was not without sorrow I 
parted with her sister.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I can imagine that.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Well, Miss Matilda is quite as good ... better in one respect.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;What is that?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;She's honest.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;And the other is not?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;I should not call her dis honest; but it must be confessed, she's a 
little artful.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo; Artful is she?&mdash;I saw she was giddy and 
vain&mdash;and now,&rdquo; he added, after a pause, &ldquo;I can well believe she 
was artful too, but so excessively so as to assume an aspect of extreme 
simplicity and unguarded openness. Yes,&rdquo; continued he musingly, &ldquo;that 
accounts for some little things that puzzled me a trifle before.&rdquo; 


 

After that, he turned the conversation to more general subjects. He did not 
leave me till we had nearly reached the park-gates: he had certainly stepped 
a little out of his way 
to accompany me so far, for 
he now went back and disappeared down Moss-lane, the entrance of which we had 
passed some time before. Assuredly, I did not regret this circumstance: if 
sorrow had any place in my heart, it was that he was gone at last ... that he 
was no longer walking by my side, and that that short interval of delightful 
intercourse was at an end. He had not breathed a word of love, or dropped one 
hint of tenderness or affection, and yet I had been supremely happy. To be 
near him, to hear him talk ... as he did talk; and to feel that he thought me 
worthy to be so spoken to ... capable of understanding and duly appreciating 
such discourse ... was enough. 


 

&ldquo;Yes, Edward Weston, I could indeed be happy in a house full of enemies, if I 
had but one friend, who truly, deeply, and faithfully loved me, and if that 
friend were you&mdash;though we might be far apart ... seldom to hear 
from each other, still more seldom to meet ... though toil, and trouble, and 
vexation might surround me, still ... it would be too much happiness for me 
to dream of! Yet who can tell,&rdquo; said I within myself, as I proceeded up the 
park. &ldquo;who can tell what this one month may bring forth? I have lived nearly 
three and twenty years, and I have suffered much, and tasted little pleasure 
yet: is it likely my life all through will be so clouded? Is it not possible 
that God may hear my prayers, disperse these gloomy shadows, and grant me 
some beams of heaven's sunshine yet? Will He entirely deny to me those 
blessings which are so freely given to others, who neither ask them nor 
acknowledge them when received? May I not still hope and trust?&rdquo; 


 

I did hope and trust&mdash;for a while; but alas, alas! the time ebbed 
away; one week followed another, and, excepting one distant glimpse, and two 
transient meetings&mdash;during which scarcely anything was 
said&mdash;while I was walking 
with Miss 
Matilda, I saw nothing of him&mdash;except, of course, at church. 


 

And now, the last Sunday was come, and the last service. I was often on the 
point of melting into tears during the sermon&mdash;the last I was to 
hear from him ... the best I should hear from any one, I was well assured. It 
was over ... the congregation were departing; and I must follow ... I had 
then seen him and heard his voice, too probably for the last time. 


 

In the church-yard, Matilda was pounced upon by the two Misses Green. They 
had many inquiries to make about her sister, and I know not what besides. I 
only wished they would have done, that we might hasten back to Horton Lodge: 
I longed to seek the retirement of my own room, or some sequestered nook in 
the grounds, that I might deliver myself up to my feelings to weep my last 
farewell, and lament my false hopes and vain delusions ... only this once, 
and then adieu to fruitless dreaming ... thenceforth, only sober, solid, sad 
reality should occupy my mind; but while I thus resolved, a low voice close 
beside me said, 


 

&ldquo;I suppose you are going this week, Miss Grey?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; I replied. I was very much startled; and had I been at all 
hysterically inclined, I certainly should have committed myself in some way 
then. Thank God I was not. 


 

&ldquo;Well,&rdquo; said Mr Weston, &ldquo;I want to bid you good-bye ... it is not likely I 
shall see you again before you go.&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Good-bye, Mr Weston,&rdquo; I said ... Oh, how I struggled to say it calmly! I 
gave him my hand. He retained it a few seconds in his. 


 

&ldquo;It is possible we may meet again,&rdquo; said he, &ldquo;will it be of any consequence 
to you whether we do or not?&rdquo; 


 

&ldquo;Yes, I should be very glad to see you again.&rdquo; 


 

I could say no less. He kindly pressed my hand, and went. 
 Now I was happy again ... though more inclined to burst into 
tears than ever. If I had been forced to speak at that moment, a succession 
of sobs would have inevitably ensued; and as it was, I could not keep the 
water out of my eyes. I walked along with Miss Murray, turning aside my face 
and neglecting to notice several successive remarks, till she bawled out that 
I was either deaf or stupid, and then (having recovered my self-possession) 
as one awakened from a fit of abstraction, I suddenly looked up and asked 
what she had been saying. 

 
 
 
 Chapter XXI 
 THE SCHOOL 

