



Chapter 21


It was for the moment an inexpressible relief to Dolly, to 
recognise in the person who forced himself into the path so 
abruptly, and now stood directly in her way, Hugh of the Maypole, 
whose name she uttered in a tone of delighted surprise that came 
from her heart.

'Was it you?' she said, 'how glad I am to see you! and how could 
you terrify me so!'

In answer to which, he said nothing at all, but stood quite still, 
looking at her.

'Did you come to meet me?' asked Dolly.

Hugh nodded, and muttered something to the effect that he had been 
waiting for her, and had expected her sooner.

'I thought it likely they would send,' said Dolly, greatly 
reassured by this.

'Nobody sent me,' was his sullen answer.  'I came of my own 
accord.'

The rough bearing of this fellow, and his wild, uncouth appearance, 
had often filled the girl with a vague apprehension even when other 
people were by, and had occasioned her to shrink from him 
involuntarily.  The having him for an unbidden companion in so 
solitary a place, with the darkness fast gathering about them, 
renewed and even increased the alarm she had felt at first.

If his manner had been merely dogged and passively fierce, as 
usual, she would have had no greater dislike to his company than 
she always felt--perhaps, indeed, would have been rather glad to 
have had him at hand.  But there was something of coarse bold 
admiration in his look, which terrified her very much.  She glanced 
timidly towards him, uncertain whether to go forward or retreat, 
and he stood gazing at her like a handsome satyr; and so they 
remained for some short time without stirring or breaking silence.  
At length Dolly took courage, shot past him, and hurried on.

'Why do you spend so much breath in avoiding me?' said Hugh, 
accommodating his pace to hers, and keeping close at her side.

'I wish to get back as quickly as I can, and you walk too near me, 
answered Dolly.'

'Too near!' said Hugh, stooping over her so that she could feel his 
breath upon her forehead.  'Why too near?  You're always proud to 
ME, mistress.'

'I am proud to no one.  You mistake me,' answered Dolly.  'Fall 
back, if you please, or go on.'

'Nay, mistress,' he rejoined, endeavouring to draw her arm through 
his, 'I'll walk with you.'

She released herself and clenching her little hand, struck him with 
right good will.  At this, Maypole Hugh burst into a roar of 
laughter, and passing his arm about her waist, held her in his 
strong grasp as easily as if she had been a bird.

'Ha ha ha!  Well done, mistress!  Strike again.  You shall beat my 
face, and tear my hair, and pluck my beard up by the roots, and 
welcome, for the sake of your bright eyes.  Strike again, mistress.  
Do.  Ha ha ha!  I like it.'

'Let me go,' she cried, endeavouring with both her hands to push 
him off.  'Let me go this moment.'

'You had as good be kinder to me, Sweetlips,' said Hugh.  'You had, 
indeed.  Come.  Tell me now.  Why are you always so proud?  I 
don't quarrel with you for it.  I love you when you're proud.  Ha 
ha ha!  You can't hide your beauty from a poor fellow; that's a 
comfort!'

She gave him no answer, but as he had not yet checked her progress, 
continued to press forward as rapidly as she could.  At length, 
between the hurry she had made, her terror, and the tightness of 
his embrace, her strength failed her, and she could go no further.

'Hugh,' cried the panting girl, 'good Hugh; if you will leave me I 
will give you anything--everything I have--and never tell one word 
of this to any living creature.'

'You had best not,' he answered.  'Harkye, little dove, you had 
best not.  All about here know me, and what I dare do if I have a 
mind.  If ever you are going to tell, stop when the words are on 
your lips, and think of the mischief you'll bring, if you do, upon 
some innocent heads that you wouldn't wish to hurt a hair of.  
Bring trouble on me, and I'll bring trouble and something more on 
them in return.  I care no more for them than for so many dogs; not 
so much--why should I?  I'd sooner kill a man than a dog any day.  
I've never been sorry for a man's death in all my life, and I have 
for a dog's.'

There was something so thoroughly savage in the manner of these 
expressions, and the looks and gestures by which they were 
accompanied, that her great fear of him gave her new strength, and 
enabled her by a sudden effort to extricate herself and run fleetly 
from him.  But Hugh was as nimble, strong, and swift of foot, as 
any man in broad England, and it was but a fruitless expenditure of 
energy, for he had her in his encircling arms again before she had 
gone a hundred yards.

'Softly, darling--gently--would you fly from rough Hugh, that loves 
you as well as any drawing-room gallant?'

'I would,' she answered, struggling to free herself again.  'I 
will.  Help!'

'A fine for crying out,' said Hugh.  'Ha ha ha!  A fine, pretty 
one, from your lips.  I pay myself!  Ha ha ha!'

'Help! help! help!'  As she shrieked with the utmost violence she 
could exert, a shout was heard in answer, and another, and another.

'Thank Heaven!' cried the girl in an ecstasy.  'Joe, dear Joe, this 
way.  Help!'

Her assailant paused, and stood irresolute for a moment, but the 
shouts drawing nearer and coming quick upon them, forced him to a 
speedy decision.  He released her, whispered with a menacing look, 
'Tell HIM: and see what follows!' and leaping the hedge, was gone 
in an instant.  Dolly darted off, and fairly ran into Joe Willet's 
open arms.

'What is the matter? are you hurt? what was it? who was it? where 
is he? what was he like?' with a great many encouraging expressions 
and assurances of safety, were the first words Joe poured forth.  
But poor little Dolly was so breathless and terrified that for some 
time she was quite unable to answer him, and hung upon his 
shoulder, sobbing and crying as if her heart would break.

Joe had not the smallest objection to have her hanging on his 
shoulder; no, not the least, though it crushed the cherry-coloured 
ribbons sadly, and put the smart little hat out of all shape.  But 
he couldn't bear to see her cry; it went to his very heart.  He 
tried to console her, bent over her, whispered to her--some say 
kissed her, but that's a fable.  At any rate he said all the kind 
and tender things he could think of and Dolly let him go on and 
didn't interrupt him once, and it was a good ten minutes before she 
was able to raise her head and thank him.

'What was it that frightened you?' said Joe.

A man whose person was unknown to her had followed her, she 
answered; he began by begging, and went on to threats of robbery, 
which he was on the point of carrying into execution, and would 
have executed, but for Joe's timely aid.  The hesitation and 
confusion with which she said this, Joe attributed to the fright 
she had sustained, and no suspicion of the truth occurred to him 
for a moment.

'Stop when the words are on your lips.'  A hundred times that 
night, and very often afterwards, when the disclosure was rising 
to her tongue, Dolly thought of that, and repressed it.  A deeply 
rooted dread of the man; the conviction that his ferocious nature, 
once roused, would stop at nothing; and the strong assurance that 
if she impeached him, the full measure of his wrath and vengeance 
would be wreaked on Joe, who had preserved her; these were 
considerations she had not the courage to overcome, and inducements 
to secrecy too powerful for her to surmount.

Joe, for his part, was a great deal too happy to inquire very 
curiously into the matter; and Dolly being yet too tremulous to 
walk without assistance, they went forward very slowly, and in his 
mind very pleasantly, until the Maypole lights were near at hand, 
twinkling their cheerful welcome, when Dolly stopped suddenly and 
with a half scream exclaimed,

'The letter!'

'What letter?' cried Joe.

'That I was carrying--I had it in my hand.  My bracelet too,' she 
said, clasping her wrist.  'I have lost them both.'

'Do you mean just now?' said Joe.

'Either I dropped them then, or they were taken from me,' answered 
Dolly, vainly searching her pocket and rustling her dress.  'They 
are gone, both gone.  What an unhappy girl I am!'  With these words 
poor Dolly, who to do her justice was quite as sorry for the loss 
of the letter as for her bracelet, fell a-crying again, and 
bemoaned her fate most movingly.

Joe tried to comfort her with the assurance that directly he had 
housed her in the Maypole, he would return to the spot with a 
lantern (for it was now quite dark) and make strict search for the 
missing articles, which there was great probability of his finding, 
as it was not likely that anybody had passed that way since, and 
she was not conscious that they had been forcibly taken from her.  
Dolly thanked him very heartily for this offer, though with no 
great hope of his quest being successful; and so with many 
lamentations on her side, and many hopeful words on his, and much 
weakness on the part of Dolly and much tender supporting on the 
part of Joe, they reached the Maypole bar at last, where the 
locksmith and his wife and old John were yet keeping high festival.

Mr Willet received the intelligence of Dolly's trouble with that 
surprising presence of mind and readiness of speech for which he 
was so eminently distinguished above all other men.  Mrs Varden 
expressed her sympathy for her daughter's distress by scolding her 
roundly for being so late; and the honest locksmith divided himself 
between condoling with and kissing Dolly, and shaking hands 
heartily with Joe, whom he could not sufficiently praise or thank.

In reference to this latter point, old John was far from agreeing 
with his friend; for besides that he by no means approved of an 
adventurous spirit in the abstract, it occurred to him that if his 
son and heir had been seriously damaged in a scuffle, the 
consequences would assuredly have been expensive and inconvenient, 
and might perhaps have proved detrimental to the Maypole business.  
Wherefore, and because he looked with no favourable eye upon young 
girls, but rather considered that they and the whole female sex 
were a kind of nonsensical mistake on the part of Nature, he took 
occasion to retire and shake his head in private at the boiler; 
inspired by which silent oracle, he was moved to give Joe various 
stealthy nudges with his elbow, as a parental reproof and gentle 
admonition to mind his own business and not make a fool of himself.

Joe, however, took down the lantern and lighted it; and arming 
himself with a stout stick, asked whether Hugh was in the stable.

'He's lying asleep before the kitchen fire, sir,' said Mr Willet.  
'What do you want him for?'

'I want him to come with me to look after this bracelet and 
letter,' answered Joe.  'Halloa there!  Hugh!'

Dolly turned pale as death, and felt as if she must faint 
forthwith.  After a few moments, Hugh came staggering in, 
stretching himself and yawning according to custom, and presenting 
every appearance of having been roused from a sound nap.

'Here, sleepy-head,' said Joe, giving him the lantern.  'Carry 
this, and bring the dog, and that small cudgel of yours.  And woe 
betide the fellow if we come upon him.'

'What fellow?' growled Hugh, rubbing his eyes and shaking himself.

'What fellow?' returned Joe, who was in a state of great valour and 
bustle; 'a fellow you ought to know of and be more alive about.  
It's well for the like of you, lazy giant that you are, to be 
snoring your time away in chimney-corners, when honest men's 
daughters can't cross even our quiet meadows at nightfall without 
being set upon by footpads, and frightened out of their precious 
lives.'

'They never rob me,' cried Hugh with a laugh.  'I have got nothing 
to lose.  But I'd as lief knock them at head as any other men.  How 
many are there?'

'Only one,' said Dolly faintly, for everybody looked at her.

'And what was he like, mistress?' said Hugh with a glance at young 
Willet, so slight and momentary that the scowl it conveyed was lost 
on all but her.  'About my height?'

'Not--not so tall,' Dolly replied, scarce knowing what she said.

'His dress,' said Hugh, looking at her keenly, 'like--like any of 
ours now?  I know all the people hereabouts, and maybe could give a 
guess at the man, if I had anything to guide me.'

Dolly faltered and turned paler yet; then answered that he was 
wrapped in a loose coat and had his face hidden by a handkerchief 
and that she could give no other description of him.

'You wouldn't know him if you saw him then, belike?' said Hugh with 
a malicious grin.

'I should not,' answered Dolly, bursting into tears again.  'I 
don't wish to see him.  I can't bear to think of him.  I can't talk 
about him any more.  Don't go to look for these things, Mr Joe, 
pray don't.  I entreat you not to go with that man.'

'Not to go with me!' cried Hugh.  'I'm too rough for them all.  
They're all afraid of me.  Why, bless you mistress, I've the 
tenderest heart alive.  I love all the ladies, ma'am,' said Hugh, 
turning to the locksmith's wife.

Mrs Varden opined that if he did, he ought to be ashamed of 
himself; such sentiments being more consistent (so she argued) with 
a benighted Mussulman or wild Islander than with a stanch 
Protestant.  Arguing from this imperfect state of his morals, Mrs 
Varden further opined that he had never studied the Manual.  Hugh 
admitting that he never had, and moreover that he couldn't read, 
Mrs Varden declared with much severity, that he ought to he even 
more ashamed of himself than before, and strongly recommended him 
to save up his pocket-money for the purchase of one, and further to 
teach himself the contents with all convenient diligence.  She was 
still pursuing this train of discourse, when Hugh, somewhat 
unceremoniously and irreverently, followed his young master out, 
and left her to edify the rest of the company.  This she proceeded 
to do, and finding that Mr Willet's eyes were fixed upon her with 
an appearance of deep attention, gradually addressed the whole of 
her discourse to him, whom she entertained with a moral and 
theological lecture of considerable length, in the conviction that 
great workings were taking place in his spirit.  The simple truth 
was, however, that Mr Willet, although his eyes were wide open and 
he saw a woman before him whose head by long and steady looking at 
seemed to grow bigger and bigger until it filled the whole bar, was 
to all other intents and purposes fast asleep; and so sat leaning 
back in his chair with his hands in his pockets until his son's 
return caused him to wake up with a deep sigh, and a faint 
impression that he had been dreaming about pickled pork and greens--
a vision of his slumbers which was no doubt referable to the 
circumstance of Mrs Varden's having frequently pronounced the word 
'Grace' with much emphasis; which word, entering the portals of Mr 
Willet's brain as they stood ajar, and coupling itself with the 
words 'before meat,' which were there ranging about, did in time 
suggest a particular kind of meat together with that description of 
vegetable which is usually its companion.

The search was wholly unsuccessful.  Joe had groped along the path 
a dozen times, and among the grass, and in the dry ditch, and in 
the hedge, but all in vain.  Dolly, who was quite inconsolable for 
her loss, wrote a note to Miss Haredale giving her the same account 
of it that she had given at the Maypole, which Joe undertook to 
deliver as soon as the family were stirring next day.  That done, 
they sat down to tea in the bar, where there was an uncommon 
display of buttered toast, and--in order that they might not grow 
faint for want of sustenance, and might have a decent halting-
place or halfway house between dinner and supper--a few savoury 
trifles in the shape of great rashers of broiled ham, which being 
well cured, done to a turn, and smoking hot, sent forth a tempting 
and delicious fragrance.

Mrs Varden was seldom very Protestant at meals, unless it happened 
that they were underdone, or overdone, or indeed that anything 
occurred to put her out of humour.  Her spirits rose considerably 
on beholding these goodly preparations, and from the nothingness of 
good works, she passed to the somethingness of ham and toast with 
great cheerfulness.  Nay, under the influence of these wholesome 
stimulants, she sharply reproved her daughter for being low and 
despondent (which she considered an unacceptable frame of mind), 
and remarked, as she held her own plate for a fresh supply, that it 
would be well for Dolly, who pined over the loss of a toy and a 
sheet of paper, if she would reflect upon the voluntary sacrifices 
of the missionaries in foreign parts who lived chiefly on salads.

The proceedings of such a day occasion various fluctuations in the 
human thermometer, and especially in instruments so sensitively and 
delicately constructed as Mrs Varden.  Thus, at dinner Mrs V. stood 
at summer heat; genial, smiling, and delightful.  After dinner, in 
the sunshine of the wine, she went up at least half-a-dozen 
degrees, and was perfectly enchanting.  As its effect subsided, she 
fell rapidly, went to sleep for an hour or so at temperate, and 
woke at something below freezing.  Now she was at summer heat 
again, in the shade; and when tea was over, and old John, producing 
a bottle of cordial from one of the oaken cases, insisted on her 
sipping two glasses thereof in slow succession, she stood steadily 
at ninety for one hour and a quarter.  Profiting by experience, the 
locksmith took advantage of this genial weather to smoke his pipe 
in the porch, and in consequence of this prudent management, he was 
fully prepared, when the glass went down again, to start homewards 
directly.

The horse was accordingly put in, and the chaise brought round to 
the door.  Joe, who would on no account be dissuaded from escorting 
them until they had passed the most dreary and solitary part of the 
road, led out the grey mare at the same time; and having helped 
Dolly into her seat (more happiness!) sprung gaily into the saddle.  
Then, after many good nights, and admonitions to wrap up, and 
glancing of lights, and handing in of cloaks and shawls, the chaise 
rolled away, and Joe trotted beside it--on Dolly's side, no doubt, 
and pretty close to the wheel too.



Chapter 22


It was a fine bright night, and for all her lowness of spirits 
Dolly kept looking up at the stars in a manner so bewitching (and 
SHE knew it!) that Joe was clean out of his senses, and plainly 
showed that if ever a man were--not to say over head and ears, but 
over the Monument and the top of Saint Paul's in love, that man was 
himself.  The road was a very good one; not at all a jolting road, 
or an uneven one; and yet Dolly held the side of the chaise with 
one little hand, all the way.  If there had been an executioner 
behind him with an uplifted axe ready to chop off his head if he 
touched that hand, Joe couldn't have helped doing it.  From putting 
his own hand upon it as if by chance, and taking it away again 
after a minute or so, he got to riding along without taking it off 
at all; as if he, the escort, were bound to do that as an important 
part of his duty, and had come out for the purpose.  The most 
curious circumstance about this little incident was, that Dolly 
didn't seem to know of it.  She looked so innocent and unconscious 
when she turned her eyes on Joe, that it was quite provoking.

She talked though; talked about her fright, and about Joe's coming 
up to rescue her, and about her gratitude, and about her fear that 
she might not have thanked him enough, and about their always being 
friends from that time forth--and about all that sort of thing.  
And when Joe said, not friends he hoped, Dolly was quite surprised, 
and said not enemies she hoped; and when Joe said, couldn't they be 
something much better than either, Dolly all of a sudden found out 
a star which was brighter than all the other stars, and begged to 
call his attention to the same, and was ten thousand times more 
innocent and unconscious than ever.

In this manner they travelled along, talking very little above a 
whisper, and wishing the road could be stretched out to some dozen 
times its natural length--at least that was Joe's desire--when, as 
they were getting clear of the forest and emerging on the more 
frequented road, they heard behind them the sound of a horse's feet 
at a round trot, which growing rapidly louder as it drew nearer, 
elicited a scream from Mrs Varden, and the cry 'a friend!' from the 
rider, who now came panting up, and checked his horse beside them.

'This man again!' cried Dolly, shuddering.

'Hugh!' said Joe.  'What errand are you upon?'

'I come to ride back with you,' he answered, glancing covertly at 
the locksmith's daughter.  'HE sent me.

'My father!' said poor Joe; adding under his breath, with a very 
unfilial apostrophe, 'Will he never think me man enough to take 
care of myself!'

'Aye!' returned Hugh to the first part of the inquiry.  'The roads 
are not safe just now, he says, and you'd better have a companion.'

'Ride on then,' said Joe.  'I'm not going to turn yet.'

Hugh complied, and they went on again.  It was his whim or humour 
to ride immediately before the chaise, and from this position he 
constantly turned his head, and looked back.  Dolly felt that he 
looked at her, but she averted her eyes and feared to raise them 
once, so great was the dread with which he had inspired her.

This interruption, and the consequent wakefulness of Mrs Varden, 
who had been nodding in her sleep up to this point, except for a 
minute or two at a time, when she roused herself to scold the 
locksmith for audaciously taking hold of her to prevent her nodding 
herself out of the chaise, put a restraint upon the whispered 
conversation, and made it difficult of resumption.  Indeed, before 
they had gone another mile, Gabriel stopped at his wife's desire, 
and that good lady protested she would not hear of Joe's going a 
step further on any account whatever.  It was in vain for Joe to 
protest on the other hand that he was by no means tired, and would 
turn back presently, and would see them safely past such a point, 
and so forth.  Mrs Varden was obdurate, and being so was not to be 
overcome by mortal agency.

'Good night--if I must say it,' said Joe, sorrowfully.

'Good night,' said Dolly.  She would have added, 'Take care of that 
man, and pray don't trust him,' but he had turned his horse's head, 
and was standing close to them.  She had therefore nothing for it 
but to suffer Joe to give her hand a gentle squeeze, and when the 
chaise had gone on for some distance, to look back and wave it, as 
he still lingered on the spot where they had parted, with the tall 
dark figure of Hugh beside him.

What she thought about, going home; and whether the coach-maker 
held as favourable a place in her meditations as he had occupied in 
the morning, is unknown.  They reached home at last--at last, for 
it was a long way, made none the shorter by Mrs Varden's grumbling.  
Miggs hearing the sound of wheels was at the door immediately.

'Here they are, Simmun!  Here they are!' cried Miggs, clapping her 
hands, and issuing forth to help her mistress to alight.  'Bring a 
chair, Simmun.  Now, an't you the better for it, mim?  Don't you 
feel more yourself than you would have done if you'd have stopped 
at home?  Oh, gracious! how cold you are!  Goodness me, sir, she's 
a perfect heap of ice.'

'I can't help it, my good girl.  You had better take her in to the 
fire,' said the locksmith.

'Master sounds unfeeling, mim,' said Miggs, in a tone of 
commiseration, 'but such is not his intentions, I'm sure.  After 
what he has seen of you this day, I never will believe but that he 
has a deal more affection in his heart than to speak unkind.  Come 
in and sit yourself down by the fire; there's a good dear--do.'

Mrs Varden complied.  The locksmith followed with his hands in his 
pockets, and Mr Tappertit trundled off with the chaise to a 
neighbouring stable.

'Martha, my dear,' said the locksmith, when they reached the 
parlour, 'if you'll look to Dolly yourself or let somebody else do 
it, perhaps it will be only kind and reasonable.  She has been 
frightened, you know, and is not at all well to-night.'

In fact, Dolly had thrown herself upon the sofa, quite regardless 
of all the little finery of which she had been so proud in the 
morning, and with her face buried in her hands was crying very 
much.

At first sight of this phenomenon (for Dolly was by no means 
accustomed to displays of this sort, rather learning from her 
mother's example to avoid them as much as possible) Mrs Varden 
expressed her belief that never was any woman so beset as she; that 
her life was a continued scene of trial; that whenever she was 
disposed to be well and cheerful, so sure were the people around 
her to throw, by some means or other, a damp upon her spirits; and 
that, as she had enjoyed herself that day, and Heaven knew it was 
very seldom she did enjoy herself so she was now to pay the 
penalty.  To all such propositions Miggs assented freely.  Poor 
Dolly, however, grew none the better for these restoratives, but 
rather worse, indeed; and seeing that she was really ill, both Mrs 
Varden and Miggs were moved to compassion, and tended her in 
earnest.

But even then, their very kindness shaped itself into their usual 
course of policy, and though Dolly was in a swoon, it was rendered 
clear to the meanest capacity, that Mrs Varden was the sufferer.  
Thus when Dolly began to get a little better, and passed into that 
stage in which matrons hold that remonstrance and argument may be 
successfully applied, her mother represented to her, with tears in 
her eyes, that if she had been flurried and worried that day, she 
must remember it was the common lot of humanity, and in especial of 
womankind, who through the whole of their existence must expect no 
less, and were bound to make up their minds to meek endurance and 
patient resignation.  Mrs Varden entreated her to remember that one 
of these days she would, in all probability, have to do violence to 
her feelings so far as to be married; and that marriage, as she 
might see every day of her life (and truly she did) was a state 
requiring great fortitude and forbearance.  She represented to her 
in lively colours, that if she (Mrs V.) had not, in steering her 
course through this vale of tears, been supported by a strong 
principle of duty which alone upheld and prevented her from 
drooping, she must have been in her grave many years ago; in which 
case she desired to know what would have become of that errant 
spirit (meaning the locksmith), of whose eye she was the very 
apple, and in whose path she was, as it were, a shining light and 
guiding star?

Miss Miggs also put in her word to the same effect.  She said that 
indeed and indeed Miss Dolly might take pattern by her blessed 
mother, who, she always had said, and always would say, though she 
were to be hanged, drawn, and quartered for it next minute, was 
the mildest, amiablest, forgivingest-spirited, longest-sufferingest 
female as ever she could have believed; the mere narration of whose 
excellencies had worked such a wholesome change in the mind of her 
own sister-in-law, that, whereas, before, she and her husband lived 
like cat and dog, and were in the habit of exchanging brass 
candlesticks, pot-lids, flat-irons, and other such strong 
resentments, they were now the happiest and affectionatest couple 
upon earth; as could be proved any day on application at Golden 
Lion Court, number twenty-sivin, second bell-handle on the right-
hand doorpost.  After glancing at herself as a comparatively 
worthless vessel, but still as one of some desert, she besought her 
to bear in mind that her aforesaid dear and only mother was of a 
weakly constitution and excitable temperament, who had constantly 
to sustain afflictions in domestic life, compared with which 
thieves and robbers were as nothing, and yet never sunk down or 
gave way to despair or wrath, but, in prize-fighting phraseology, 
always came up to time with a cheerful countenance, and went in to 
win as if nothing had happened.  When Miggs finished her solo, her 
mistress struck in again, and the two together performed a duet to 
the same purpose; the burden being, that Mrs Varden was persecuted 
perfection, and Mr Varden, as the representative of mankind in that 
apartment, a creature of vicious and brutal habits, utterly 
insensible to the blessings he enjoyed.  Of so refined a character, 
indeed, was their talent of assault under the mask of sympathy, 
that when Dolly, recovering, embraced her father tenderly, as in 
vindication of his goodness, Mrs Varden expressed her solemn hope 
that this would be a lesson to him for the remainder of his life, 
and that he would do some little justice to a woman's nature ever 
afterwards--in which aspiration Miss Miggs, by divers sniffs and 
coughs, more significant than the longest oration, expressed her 
entire concurrence.

But the great joy of Miggs's heart was, that she not only picked up 
a full account of what had happened, but had the exquisite delight 
of conveying it to Mr Tappertit for his jealousy and torture.  For 
that gentleman, on account of Dolly's indisposition, had been 
requested to take his supper in the workshop, and it was conveyed 
thither by Miss Miggs's own fair hands.

'Oh Simmun!' said the young lady, 'such goings on to-day!  Oh, 
gracious me, Simmun!'

Mr Tappertit, who was not in the best of humours, and who 
disliked Miss Miggs more when she laid her hand on her heart and 
panted for breath than at any other time, as her deficiency of 
outline was most apparent under such circumstances, eyed her over 
in his loftiest style, and deigned to express no curiosity 
whatever.

'I never heard the like, nor nobody else,' pursued Miggs.  'The 
idea of interfering with HER.  What people can see in her to make 
it worth their while to do so, that's the joke--he he he!'

Finding there was a lady in the case, Mr Tappertit haughtily 
requested his fair friend to be more explicit, and demanded to know 
what she meant by 'her.'

'Why, that Dolly,' said Miggs, with an extremely sharp emphasis on 
the name.  'But, oh upon my word and honour, young Joseph Willet is 
a brave one; and he do deserve her, that he do.'

'Woman!' said Mr Tappertit, jumping off the counter on which he was 
seated; 'beware!'

'My stars, Simmun!' cried Miggs, in affected astonishment.  'You 
frighten me to death!  What's the matter?'

'There are strings,' said Mr Tappertit, flourishing his bread-and-
cheese knife in the air, 'in the human heart that had better not be 
wibrated.  That's what's the matter.'

'Oh, very well--if you're in a huff,' cried Miggs, turning away.

'Huff or no huff,' said Mr Tappertit, detaining her by the wrist.  
'What do you mean, Jezebel?  What were you going to say?  Answer 
me!'

Notwithstanding this uncivil exhortation, Miggs gladly did as she 
was required; and told him how that their young mistress, being 
alone in the meadows after dark, had been attacked by three or four 
tall men, who would have certainly borne her away and perhaps 
murdered her, but for the timely arrival of Joseph Willet, who with 
his own single hand put them all to flight, and rescued her; to the 
lasting admiration of his fellow-creatures generally, and to the 
eternal love and gratitude of Dolly Varden.

'Very good,' said Mr Tappertit, fetching a long breath when the 
tale was told, and rubbing his hair up till it stood stiff and 
straight on end all over his head.  'His days are numbered.'

'Oh, Simmun!'

'I tell you,' said the 'prentice, 'his days are numbered.  Leave 
me.  Get along with you.'

Miggs departed at his bidding, but less because of his bidding than 
because she desired to chuckle in secret.  When she had given vent 
to her satisfaction, she returned to the parlour; where the 
locksmith, stimulated by quietness and Toby, had become talkative, 
and was disposed to take a cheerful review of the occurrences of 
the day.  But Mrs Varden, whose practical religion (as is not 
uncommon) was usually of the retrospective order, cut him short by 
declaiming on the sinfulness of such junketings, and holding that 
it was high time to go to bed.  To bed therefore she withdrew, with 
an aspect as grim and gloomy as that of the Maypole's own state 
couch; and to bed the rest of the establishment soon afterwards 
repaired.



Chapter 23


Twilight had given place to night some hours, and it was high noon 
in those quarters of the town in which 'the world' condescended to 
dwell--the world being then, as now, of very limited dimensions and 
easily lodged--when Mr Chester reclined upon a sofa in his 
dressing-room in the Temple, entertaining himself with a book.

He was dressing, as it seemed, by easy stages, and having performed 
half the journey was taking a long rest.  Completely attired as to 
his legs and feet in the trimmest fashion of the day, he had yet 
the remainder of his toilet to perform.  The coat was stretched, 
like a refined scarecrow, on its separate horse; the waistcoat was 
displayed to the best advantage; the various ornamental articles of 
dress were severally set out in most alluring order; and yet he lay 
dangling his legs between the sofa and the ground, as intent upon 
his book as if there were nothing but bed before him.

'Upon my honour,' he said, at length raising his eyes to the 
ceiling with the air of a man who was reflecting seriously on what 
he had read; 'upon my honour, the most masterly composition, the 
most delicate thoughts, the finest code of morality, and the most 
gentlemanly sentiments in the universe!  Ah Ned, Ned, if you would 
but form your mind by such precepts, we should have but one common 
feeling on every subject that could possibly arise between us!'

This apostrophe was addressed, like the rest of his remarks, to 
empty air: for Edward was not present, and the father was quite 
alone.

'My Lord Chesterfield,' he said, pressing his hand tenderly upon 
the book as he laid it down, 'if I could but have profited by your 
genius soon enough to have formed my son on the model you have left 
to all wise fathers, both he and I would have been rich men.  
Shakespeare was undoubtedly very fine in his way; Milton good, 
though prosy; Lord Bacon deep, and decidedly knowing; but the 
writer who should be his country's pride, is my Lord Chesterfield.'

He became thoughtful again, and the toothpick was in requisition.

'I thought I was tolerably accomplished as a man of the world,' he 
continued, 'I flattered myself that I was pretty well versed in all 
those little arts and graces which distinguish men of the world 
from boors and peasants, and separate their character from those 
intensely vulgar sentiments which are called the national 
character.  Apart from any natural prepossession in my own favour, 
I believed I was.  Still, in every page of this enlightened writer, 
I find some captivating hypocrisy which has never occurred to me 
before, or some superlative piece of selfishness to which I was 
utterly a stranger.  I should quite blush for myself before this 
stupendous creature, if remembering his precepts, one might blush 
at anything.  An amazing man! a nobleman indeed! any King or Queen 
may make a Lord, but only the Devil himself--and the Graces--can 
make a Chesterfield.'

Men who are thoroughly false and hollow, seldom try to hide those 
vices from themselves; and yet in the very act of avowing them, 
they lay claim to the virtues they feign most to despise.  'For,' 
say they, 'this is honesty, this is truth.  All mankind are like 
us, but they have not the candour to avow it.'  The more they 
affect to deny the existence of any sincerity in the world, the 
more they would be thought to possess it in its boldest shape; and 
this is an unconscious compliment to Truth on the part of these 
philosophers, which will turn the laugh against them to the Day of 
Judgment.

Mr Chester, having extolled his favourite author, as above recited, 
took up the book again in the excess of his admiration and was 
composing himself for a further perusal of its sublime morality, 
when he was disturbed by a noise at the outer door; occasioned as 
it seemed by the endeavours of his servant to obstruct the entrance 
of some unwelcome visitor.

'A late hour for an importunate creditor,' he said, raising his 
eyebrows with as indolent an expression of wonder as if the noise 
were in the street, and one with which he had not the smallest 
possible concern.  'Much after their accustomed time.  The usual 
pretence I suppose.  No doubt a heavy payment to make up tomorrow.  
Poor fellow, he loses time, and time is money as the good proverb 
says--I never found it out though.  Well.  What now?  You know I am 
not at home.'

'A man, sir,' replied the servant, who was to the full as cool and 
negligent in his way as his master, 'has brought home the riding-
whip you lost the other day.  I told him you were out, but he said 
he was to wait while I brought it in, and wouldn't go till I did.'

'He was quite right,' returned his master, 'and you're a blockhead, 
possessing no judgment or discretion whatever.  Tell him to come 
in, and see that he rubs his shoes for exactly five minutes first.'

The man laid the whip on a chair, and withdrew.  The master, who 
had only heard his foot upon the ground and had not taken the 
trouble to turn round and look at him, shut his book, and pursued 
the train of ideas his entrance had disturbed.

'If time were money,' he said, handling his snuff-box, 'I would 
compound with my creditors, and give them--let me see--how much a 
day?  There's my nap after dinner--an hour--they're extremely 
welcome to that, and to make the most of it.  In the morning, 
between my breakfast and the paper, I could spare them another 
hour; in the evening before dinner say another.  Three hours a day.  
They might pay themselves in calls, with interest, in twelve 
months.  I think I shall propose it to them.  Ah, my centaur, are 
you there?'

'Here I am,' replied Hugh, striding in, followed by a dog, as rough 
and sullen as himself; 'and trouble enough I've had to get here.  
What do you ask me to come for, and keep me out when I DO come?'

'My good fellow,' returned the other, raising his head a little 
from the cushion and carelessly surveying him from top to toe, 'I 
am delighted to see you, and to have, in your being here, the very 
best proof that you are not kept out.  How are you?'

'I'm well enough,' said Hugh impatiently.

'You look a perfect marvel of health.  Sit down.'

'I'd rather stand,' said Hugh.

'Please yourself my good fellow,' returned Mr Chester rising, 
slowly pulling off the loose robe he wore, and sitting down before 
the dressing-glass.  'Please yourself by all means.'

Having said this in the politest and blandest tone possible, he 
went on dressing, and took no further notice of his guest, who 
stood in the same spot as uncertain what to do next, eyeing him 
sulkily from time to time.

'Are you going to speak to me, master?' he said, after a long 
silence.

'My worthy creature,' returned Mr Chester, 'you are a little 
ruffled and out of humour.  I'll wait till you're quite yourself 
again.  I am in no hurry.'

This behaviour had its intended effect.  It humbled and abashed the 
man, and made him still more irresolute and uncertain.  Hard words 
he could have returned, violence he would have repaid with 
interest; but this cool, complacent, contemptuous, self-possessed 
reception, caused him to feel his inferiority more completely than 
the most elaborate arguments.  Everything contributed to this 
effect.  His own rough speech, contrasted with the soft persuasive 
accents of the other; his rude bearing, and Mr Chester's polished 
manner; the disorder and negligence of his ragged dress, and the 
elegant attire he saw before him; with all the unaccustomed 
luxuries and comforts of the room, and the silence that gave him 
leisure to observe these things, and feel how ill at ease they made 
him; all these influences, which have too often some effect on 
tutored minds and become of almost resistless power when brought to 
bear on such a mind as his, quelled Hugh completely.  He moved by 
little and little nearer to Mr Chester's chair, and glancing over 
his shoulder at the reflection of his face in the glass, as if 
seeking for some encouragement in its expression, said at length, 
with a rough attempt at conciliation,

'ARE you going to speak to me, master, or am I to go away?'

'Speak you,' said Mr Chester, 'speak you, good fellow.  I have 
spoken, have I not?  I am waiting for you.'

'Why, look'ee, sir,' returned Hugh with increased embarrassment, 
'am I the man that you privately left your whip with before you 
rode away from the Maypole, and told to bring it back whenever he 
might want to see you on a certain subject?'

'No doubt the same, or you have a twin brother,' said Mr Chester, 
glancing at the reflection of his anxious face; 'which is not 
probable, I should say.'

'Then I have come, sir,' said Hugh, 'and I have brought it back, 
and something else along with it.  A letter, sir, it is, that I 
took from the person who had charge of it.'  As he spoke, he laid 
upon the dressing-table, Dolly's lost epistle.  The very letter 
that had cost her so much trouble.

'Did you obtain this by force, my good fellow?' said Mr Chester, 
casting his eye upon it without the least perceptible surprise or 
pleasure.

'Not quite,' said Hugh.  'Partly.'

'Who was the messenger from whom you took it?'

'A woman.  One Varden's daughter.'

'Oh indeed!' said Mr Chester gaily.  'What else did you take from 
her?'

'What else?'

'Yes,' said the other, in a drawling manner, for he was fixing a 
very small patch of sticking plaster on a very small pimple near 
the corner of his mouth.  'What else?'

'Well a kiss,' replied Hugh, after some hesitation.

'And what else?'

'Nothing.'

'I think,' said Mr Chester, in the same easy tone, and smiling 
twice or thrice to try if the patch adhered--'I think there was 
something else.  I have heard a trifle of jewellery spoken of--a 
mere trifle--a thing of such little value, indeed, that you may 
have forgotten it.  Do you remember anything of the kind--such as a 
bracelet now, for instance?'

Hugh with a muttered oath thrust his hand into his breast, and 
drawing the bracelet forth, wrapped in a scrap of hay, was about to 
lay it on the table likewise, when his patron stopped his hand and 
bade him put it up again.

'You took that for yourself my excellent friend,' he said, 'and may 
keep it.  I am neither a thief nor a receiver.  Don't show it to 
me.  You had better hide it again, and lose no time.  Don't let me 
see where you put it either,' he added, turning away his head.

'You're not a receiver!' said Hugh bluntly, despite the increasing 
awe in which he held him.  'What do you call THAT, master?' 
striking the letter with his heavy hand.

'I call that quite another thing,' said Mr Chester coolly.  'I 
shall prove it presently, as you will see.  You are thirsty, I 
suppose?'

Hugh drew his sleeve across his lips, and gruffly answered yes.

'Step to that closet and bring me a bottle you will see there, and 
a glass.'

He obeyed.  His patron followed him with his eyes, and when his 
back was turned, smiled as he had never done when he stood beside 
the mirror.  On his return he filled the glass, and bade him drink.  
That dram despatched, he poured him out another, and another.

'How many can you bear?' he said, filling the glass again.

'As many as you like to give me.  Pour on.  Fill high.  A bumper 
with a bead in the middle!  Give me enough of this,' he added, as 
he tossed it down his hairy throat, 'and I'll do murder if you ask 
me!'

'As I don't mean to ask you, and you might possibly do it without 
being invited if you went on much further,' said Mr Chester with 
great composure, we will stop, if agreeable to you, my good friend, 
at the next glass.  You were drinking before you came here.'

'I always am when I can get it,' cried Hugh boisterously, waving 
the empty glass above his head, and throwing himself into a rude 
dancing attitude.  'I always am.  Why not?  Ha ha ha!  What's so 
good to me as this?  What ever has been?  What else has kept away 
the cold on bitter nights, and driven hunger off in starving times?  
What else has given me the strength and courage of a man, when men 
would have left me to die, a puny child?  I should never have had a 
man's heart but for this.  I should have died in a ditch.  Where's 
he who when I was a weak and sickly wretch, with trembling legs and 
fading sight, bade me cheer up, as this did?  I never knew him; not 
I.  I drink to the drink, master.  Ha ha ha!'

'You are an exceedingly cheerful young man,' said Mr Chester, 
putting on his cravat with great deliberation, and slightly moving 
his head from side to side to settle his chin in its proper place.  
'Quite a boon companion.'

'Do you see this hand, master,' said Hugh, 'and this arm?' baring 
the brawny limb to the elbow.  'It was once mere skin and bone, and 
would have been dust in some poor churchyard by this time, but for 
the drink.'

'You may cover it,' said Mr Chester, 'it's sufficiently real in 
your sleeve.'

'I should never have been spirited up to take a kiss from the proud 
little beauty, master, but for the drink,' cried Hugh.  'Ha ha ha!  
It was a good one.  As sweet as honeysuckle, I warrant you.  I 
thank the drink for it.  I'll drink to the drink again, master.  
Fill me one more.  Come.  One more!'

'You are such a promising fellow,' said his patron, putting on his 
waistcoat with great nicety, and taking no heed of this request, 
'that I must caution you against having too many impulses from the 
drink, and getting hung before your time.  What's your age?'

'I don't know.'

'At any rate,' said Mr Chester, 'you are young enough to escape 
what I may call a natural death for some years to come.  How can 
you trust yourself in my hands on so short an acquaintance, with a 
halter round your neck?  What a confiding nature yours must be!'

Hugh fell back a pace or two and surveyed him with a look of 
mingled terror, indignation, and surprise.  Regarding himself in 
the glass with the same complacency as before, and speaking as 
smoothly as if he were discussing some pleasant chit-chat of the 
town, his patron went on:

'Robbery on the king's highway, my young friend, is a very 
dangerous and ticklish occupation.  It is pleasant, I have no 
doubt, while it lasts; but like many other pleasures in this 
transitory world, it seldom lasts long.  And really if in the 
ingenuousness of youth, you open your heart so readily on the 
subject, I am afraid your career will be an extremely short one.'

'How's this?' said Hugh.  'What do you talk of master?  Who was it 
set me on?'

'Who?' said Mr Chester, wheeling sharply round, and looking full 
at him for the first time.  'I didn't hear you.  Who was it?'

Hugh faltered, and muttered something which was not audible.

'Who was it?  I am curious to know,' said Mr Chester, with 
surpassing affability.  'Some rustic beauty perhaps?  But be 
cautious, my good friend.  They are not always to be trusted.  Do 
take my advice now, and be careful of yourself.'  With these words 
he turned to the glass again, and went on with his toilet.

Hugh would have answered him that he, the questioner himself had 
set him on, but the words stuck in his throat.  The consummate art 
with which his patron had led him to this point, and managed the 
whole conversation, perfectly baffled him.  He did not doubt that 
if he had made the retort which was on his lips when Mr Chester 
turned round and questioned him so keenly, he would straightway 
have given him into custody and had him dragged before a justice 
with the stolen property upon him; in which case it was as certain 
he would have been hung as it was that he had been born.  The 
ascendency which it was the purpose of the man of the world to 
establish over this savage instrument, was gained from that time.  
Hugh's submission was complete.  He dreaded him beyond description; 
and felt that accident and artifice had spun a web about him, which 
at a touch from such a master-hand as his, would bind him to the 
gallows.

With these thoughts passing through his mind, and yet wondering at 
the very same time how he who came there rioting in the confidence 
of this man (as he thought), should be so soon and so thoroughly 
subdued, Hugh stood cowering before him, regarding him uneasily 
from time to time, while he finished dressing.  When he had done 
so, he took up the letter, broke the seal, and throwing himself 
back in his chair, read it leisurely through.

'Very neatly worded upon my life!  Quite a woman's letter, full of 
what people call tenderness, and disinterestedness, and heart, and 
all that sort of thing!'

As he spoke, he twisted it up, and glancing lazily round at Hugh as 
though he would say 'You see this?' held it in the flame of the 
candle.  When it was in a full blaze, he tossed it into the grate, 
and there it smouldered away.

'It was directed to my son,' he said, turning to Hugh, 'and you did 
quite right to bring it here.  I opened it on my own 
responsibility, and you see what I have done with it.  Take this, 
for your trouble.'

Hugh stepped forward to receive the piece of money he held out to 
him.  As he put it in his hand, he added:

'If you should happen to find anything else of this sort, or to 
pick up any kind of information you may think I would like to have, 
bring it here, will you, my good fellow?'

This was said with a smile which implied--or Hugh thought it did--
'fail to do so at your peril!'  He answered that he would.

'And don't,' said his patron, with an air of the very kindest 
patronage, 'don't be at all downcast or uneasy respecting that 
little rashness we have been speaking of.  Your neck is as safe in 
my hands, my good fellow, as though a baby's fingers clasped it, I 
assure you.--Take another glass.  You are quieter now.'

Hugh accepted it from his hand, and looking stealthily at his 
smiling face, drank the contents in silence.

'Don't you--ha, ha!--don't you drink to the drink any more?' said 
Mr Chester, in his most winning manner.

'To you, sir,' was the sullen answer, with something approaching to 
a bow.  'I drink to you.'

'Thank you.  God bless you.  By the bye, what is your name, my good 
soul?  You are called Hugh, I know, of course--your other name?'

'I have no other name.'

'A very strange fellow!  Do you mean that you never knew one, or 
that you don't choose to tell it?  Which?'

'I'd tell it if I could,' said Hugh, quickly.  'I can't.  I have 
been always called Hugh; nothing more.  I never knew, nor saw, nor 
thought about a father; and I was a boy of six--that's not very 
old--when they hung my mother up at Tyburn for a couple of thousand 
men to stare at.  They might have let her live.  She was poor 
enough.'

'How very sad!' exclaimed his patron, with a condescending smile.  
'I have no doubt she was an exceedingly fine woman.'

'You see that dog of mine?' said Hugh, abruptly.

'Faithful, I dare say?' rejoined his patron, looking at him through 
his glass; 'and immensely clever?  Virtuous and gifted animals, 
whether man or beast, always are so very hideous.'

'Such a dog as that, and one of the same breed, was the only living 
thing except me that howled that day,' said Hugh.  'Out of the two 
thousand odd--there was a larger crowd for its being a woman--the 
dog and I alone had any pity.  If he'd have been a man, he'd have 
been glad to be quit of her, for she had been forced to keep him 
lean and half-starved; but being a dog, and not having a man's 
sense, he was sorry.'

'It was dull of the brute, certainly,' said Mr Chester, 'and very 
like a brute.'

Hugh made no rejoinder, but whistling to his dog, who sprung up at 
the sound and came jumping and sporting about him, bade his 
sympathising friend good night.

'Good night; he returned.  'Remember; you're safe with me--quite 
safe.  So long as you deserve it, my good fellow, as I hope you 
always will, you have a friend in me, on whose silence you may 
rely.  Now do be careful of yourself, pray do, and consider what 
jeopardy you might have stood in.  Good night! bless you!'

Hugh truckled before the hidden meaning of these words as much as 
such a being could, and crept out of the door so submissively and 
subserviently--with an air, in short, so different from that with 
which he had entered--that his patron on being left alone, smiled 
more than ever.

'And yet,' he said, as he took a pinch of snuff, 'I do not like 
their having hanged his mother.  The fellow has a fine eye, and I 
am sure she was handsome.  But very probably she was coarse--red-
nosed perhaps, and had clumsy feet.  Aye, it was all for the best, 
no doubt.'

With this comforting reflection, he put on his coat, took a 
farewell glance at the glass, and summoned his man, who promptly 
attended, followed by a chair and its two bearers.

'Foh!' said Mr Chester.  'The very atmosphere that centaur has 
breathed, seems tainted with the cart and ladder.  Here, Peak.  
Bring some scent and sprinkle the floor; and take away the chair he 
sat upon, and air it; and dash a little of that mixture upon me.  I 
am stifled!'

The man obeyed; and the room and its master being both purified, 
nothing remained for Mr Chester but to demand his hat, to fold it 
jauntily under his arm, to take his seat in the chair and be 
carried off; humming a fashionable tune.



Chapter 24


How the accomplished gentleman spent the evening in the midst of a 
dazzling and brilliant circle; how he enchanted all those with 
whom he mingled by the grace of his deportment, the politeness of 
his manner, the vivacity of his conversation, and the sweetness of 
his voice; how it was observed in every corner, that Chester was a 
man of that happy disposition that nothing ruffled him, that he was 
one on whom the world's cares and errors sat lightly as his dress, 
and in whose smiling face a calm and tranquil mind was constantly 
reflected; how honest men, who by instinct knew him better, 
bowed down before him nevertheless, deferred to his every word, and 
courted his favourable notice; how people, who really had good in 
them, went with the stream, and fawned and flattered, and approved, 
and despised themselves while they did so, and yet had not the 
courage to resist; how, in short, he was one of those who are 
received and cherished in society (as the phrase is) by scores who 
individually would shrink from and be repelled by the object of 
their lavish regard; are things of course, which will suggest 
themselves.  Matter so commonplace needs but a passing glance, and 
there an end.

The despisers of mankind--apart from the mere fools and mimics, of 
that creed--are of two sorts.  They who believe their merit 
neglected and unappreciated, make up one class; they who receive 
adulation and flattery, knowing their own worthlessness, compose 
the other.  Be sure that the coldest-hearted misanthropes are ever 
of this last order.

Mr Chester sat up in bed next morning, sipping his coffee, and 
remembering with a kind of contemptuous satisfaction how he had 
shone last night, and how he had been caressed and courted, when 
his servant brought in a very small scrap of dirty paper, tightly 
sealed in two places, on the inside whereof was inscribed in pretty 
large text these words: 'A friend.  Desiring of a conference.  
Immediate.  Private.  Burn it when you've read it.'

'Where in the name of the Gunpowder Plot did you pick up this?' 
said his master.

It was given him by a person then waiting at the door, the man 
replied.

'With a cloak and dagger?' said Mr Chester.

With nothing more threatening about him, it appeared, than a 
leather apron and a dirty face.  'Let him come in.'  In he came--Mr 
Tappertit; with his hair still on end, and a great lock in his 
hand, which he put down on the floor in the middle of the chamber 
as if he were about to go through some performances in which it was 
a necessary agent.

'Sir,' said Mr Tappertit with a low bow, 'I thank you for this 
condescension, and am glad to see you.  Pardon the menial office in 
which I am engaged, sir, and extend your sympathies to one, who, 
humble as his appearance is, has inn'ard workings far above his 
station.'

Mr Chester held the bed-curtain farther back, and looked at him 
with a vague impression that he was some maniac, who had not only 
broken open the door of his place of confinement, but had brought 
away the lock.  Mr Tappertit bowed again, and displayed his legs to 
the best advantage.

'You have heard, sir,' said Mr Tappertit, laying his hand upon his 
breast, 'of G. Varden Locksmith and bell-hanger and repairs neatly 
executed in town and country, Clerkenwell, London?'

'What then?' asked Mr Chester.

'I'm his 'prentice, sir.'

'What THEN?'

'Ahem!' said Mr Tappertit.  'Would you permit me to shut the door, 
sir, and will you further, sir, give me your honour bright, that 
what passes between us is in the strictest confidence?'

Mr Chester laid himself calmly down in bed again, and turning a 
perfectly undisturbed face towards the strange apparition, which 
had by this time closed the door, begged him to speak out, and to 
be as rational as he could, without putting himself to any very 
great personal inconvenience.

'In the first place, sir,' said Mr Tappertit, producing a small 
pocket-handkerchief and shaking it out of the folds, 'as I have not 
a card about me (for the envy of masters debases us below that 
level) allow me to offer the best substitute that circumstances 
will admit of.  If you will take that in your own hand, sir, and 
cast your eye on the right-hand corner,' said Mr Tappertit, 
offering it with a graceful air, 'you will meet with my 
credentials.'

'Thank you,' answered Mr Chester, politely accepting it, and 
turning to some blood-red characters at one end.  '"Four.  Simon 
Tappertit.  One."  Is that the--'

'Without the numbers, sir, that is my name,' replied the 'prentice.  
'They are merely intended as directions to the washerwoman, and 
have no connection with myself or family.  YOUR name, sir,' said Mr 
Tappertit, looking very hard at his nightcap, 'is Chester, I 
suppose?  You needn't pull it off, sir, thank you.  I observe E. C. 
from here.  We will take the rest for granted.'

'Pray, Mr Tappertit,' said Mr Chester, 'has that complicated piece 
of ironmongery which you have done me the favour to bring with you, 
any immediate connection with the business we are to discuss?'

'It has not, sir,' rejoined the 'prentice.  'It's going to be 
fitted on a ware'us-door in Thames Street.'

'Perhaps, as that is the case,' said Mr Chester, 'and as it has a 
stronger flavour of oil than I usually refresh my bedroom with, you 
will oblige me so far as to put it outside the door?'

'By all means, sir,' said Mr Tappertit, suiting the action to the 
word.

'You'll excuse my mentioning it, I hope?'

'Don't apologise, sir, I beg.  And now, if you please, to 
business.'

During the whole of this dialogue, Mr Chester had suffered nothing 
but his smile of unvarying serenity and politeness to appear upon 
his face.  Sim Tappertit, who had far too good an opinion of 
himself to suspect that anybody could be playing upon him, thought 
within himself that this was something like the respect to which he 
was entitled, and drew a comparison from this courteous demeanour 
of a stranger, by no means favourable to the worthy locksmith.

'From what passes in our house,' said Mr Tappertit, 'I am aware, 
sir, that your son keeps company with a young lady against your 
inclinations.  Sir, your son has not used me well.'

'Mr Tappertit,' said the other, 'you grieve me beyond description.'

'Thank you, sir,' replied the 'prentice.  'I'm glad to hear you say 
so.  He's very proud, sir, is your son; very haughty.'

'I am afraid he IS haughty,' said Mr Chester.  'Do you know I was 
really afraid of that before; and you confirm me?'

'To recount the menial offices I've had to do for your son, sir,' 
said Mr Tappertit; 'the chairs I've had to hand him, the coaches 
I've had to call for him, the numerous degrading duties, wholly 
unconnected with my indenters, that I've had to do for him, would 
fill a family Bible.  Besides which, sir, he is but a young man 
himself and I do not consider "thank'ee Sim," a proper form of 
address on those occasions.'

'Mr Tappertit, your wisdom is beyond your years.  Pray go on.'

'I thank you for your good opinion, sir,' said Sim, much gratified, 
'and will endeavour so to do.  Now sir, on this account (and 
perhaps for another reason or two which I needn't go into) I am on 
your side.  And what I tell you is this--that as long as our people 
go backwards and forwards, to and fro, up and down, to that there 
jolly old Maypole, lettering, and messaging, and fetching and 
carrying, you couldn't help your son keeping company with that 
young lady by deputy,--not if he was minded night and day by all 
the Horse Guards, and every man of 'em in the very fullest 
uniform.'

Mr Tappertit stopped to take breath after this, and then started 
fresh again.

'Now, sir, I am a coming to the point.  You will inquire of me, 
"how is this to he prevented?"  I'll tell you how.  If an honest, 
civil, smiling gentleman like you--'

'Mr Tappertit--really--'

'No, no, I'm serious,' rejoined the 'prentice, 'I am, upon my soul.  
If an honest, civil, smiling gentleman like you, was to talk but 
ten minutes to our old woman--that's Mrs Varden--and flatter her up 
a bit, you'd gain her over for ever.  Then there's this point got--
that her daughter Dolly,'--here a flush came over Mr Tappertit's 
face--'wouldn't be allowed to be a go-between from that time 
forward; and till that point's got, there's nothing ever will 
prevent her.  Mind that.'

'Mr Tappertit, your knowledge of human nature--'

'Wait a minute,' said Sim, folding his arms with a dreadful 
calmness.  'Now I come to THE point.  Sir, there is a villain at 
that Maypole, a monster in human shape, a vagabond of the deepest 
dye, that unless you get rid of and have kidnapped and carried off 
at the very least--nothing less will do--will marry your son to 
that young woman, as certainly and as surely as if he was the 
Archbishop of Canterbury himself.  He will, sir, for the hatred and 
malice that he bears to you; let alone the pleasure of doing a bad 
action, which to him is its own reward.  If you knew how this chap, 
this Joseph Willet--that's his name--comes backwards and forwards 
to our house, libelling, and denouncing, and threatening you, and 
how I shudder when I hear him, you'd hate him worse than I do,--
worse than I do, sir,' said Mr Tappertit wildly, putting his hair 
up straighter, and making a crunching noise with his teeth; 'if 
sich a thing is possible.'

'A little private vengeance in this, Mr Tappertit?'

'Private vengeance, sir, or public sentiment, or both combined--
destroy him,' said Mr Tappertit.  'Miggs says so too.  Miggs and me 
both say so.  We can't bear the plotting and undermining that takes 
place.  Our souls recoil from it.  Barnaby Rudge and Mrs Rudge are 
in it likewise; but the villain, Joseph Willet, is the ringleader.  
Their plottings and schemes are known to me and Miggs.  If you want 
information of 'em, apply to us.  Put Joseph Willet down, sir.  
Destroy him.  Crush him.  And be happy.'

With these words, Mr Tappertit, who seemed to expect no reply, and 
to hold it as a necessary consequence of his eloquence that his 
hearer should be utterly stunned, dumbfoundered, and overwhelmed, 
folded his arms so that the palm of each hand rested on the 
opposite shoulder, and disappeared after the manner of those 
mysterious warners of whom he had read in cheap story-books.

'That fellow,' said Mr Chester, relaxing his face when he was 
fairly gone, 'is good practice.  I HAVE some command of my 
features, beyond all doubt.  He fully confirms what I suspected, 
though; and blunt tools are sometimes found of use, where sharper 
instruments would fail.  I fear I may be obliged to make great 
havoc among these worthy people.  A troublesome necessity!  I 
quite feel for them.'

With that he fell into a quiet slumber:--subsided into such a 
gentle, pleasant sleep, that it was quite infantine.



Chapter 25


Leaving the favoured, and well-received, and flattered of the 
world; him of the world most worldly, who never compromised himself 
by an ungentlemanly action, and never was guilty of a manly one; to 
lie smilingly asleep--for even sleep, working but little change in 
his dissembling face, became with him a piece of cold, conventional 
hypocrisy--we follow in the steps of two slow travellers on foot, 
making towards Chigwell.

Barnaby and his mother.  Grip in their company, of course.

The widow, to whom each painful mile seemed longer than the last, 
toiled wearily along; while Barnaby, yielding to every inconstant 
impulse, fluttered here and there, now leaving her far behind, now 
lingering far behind himself, now darting into some by-lane or path 
and leaving her to pursue her way alone, until he stealthily 
emerged again and came upon her with a wild shout of merriment, as 
his wayward and capricious nature prompted.  Now he would call to 
her from the topmost branch of some high tree by the roadside; now 
using his tall staff as a leaping-pole, come flying over ditch or 
hedge or five-barred gate; now run with surprising swiftness for a 
mile or more on the straight road, and halting, sport upon a patch 
of grass with Grip till she came up.  These were his delights; and 
when his patient mother heard his merry voice, or looked into his 
flushed and healthy face, she would not have abated them by one sad 
word or murmur, though each had been to her a source of suffering 
in the same degree as it was to him of pleasure.

It is something to look upon enjoyment, so that it be free and 
wild and in the face of nature, though it is but the enjoyment of 
an idiot.  It is something to know that Heaven has left the 
capacity of gladness in such a creature's breast; it is something 
to be assured that, however lightly men may crush that faculty in 
their fellows, the Great Creator of mankind imparts it even to his 
despised and slighted work.  Who would not rather see a poor idiot 
happy in the sunlight, than a wise man pining in a darkened jail!

Ye men of gloom and austerity, who paint the face of Infinite 
Benevolence with an eternal frown; read in the Everlasting Book, 
wide open to your view, the lesson it would teach.  Its pictures 
are not in black and sombre hues, but bright and glowing tints; its 
music--save when ye drown it--is not in sighs and groans, but songs 
and cheerful sounds.  Listen to the million voices in the summer 
air, and find one dismal as your own.  Remember, if ye can, the 
sense of hope and pleasure which every glad return of day awakens 
in the breast of all your kind who have not changed their nature; 
and learn some wisdom even from the witless, when their hearts are 
lifted up they know not why, by all the mirth and happiness it 
brings.

The widow's breast was full of care, was laden heavily with secret 
dread and sorrow; but her boy's gaiety of heart gladdened her, and 
beguiled the long journey.  Sometimes he would bid her lean upon 
his arm, and would keep beside her steadily for a short distance; 
but it was more his nature to be rambling to and fro, and she 
better liked to see him free and happy, even than to have him near 
her, because she loved him better than herself.

She had quitted the place to which they were travelling, directly 
after the event which had changed her whole existence; and for two-
and-twenty years had never had courage to revisit it.  It was her 
native village.  How many recollections crowded on her mind when it 
appeared in sight!

Two-and-twenty years.  Her boy's whole life and history.  The last 
time she looked back upon those roofs among the trees, she carried 
him in her arms, an infant.  How often since that time had she sat 
beside him night and day, watching for the dawn of mind that never 
came; how had she feared, and doubted, and yet hoped, long after 
conviction forced itself upon her!  The little stratagems she had 
devised to try him, the little tokens he had given in his childish 
way--not of dulness but of something infinitely worse, so ghastly 
and unchildlike in its cunning--came back as vividly as if but 
yesterday had intervened.  The room in which they used to be; the 
spot in which his cradle stood; he, old and elfin-like in face, but 
ever dear to her, gazing at her with a wild and vacant eye, and 
crooning some uncouth song as she sat by and rocked him; every 
circumstance of his infancy came thronging back, and the most 
trivial, perhaps, the most distinctly.

His older childhood, too; the strange imaginings he had; his terror 
of certain senseless things--familiar objects he endowed with life; 
the slow and gradual breaking out of that one horror, in which, 
before his birth, his darkened intellect began; how, in the midst 
of all, she had found some hope and comfort in his being unlike 
another child, and had gone on almost believing in the slow 
development of his mind until he grew a man, and then his childhood 
was complete and lasting; one after another, all these old thoughts 
sprung up within her, strong after their long slumber and bitterer 
than ever.

She took his arm and they hurried through the village street.  It 
was the same as it was wont to be in old times, yet different too, 
and wore another air.  The change was in herself, not it; but she 
never thought of that, and wondered at its alteration, and where it 
lay, and what it was.

The people all knew Barnaby, and the children of the place came 
flocking round him--as she remembered to have done with their 
fathers and mothers round some silly beggarman, when a child 
herself.  None of them knew her; they passed each well-remembered 
house, and yard, and homestead; and striking into the fields, were 
soon alone again.

The Warren was the end of their journey.  Mr Haredale was walking 
in the garden, and seeing them as they passed the iron gate, 
unlocked it, and bade them enter that way.

'At length you have mustered heart to visit the old place,' he said 
to the widow.  'I am glad you have.'

'For the first time, and the last, sir,' she replied.

'The first for many years, but not the last?'

'The very last.'

'You mean,' said Mr Haredale, regarding her with some surprise, 
'that having made this effort, you are resolved not to persevere 
and are determined to relapse?  This is unworthy of you.  I have 
often told you, you should return here.  You would be happier here 
than elsewhere, I know.  As to Barnaby, it's quite his home.'

'And Grip's,' said Barnaby, holding the basket open.  The raven 
hopped gravely out, and perching on his shoulder and addressing 
himself to Mr Haredale, cried--as a hint, perhaps, that some 
temperate refreshment would be acceptable--'Polly put the ket-tle 
on, we'll all have tea!'

'Hear me, Mary,' said Mr Haredale kindly, as he motioned her to 
walk with him towards the house.  'Your life has been an example of 
patience and fortitude, except in this one particular which has 
often given me great pain.  It is enough to know that you were 
cruelly involved in the calamity which deprived me of an only 
brother, and Emma of her father, without being obliged to suppose 
(as I sometimes am) that you associate us with the author of our 
joint misfortunes.'

'Associate you with him, sir!' she cried.

'Indeed,' said Mr Haredale, 'I think you do.  I almost believe 
that because your husband was bound by so many ties to our 
relation, and died in his service and defence, you have come in 
some sort to connect us with his murder.'

'Alas!' she answered.  'You little know my heart, sir.  You little 
know the truth!'

'It is natural you should do so; it is very probable you may, 
without being conscious of it,' said Mr Haredale, speaking more to 
himself than her.  'We are a fallen house.  Money, dispensed with 
the most lavish hand, would be a poor recompense for sufferings 
like yours; and thinly scattered by hands so pinched and tied as 
ours, it becomes a miserable mockery.  I feel it so, God knows,' he 
added, hastily.  'Why should I wonder if she does!'

'You do me wrong, dear sir, indeed,' she rejoined with great 
earnestness; 'and yet when you come to hear what I desire your 
leave to say--'

'I shall find my doubts confirmed?' he said, observing that she 
faltered and became confused.  'Well!'

He quickened his pace for a few steps, but fell back again to her 
side, and said:

'And have you come all this way at last, solely to speak to me?'

She answered, 'Yes.'

'A curse,' he muttered, 'upon the wretched state of us proud 
beggars, from whom the poor and rich are equally at a distance; the 
one being forced to treat us with a show of cold respect; the other 
condescending to us in their every deed and word, and keeping more 
aloof, the nearer they approach us.--Why, if it were pain to you 
(as it must have been) to break for this slight purpose the chain 
of habit forged through two-and-twenty years, could you not let me 
know your wish, and beg me to come to you?'

'There was not time, sir,' she rejoined.  'I took my resolution 
but last night, and taking it, felt that I must not lose a day--a 
day! an hour--in having speech with you.'

They had by this time reached the house.  Mr Haredale paused for a 
moment, and looked at her as if surprised by the energy of her 
manner.  Observing, however, that she took no heed of him, but 
glanced up, shuddering, at the old walls with which such horrors 
were connected in her mind, he led her by a private stair into his 
library, where Emma was seated in a window, reading.

The young lady, seeing who approached, hastily rose and laid aside 
her book, and with many kind words, and not without tears, gave her 
a warm and earnest welcome.  But the widow shrunk from her embrace 
as though she feared her, and sunk down trembling on a chair.

'It is the return to this place after so long an absence,' said 
Emma gently.  'Pray ring, dear uncle--or stay--Barnaby will run 
himself and ask for wine--'

'Not for the world,' she cried.  'It would have another taste--I 
could not touch it.  I want but a minute's rest.  Nothing but 
that.'

Miss Haredale stood beside her chair, regarding her with silent 
pity.  She remained for a little time quite still; then rose and 
turned to Mr Haredale, who had sat down in his easy chair, and was 
contemplating her with fixed attention.

The tale connected with the mansion borne in mind, it seemed, as 
has been already said, the chosen theatre for such a deed as it had 
known.  The room in which this group were now assembled--hard by 
the very chamber where the act was done--dull, dark, and sombre; 
heavy with worm-eaten books; deadened and shut in by faded 
hangings, muffling every sound; shadowed mournfully by trees whose 
rustling boughs gave ever and anon a spectral knocking at the 
glass; wore, beyond all others in the house, a ghostly, gloomy air.  
Nor were the group assembled there, unfitting tenants of the spot.  
The widow, with her marked and startling face and downcast eyes; Mr 
Haredale stern and despondent ever; his niece beside him, like, yet 
most unlike, the picture of her father, which gazed reproachfully 
down upon them from the blackened wall; Barnaby, with his vacant 
look and restless eye; were all in keeping with the place, and 
actors in the legend.  Nay, the very raven, who had hopped upon the 
table and with the air of some old necromancer appeared to be 
profoundly studying a great folio volume that lay open on a desk, 
was strictly in unison with the rest, and looked like the embodied 
spirit of evil biding his time of mischief.

'I scarcely know,' said the widow, breaking silence, 'how to begin.  
You will think my mind disordered.'

'The whole tenor of your quiet and reproachless life since you were 
last here,' returned Mr Haredale, mildly, 'shall bear witness for 
you.  Why do you fear to awaken such a suspicion?  You do not speak 
to strangers.  You have not to claim our interest or consideration 
for the first time.  Be more yourself.  Take heart.  Any advice or 
assistance that I can give you, you know is yours of right, and 
freely yours.'

'What if I came, sir,' she rejoined, 'I who have but one other 
friend on earth, to reject your aid from this moment, and to say 
that henceforth I launch myself upon the world, alone and 
unassisted, to sink or swim as Heaven may decree!'

'You would have, if you came to me for such a purpose,' said Mr 
Haredale calmly, 'some reason to assign for conduct so 
extraordinary, which--if one may entertain the possibility of 
anything so wild and strange--would have its weight, of course.'

'That, sir,' she answered, 'is the misery of my distress.  I can 
give no reason whatever.  My own bare word is all that I can offer.  
It is my duty, my imperative and bounden duty.  If I did not 
discharge it, I should be a base and guilty wretch.  Having said 
that, my lips are sealed, and I can say no more.'

As though she felt relieved at having said so much, and had nerved 
herself to the remainder of her task, she spoke from this time with 
a firmer voice and heightened courage.

'Heaven is my witness, as my own heart is--and yours, dear young 
lady, will speak for me, I know--that I have lived, since that time 
we all have bitter reason to remember, in unchanging devotion, and 
gratitude to this family.  Heaven is my witness that go where I 
may, I shall preserve those feelings unimpaired.  And it is my 
witness, too, that they alone impel me to the course I must take, 
and from which nothing now shall turn me, as I hope for mercy.'

'These are strange riddles,' said Mr Haredale.

'In this world, sir,' she replied, 'they may, perhaps, never be 
explained.  In another, the Truth will be discovered in its own 
good time.  And may that time,' she added in a low voice, 'be far 
distant!'

'Let me be sure,' said Mr Haredale, 'that I understand you, for I 
am doubtful of my own senses.  Do you mean that you are resolved 
voluntarily to deprive yourself of those means of support you have 
received from us so long--that you are determined to resign the 
annuity we settled on you twenty years ago--to leave house, and 
home, and goods, and begin life anew--and this, for some secret 
reason or monstrous fancy which is incapable of explanation, which 
only now exists, and has been dormant all this time?  In the name 
of God, under what delusion are you labouring?'

'As I am deeply thankful,' she made answer, 'for the kindness of 
those, alive and dead, who have owned this house; and as I would 
not have its roof fall down and crush me, or its very walls drip 
blood, my name being spoken in their hearing; I never will again 
subsist upon their bounty, or let it help me to subsistence.  You 
do not know,' she added, suddenly, 'to what uses it may be applied; 
into what hands it may pass.  I do, and I renounce it.'

'Surely,' said Mr Haredale, 'its uses rest with you.'

'They did.  They rest with me no longer.  It may be--it IS--devoted 
to purposes that mock the dead in their graves.  It never can 
prosper with me.  It will bring some other heavy judgement on the 
head of my dear son, whose innocence will suffer for his mother's 
guilt.'

'What words are these!' cried Mr Haredale, regarding her with 
wonder.  'Among what associates have you fallen?  Into what guilt 
have you ever been betrayed?'

'I am guilty, and yet innocent; wrong, yet right; good in 
intention, though constrained to shield and aid the bad.  Ask me no 
more questions, sir; but believe that I am rather to be pitied than 
condemned.  I must leave my house to-morrow, for while I stay 
there, it is haunted.  My future dwelling, if I am to live in 
peace, must be a secret.  If my poor boy should ever stray this 
way, do not tempt him to disclose it or have him watched when he 
returns; for if we are hunted, we must fly again.  And now this 
load is off my mind, I beseech you--and you, dear Miss Haredale, 
too--to trust me if you can, and think of me kindly as you have 
been used to do.  If I die and cannot tell my secret even then (for 
that may come to pass), it will sit the lighter on my breast in 
that hour for this day's work; and on that day, and every day until 
it comes, I will pray for and thank you both, and trouble you no 
more.

With that, she would have left them, but they detained her, and 
with many soothing words and kind entreaties, besought her to 
consider what she did, and above all to repose more freely upon 
them, and say what weighed so sorely on her mind.  Finding her deaf 
to their persuasions, Mr Haredale suggested, as a last resource, 
that she should confide in Emma, of whom, as a young person and one 
of her own sex, she might stand in less dread than of himself.  
From this proposal, however, she recoiled with the same 
indescribable repugnance she had manifested when they met.  The 
utmost that could be wrung from her was, a promise that she would 
receive Mr Haredale at her own house next evening, and in the mean 
time reconsider her determination and their dissuasions--though any 
change on her part, as she told them, was quite hopeless.  This 
condition made at last, they reluctantly suffered her to depart, 
since she would neither eat nor drink within the house; and she, 
and Barnaby, and Grip, accordingly went out as they had come, by 
the private stair and garden-gate; seeing and being seen of no one 
by the way.

It was remarkable in the raven that during the whole interview he 
had kept his eye on his book with exactly the air of a very sly 
human rascal, who, under the mask of pretending to read hard, was 
listening to everything.  He still appeared to have the 
conversation very strongly in his mind, for although, when they 
were alone again, he issued orders for the instant preparation of 
innumerable kettles for purposes of tea, he was thoughtful, and 
rather seemed to do so from an abstract sense of duty, than with 
any regard to making himself agreeable, or being what is commonly 
called good company.

They were to return by the coach.  As there was an interval of 
full two hours before it started, and they needed rest and some 
refreshment, Barnaby begged hard for a visit to the Maypole.  But 
his mother, who had no wish to be recognised by any of those who 
had known her long ago, and who feared besides that Mr Haredale 
might, on second thoughts, despatch some messenger to that place of 
entertainment in quest of her, proposed to wait in the churchyard 
instead.  As it was easy for Barnaby to buy and carry thither such 
humble viands as they required, he cheerfully assented, and in the 
churchyard they sat down to take their frugal dinner.

Here again, the raven was in a highly reflective state; walking up 
and down when he had dined, with an air of elderly complacency 
which was strongly suggestive of his having his hands under his 
coat-tails; and appearing to read the tombstones with a very 
critical taste.  Sometimes, after a long inspection of an epitaph, 
he would strop his beak upon the grave to which it referred, and 
cry in his hoarse tones, 'I'm a devil, I'm a devil, I'm a devil!' 
but whether he addressed his observations to any supposed person 
below, or merely threw them off as a general remark, is matter of 
uncertainty.

It was a quiet pretty spot, but a sad one for Barnaby's mother; for 
Mr Reuben Haredale lay there, and near the vault in which his ashes 
rested, was a stone to the memory of her own husband, with a brief 
inscription recording how and when he had lost his life.  She sat 
here, thoughtful and apart, until their time was out, and the 
distant horn told that the coach was coming.

Barnaby, who had been sleeping on the grass, sprung up quickly at 
the sound; and Grip, who appeared to understand it equally well, 
walked into his basket straightway, entreating society in general 
(as though he intended a kind of satire upon them in connection 
with churchyards) never to say die on any terms.  They were soon on 
the coach-top and rolling along the road.

It went round by the Maypole, and stopped at the door.  Joe was 
from home, and Hugh came sluggishly out to hand up the parcel that 
it called for.  There was no fear of old John coming out.  They 
could see him from the coach-roof fast asleep in his cosy bar.  It 
was a part of John's character.  He made a point of going to sleep 
at the coach's time.  He despised gadding about; he looked upon 
coaches as things that ought to be indicted; as disturbers of the 
peace of mankind; as restless, bustling, busy, horn-blowing 
contrivances, quite beneath the dignity of men, and only suited to 
giddy girls that did nothing but chatter and go a-shopping.  'We 
know nothing about coaches here, sir,' John would say, if any 
unlucky stranger made inquiry touching the offensive vehicles; 'we 
don't book for 'em; we'd rather not; they're more trouble than 
they're worth, with their noise and rattle.  If you like to wait 
for 'em you can; but we don't know anything about 'em; they may 
call and they may not--there's a carrier--he was looked upon as 
quite good enough for us, when I was a boy.'

She dropped her veil as Hugh climbed up, and while he hung behind, 
and talked to Barnaby in whispers.  But neither he nor any other 
person spoke to her, or noticed her, or had any curiosity about 
her; and so, an alien, she visited and left the village where she 
had been born, and had lived a merry child, a comely girl, a happy 
wife--where she had known all her enjoyment of life, and had 
entered on its hardest sorrows.



Chapter 26


'And you're not surprised to hear this, Varden?' said Mr Haredale.  
'Well!  You and she have always been the best friends, and you 
should understand her if anybody does.'

'I ask your pardon, sir,' rejoined the locksmith.  'I didn't say I 
understood her.  I wouldn't have the presumption to say that of any 
woman.  It's not so easily done.  But I am not so much surprised, 
sir, as you expected me to be, certainly.'

'May I ask why not, my good friend?'

'I have seen, sir,' returned the locksmith with evident reluctance, 
'I have seen in connection with her, something that has filled me 
with distrust and uneasiness.  She has made bad friends, how, or 
when, I don't know; but that her house is a refuge for one robber 
and cut-throat at least, I am certain.  There, sir!  Now it's out.'

'Varden!'

'My own eyes, sir, are my witnesses, and for her sake I would be 
willingly half-blind, if I could but have the pleasure of 
mistrusting 'em.  I have kept the secret till now, and it will go 
no further than yourself, I know; but I tell you that with my own 
eyes--broad awake--I saw, in the passage of her house one evening 
after dark, the highwayman who robbed and wounded Mr Edward 
Chester, and on the same night threatened me.'

'And you made no effort to detain him?' said Mr Haredale quickly.

'Sir,' returned the locksmith, 'she herself prevented me--held me, 
with all her strength, and hung about me until he had got clear 
off.'  And having gone so far, he related circumstantially all that 
had passed upon the night in question.

This dialogue was held in a low tone in the locksmith's little 
parlour, into which honest Gabriel had shown his visitor on his 
arrival.  Mr Haredale had called upon him to entreat his company to 
the widow's, that he might have the assistance of his persuasion 
and influence; and out of this circumstance the conversation had 
arisen.

'I forbore,' said Gabriel, 'from repeating one word of this to 
anybody, as it could do her no good and might do her great harm.  I 
thought and hoped, to say the truth, that she would come to me, and 
talk to me about it, and tell me how it was; but though I have 
purposely put myself in her way more than once or twice, she has 
never touched upon the subject--except by a look.  And indeed,' 
said the good-natured locksmith, 'there was a good deal in the 
look, more than could have been put into a great many words.  It 
said among other matters "Don't ask me anything" so imploringly, 
that I didn't ask her anything.  You'll think me an old fool, I 
know, sir.  If it's any relief to call me one, pray do.'

'I am greatly disturbed by what you tell me,' said Mr Haredale, 
after a silence.  'What meaning do you attach to it?'

The locksmith shook his head, and looked doubtfully out of window 
at the failing light.

'She cannot have married again,' said Mr Haredale.

'Not without our knowledge surely, sir.'

'She may have done so, in the fear that it would lead, if known, to 
some objection or estrangement.  Suppose she married incautiously--
it is not improbable, for her existence has been a lonely and 
monotonous one for many years--and the man turned out a ruffian, 
she would be anxious to screen him, and yet would revolt from his 
crimes.  This might be.  It bears strongly on the whole drift of 
her discourse yesterday, and would quite explain her conduct.  Do 
you suppose Barnaby is privy to these circumstances?'

'Quite impossible to say, sir,' returned the locksmith, shaking his 
head again: 'and next to impossible to find out from him.  If what 
you suppose is really the case, I tremble for the lad--a notable 
person, sir, to put to bad uses--'

'It is not possible, Varden,' said Mr Haredale, in a still lower 
tone of voice than he had spoken yet, 'that we have been blinded 
and deceived by this woman from the beginning?  It is not possible 
that this connection was formed in her husband's lifetime, and led 
to his and my brother's--'

'Good God, sir,' cried Gabriel, interrupting him, 'don't entertain 
such dark thoughts for a moment.  Five-and-twenty years ago, where 
was there a girl like her?  A gay, handsome, laughing, bright-eyed 
damsel!  Think what she was, sir.  It makes my heart ache now, even 
now, though I'm an old man, with a woman for a daughter, to think 
what she was and what she is.  We all change, but that's with Time; 
Time does his work honestly, and I don't mind him.  A fig for Time, 
sir.  Use him well, and he's a hearty fellow, and scorns to have 
you at a disadvantage.  But care and suffering (and those have 
changed her) are devils, sir--secret, stealthy, undermining devils--
who tread down the brightest flowers in Eden, and do more havoc in 
a month than Time does in a year.  Picture to yourself for one 
minute what Mary was before they went to work with her fresh heart 
and face--do her that justice--and say whether such a thing is 
possible.'

'You're a good fellow, Varden,' said Mr Haredale, 'and are quite 
right.  I have brooded on that subject so long, that every breath 
of suspicion carries me back to it.  You are quite right.'

'It isn't, sir,' cried the locksmith with brightened eyes, and 
sturdy, honest voice; 'it isn't because I courted her before Rudge, 
and failed, that I say she was too good for him.  She would have 
been as much too good for me.  But she WAS too good for him; he 
wasn't free and frank enough for her.  I don't reproach his memory 
with it, poor fellow; I only want to put her before you as she 
really was.  For myself, I'll keep her old picture in my mind; and 
thinking of that, and what has altered her, I'll stand her friend, 
and try to win her back to peace.  And damme, sir,' cried Gabriel, 
'with your pardon for the word, I'd do the same if she had married 
fifty highwaymen in a twelvemonth; and think it in the Protestant 
Manual too, though Martha said it wasn't, tooth and nail, till 
doomsday!'

If the dark little parlour had been filled with a dense fog, which, 
clearing away in an instant, left it all radiance and brightness, 
it could not have been more suddenly cheered than by this outbreak 
on the part of the hearty locksmith.  In a voice nearly as full and 
round as his own, Mr Haredale cried 'Well said!' and bade him come 
away without more parley.  The locksmith complied right willingly; 
and both getting into a hackney coach which was waiting at the 
door, drove off straightway.

They alighted at the street corner, and dismissing their 
conveyance, walked to the house.  To their first knock at the door 
there was no response.  A second met with the like result.  But in 
answer to the third, which was of a more vigorous kind, the parlour 
window-sash was gently raised, and a musical voice cried:

'Haredale, my dear fellow, I am extremely glad to see you.  How 
very much you have improved in your appearance since our last 
meeting!  I never saw you looking better.  HOW do you do?'

Mr Haredale turned his eyes towards the casement whence the voice 
proceeded, though there was no need to do so, to recognise the 
speaker, and Mr Chester waved his hand, and smiled a courteous 
welcome.

'The door will be opened immediately,' he said.  'There is nobody 
but a very dilapidated female to perform such offices.  You will 
excuse her infirmities?  If she were in a more elevated station of 
society, she would be gouty.  Being but a hewer of wood and drawer 
of water, she is rheumatic.  My dear Haredale, these are natural 
class distinctions, depend upon it.'

Mr Haredale, whose face resumed its lowering and distrustful look 
the moment he heard the voice, inclined his head stiffly, and 
turned his back upon the speaker.

'Not opened yet,' said Mr Chester.  'Dear me!  I hope the aged soul 
has not caught her foot in some unlucky cobweb by the way.  She is 
there at last!  Come in, I beg!'

Mr Haredale entered, followed by the locksmith.  Turning with a 
look of great astonishment to the old woman who had opened the 
door, he inquired for Mrs Rudge--for Barnaby.  They were both gone, 
she replied, wagging her ancient head, for good.  There was a 
gentleman in the parlour, who perhaps could tell them more.  That 
was all SHE knew.

'Pray, sir,' said Mr Haredale, presenting himself before this new 
tenant, 'where is the person whom I came here to see?'

'My dear friend,' he returned, 'I have not the least idea.'

'Your trifling is ill-timed,' retorted the other in a suppressed 
tone and voice, 'and its subject ill-chosen.  Reserve it for those 
who are your friends, and do not expend it on me.  I lay no claim 
to the distinction, and have the self-denial to reject it.'

'My dear, good sir,' said Mr Chester, 'you are heated with walking.  
Sit down, I beg.  Our friend is--'

'Is but a plain honest man,' returned Mr Haredale, 'and quite 
unworthy of your notice.'

'Gabriel Varden by name, sir,' said the locksmith bluntly.

'A worthy English yeoman!' said Mr Chester.  'A most worthy 
yeoman, of whom I have frequently heard my son Ned--darling fellow--
speak, and have often wished to see.  Varden, my good friend, I am 
glad to know you.  You wonder now,' he said, turning languidly to 
Mr Haredale, 'to see me here.  Now, I am sure you do.'

Mr Haredale glanced at him--not fondly or admiringly--smiled, and 
held his peace.

'The mystery is solved in a moment,' said Mr Chester; 'in a moment.  
Will you step aside with me one instant.  You remember our little 
compact in reference to Ned, and your dear niece, Haredale?  You 
remember the list of assistants in their innocent intrigue?  You 
remember these two people being among them?  My dear fellow, 
congratulate yourself, and me.  I have bought them off.'

'You have done what?' said Mr Haredale.

'Bought them off,' returned his smiling friend.  'I have found it 
necessary to take some active steps towards setting this boy and 
girl attachment quite at rest, and have begun by removing these two 
agents.  You are surprised?  Who CAN withstand the influence of a 
little money!  They wanted it, and have been bought off.  We have 
nothing more to fear from them.  They are gone.'

'Gone!' echoed Mr Haredale.  'Where?'

'My dear fellow--and you must permit me to say again, that you 
never looked so young; so positively boyish as you do to-night--the 
Lord knows where; I believe Columbus himself wouldn't find them.  
Between you and me they have their hidden reasons, but upon that 
point I have pledged myself to secrecy.  She appointed to see you 
here to-night, I know, but found it inconvenient, and couldn't 
wait.  Here is the key of the door.  I am afraid you'll find it 
inconveniently large; but as the tenement is yours, your good-
nature will excuse that, Haredale, I am certain!'



Chapter 27


Mr Haredale stood in the widow's parlour with the door-key in his 
hand, gazing by turns at Mr Chester and at Gabriel Varden, and 
occasionally glancing downward at the key as in the hope that of 
its own accord it would unlock the mystery; until Mr Chester, 
putting on his hat and gloves, and sweetly inquiring whether they 
were walking in the same direction, recalled him to himself.

'No,' he said.  'Our roads diverge--widely, as you know.  For the 
present, I shall remain here.'

'You will be hipped, Haredale; you will be miserable, melancholy, 
utterly wretched,' returned the other.  'It's a place of the very 
last description for a man of your temper.  I know it will make you 
very miserable.'

'Let it,' said Mr Haredale, sitting down; 'and thrive upon the 
thought.  Good night!'

Feigning to be wholly unconscious of the abrupt wave of the hand 
which rendered this farewell tantamount to a dismissal, Mr Chester 
retorted with a bland and heartfelt benediction, and inquired of 
Gabriel in what direction HE was going.

'Yours, sir, would be too much honour for the like of me,' replied 
the locksmith, hesitating.

'I wish you to remain here a little while, Varden,' said Mr 
Haredale, without looking towards them.  'I have a word or two to 
say to you.'

'I will not intrude upon your conference another moment,' said Mr 
Chester with inconceivable politeness.  'May it be satisfactory to 
you both!  God bless you!'  So saying, and bestowing upon the 
locksmith a most refulgent smile, he left them.

'A deplorably constituted creature, that rugged person,' he said, 
as he walked along the street; 'he is an atrocity that carries its 
own punishment along with it--a bear that gnaws himself.  And here 
is one of the inestimable advantages of having a perfect command 
over one's inclinations.  I have been tempted in these two short 
interviews, to draw upon that fellow, fifty times.  Five men in six 
would have yielded to the impulse.  By suppressing mine, I wound 
him deeper and more keenly than if I were the best swordsman in all 
Europe, and he the worst.  You are the wise man's very last 
resource,' he said, tapping the hilt of his weapon; 'we can but 
appeal to you when all else is said and done.  To come to you 
before, and thereby spare our adversaries so much, is a barbarian 
mode of warfare, quite unworthy of any man with the remotest 
pretensions to delicacy of feeling, or refinement.'

He smiled so very pleasantly as he communed with himself after this 
manner, that a beggar was emboldened to follow for alms, and to dog 
his footsteps for some distance.  He was gratified by the 
circumstance, feeling it complimentary to his power of feature, and 
as a reward suffered the man to follow him until he called a chair, 
when he graciously dismissed him with a fervent blessing.

'Which is as easy as cursing,' he wisely added, as he took his 
seat, 'and more becoming to the face.--To Clerkenwell, my good 
creatures, if you please!'  The chairmen were rendered quite 
vivacious by having such a courteous burden, and to Clerkenwell 
they went at a fair round trot.

Alighting at a certain point he had indicated to them upon the 
road, and paying them something less than they expected from a fare 
of such gentle speech, he turned into the street in which the 
locksmith dwelt, and presently stood beneath the shadow of the 
Golden Key.  Mr Tappertit, who was hard at work by lamplight, in a 
corner of the workshop, remained unconscious of his presence until 
a hand upon his shoulder made him start and turn his head.

'Industry,' said Mr Chester, 'is the soul of business, and the 
keystone of prosperity.  Mr Tappertit, I shall expect you to invite 
me to dinner when you are Lord Mayor of London.'

'Sir,' returned the 'prentice, laying down his hammer, and rubbing 
his nose on the back of a very sooty hand, 'I scorn the Lord Mayor 
and everything that belongs to him.  We must have another state of 
society, sir, before you catch me being Lord Mayor.  How de do, sir?'

'The better, Mr Tappertit, for looking into your ingenuous face 
once more.  I hope you are well.'

'I am as well, sir,' said Sim, standing up to get nearer to his 
ear, and whispering hoarsely, 'as any man can be under the 
aggrawations to which I am exposed.  My life's a burden to me.  If 
it wasn't for wengeance, I'd play at pitch and toss with it on the 
losing hazard.'

'Is Mrs Varden at home?' said Mr Chester.

'Sir,' returned Sim, eyeing him over with a look of concentrated 
expression,--'she is.  Did you wish to see her?'

Mr Chester nodded.

'Then come this way, sir,' said Sim, wiping his face upon his 
apron.  'Follow me, sir.--Would you permit me to whisper in your 
ear, one half a second?'

'By all means.'

Mr Tappertit raised himself on tiptoe, applied his lips to Mr 
Chester's ear, drew back his head without saying anything, looked 
hard at him, applied them to his ear again, again drew back, and 
finally whispered--'The name is Joseph Willet.  Hush!  I say no 
more.'

Having said that much, he beckoned the visitor with a mysterious 
aspect to follow him to the parlour-door, where he announced him 
in the voice of a gentleman-usher.  'Mr Chester.'

'And not Mr Ed'dard, mind,' said Sim, looking into the door again, 
and adding this by way of postscript in his own person; 'it's his 
father.'

'But do not let his father,' said Mr Chester, advancing hat in 
hand, as he observed the effect of this last explanatory 
announcement, 'do not let his father be any check or restraint on 
your domestic occupations, Miss Varden.'

'Oh!  Now!  There!  An't I always a-saying it!' exclaimed Miggs, 
clapping her hands.  'If he an't been and took Missis for her own 
daughter.  Well, she DO look like it, that she do.  Only think of 
that, mim!'

'Is it possible,' said Mr Chester in his softest tones, 'that this 
is Mrs Varden!  I am amazed.  That is not your daughter, Mrs 
Varden?  No, no.  Your sister.'

'My daughter, indeed, sir,' returned Mrs V., blushing with great 
juvenility.

'Ah, Mrs Varden!' cried the visitor.  'Ah, ma'am--humanity is 
indeed a happy lot, when we can repeat ourselves in others, and 
still be young as they.  You must allow me to salute you--the 
custom of the country, my dear madam--your daughter too.'

Dolly showed some reluctance to perform this ceremony, but was 
sharply reproved by Mrs Varden, who insisted on her undergoing it 
that minute.  For pride, she said with great severity, was one of 
the seven deadly sins, and humility and lowliness of heart were 
virtues.  Wherefore she desired that Dolly would be kissed 
immediately, on pain of her just displeasure; at the same time 
giving her to understand that whatever she saw her mother do, she 
might safely do herself, without being at the trouble of any 
reasoning or reflection on the subject--which, indeed, was 
offensive and undutiful, and in direct contravention of the church 
catechism.

Thus admonished, Dolly complied, though by no means willingly; for 
there was a broad, bold look of admiration in Mr Chester's face, 
refined and polished though it sought to be, which distressed her 
very much.  As she stood with downcast eyes, not liking to look up 
and meet his, he gazed upon her with an approving air, and then 
turned to her mother.

'My friend Gabriel (whose acquaintance I only made this very 
evening) should be a happy man, Mrs Varden.'

'Ah!' sighed Mrs V., shaking her head.

'Ah!' echoed Miggs.

'Is that the case?' said Mr Chester, compassionately.  'Dear me!'

'Master has no intentions, sir,' murmured Miggs as she sidled up 
to him, 'but to be as grateful as his natur will let him, for 
everythink he owns which it is in his powers to appreciate.  But we 
never, sir'--said Miggs, looking sideways at Mrs Varden, and 
interlarding her discourse with a sigh--'we never know the full 
value of SOME wines and fig-trees till we lose 'em.  So much the 
worse, sir, for them as has the slighting of 'em on their 
consciences when they're gone to be in full blow elsewhere.'  And 
Miss Miggs cast up her eyes to signify where that might be.

As Mrs Varden distinctly heard, and was intended to hear, all that 
Miggs said, and as these words appeared to convey in metaphorical 
terms a presage or foreboding that she would at some early period 
droop beneath her trials and take an easy flight towards the stars, 
she immediately began to languish, and taking a volume of the 
Manual from a neighbouring table, leant her arm upon it as though 
she were Hope and that her Anchor.  Mr Chester perceiving this, 
and seeing how the volume was lettered on the back, took it gently 
from her hand, and turned the fluttering leaves.

'My favourite book, dear madam.  How often, how very often in his 
early life--before he can remember'--(this clause was strictly 
true) 'have I deduced little easy moral lessons from its pages, for 
my dear son Ned!  You know Ned?'

Mrs Varden had that honour, and a fine affable young gentleman he 
was.

'You're a mother, Mrs Varden,' said Mr Chester, taking a pinch of 
snuff, 'and you know what I, as a father, feel, when he is praised.  
He gives me some uneasiness--much uneasiness--he's of a roving 
nature, ma'am--from flower to flower--from sweet to sweet--but his 
is the butterfly time of life, and we must not be hard upon such 
trifling.'

He glanced at Dolly.  She was attending evidently to what he said.  
Just what he desired!

'The only thing I object to in this little trait of Ned's, is,' 
said Mr Chester, '--and the mention of his name reminds me, by the 
way, that I am about to beg the favour of a minute's talk with you 
alone--the only thing I object to in it, is, that it DOES partake 
of insincerity.  Now, however I may attempt to disguise the fact 
from myself in my affection for Ned, still I always revert to this--
that if we are not sincere, we are nothing.  Nothing upon earth.  
Let us be sincere, my dear madam--'

'--and Protestant,' murmured Mrs Varden.

'--and Protestant above all things.  Let us be sincere and 
Protestant, strictly moral, strictly just (though always with a 
leaning towards mercy), strictly honest, and strictly true, and we 
gain--it is a slight point, certainly, but still it is something 
tangible; we throw up a groundwork and foundation, so to speak, of 
goodness, on which we may afterwards erect some worthy 
superstructure.'

Now, to be sure, Mrs Varden thought, here is a perfect character.  
Here is a meek, righteous, thoroughgoing Christian, who, having 
mastered all these qualities, so difficult of attainment; who, 
having dropped a pinch of salt on the tails of all the cardinal 
virtues, and caught them every one; makes light of their 
possession, and pants for more morality.  For the good woman never 
doubted (as many good men and women never do), that this slighting 
kind of profession, this setting so little store by great matters, 
this seeming to say, 'I am not proud, I am what you hear, but I 
consider myself no better than other people; let us change the 
subject, pray'--was perfectly genuine and true.  He so contrived 
it, and said it in that way that it appeared to have been forced 
from him, and its effect was marvellous.

Aware of the impression he had made--few men were quicker than he 
at such discoveries--Mr Chester followed up the blow by propounding 
certain virtuous maxims, somewhat vague and general in their 
nature, doubtless, and occasionally partaking of the character of 
truisms, worn a little out at elbow, but delivered in so charming a 
voice and with such uncommon serenity and peace of mind, that they 
answered as well as the best.  Nor is this to be wondered at; for 
as hollow vessels produce a far more musical sound in falling than 
those which are substantial, so it will oftentimes be found that 
sentiments which have nothing in them make the loudest ringing in 
the world, and are the most relished.

Mr Chester, with the volume gently extended in one hand, and with 
the other planted lightly on his breast, talked to them in the most 
delicious manner possible; and quite enchanted all his hearers, 
notwithstanding their conflicting interests and thoughts.  Even 
Dolly, who, between his keen regards and her eyeing over by Mr 
Tappertit, was put quite out of countenance, could not help owning 
within herself that he was the sweetest-spoken gentleman she had 
ever seen.  Even Miss Miggs, who was divided between admiration of 
Mr Chester and a mortal jealousy of her young mistress, had 
sufficient leisure to be propitiated.  Even Mr Tappertit, though 
occupied as we have seen in gazing at his heart's delight, could 
not wholly divert his thoughts from the voice of the other charmer.  
Mrs Varden, to her own private thinking, had never been so improved 
in all her life; and when Mr Chester, rising and craving permission 
to speak with her apart, took her by the hand and led her at arm's 
length upstairs to the best sitting-room, she almost deemed him 
something more than human.

'Dear madam,' he said, pressing her hand delicately to his lips; 
'be seated.'

Mrs Varden called up quite a courtly air, and became seated.

'You guess my object?' said Mr Chester, drawing a chair towards 
her.  'You divine my purpose?  I am an affectionate parent, my dear 
Mrs Varden.'

'That I am sure you are, sir,' said Mrs V.

'Thank you,' returned Mr Chester, tapping his snuff-box lid.  
'Heavy moral responsibilities rest with parents, Mrs Varden.'

Mrs Varden slightly raised her hands, shook her head, and looked at 
the ground as though she saw straight through the globe, out at the 
other end, and into the immensity of space beyond.

'I may confide in you,' said Mr Chester, 'without reserve.  I love 
my son, ma'am, dearly; and loving him as I do, I would save him 
from working certain misery.  You know of his attachment to Miss 
Haredale.  You have abetted him in it, and very kind of you it was 
to do so.  I am deeply obliged to you--most deeply obliged to you--
for your interest in his behalf; but my dear ma'am, it is a 
mistaken one, I do assure you.'

Mrs Varden stammered that she was sorry--'

'Sorry, my dear ma'am,' he interposed.  'Never be sorry for what is 
so very amiable, so very good in intention, so perfectly like 
yourself.  But there are grave and weighty reasons, pressing family 
considerations, and apart even from these, points of religious 
difference, which interpose themselves, and render their union 
impossible; utterly im-possible.  I should have mentioned these 
circumstances to your husband; but he has--you will excuse my 
saying this so freely--he has NOT your quickness of apprehension or 
depth of moral sense.  What an extremely airy house this is, and 
how beautifully kept!  For one like myself--a widower so long--
these tokens of female care and superintendence have inexpressible 
charms.'

Mrs Varden began to think (she scarcely knew why) that the young Mr 
Chester must be in the wrong and the old Mr Chester must he in the 
right.

'My son Ned,' resumed her tempter with his most winning air, 'has 
had, I am told, your lovely daughter's aid, and your open-hearted 
husband's.'

'--Much more than mine, sir,' said Mrs Varden; 'a great deal more.  
I have often had my doubts.  It's a--'

'A bad example,' suggested Mr Chester.  'It is.  No doubt it is.  
Your daughter is at that age when to set before her an 
encouragement for young persons to rebel against their parents on 
this most important point, is particularly injudicious.  You are 
quite right.  I ought to have thought of that myself, but it 
escaped me, I confess--so far superior are your sex to ours, dear 
madam, in point of penetration and sagacity.'

Mrs Varden looked as wise as if she had really said something to 
deserve this compliment--firmly believed she had, in short--and her 
faith in her own shrewdness increased considerably.

'My dear ma'am,' said Mr Chester, 'you embolden me to be plain 
with you.  My son and I are at variance on this point.  The young 
lady and her natural guardian differ upon it, also.  And the 
closing point is, that my son is bound by his duty to me, by his 
honour, by every solemn tie and obligation, to marry some one 
else.'

'Engaged to marry another lady!' quoth Mrs Varden, holding up her 
hands.

'My dear madam, brought up, educated, and trained, expressly for 
that purpose.  Expressly for that purpose.--Miss Haredale, I am 
told, is a very charming creature.'

'I am her foster-mother, and should know--the best young lady in 
the world,' said Mrs Varden.

'I have not the smallest doubt of it.  I am sure she is.  And you, 
who have stood in that tender relation towards her, are bound to 
consult her happiness.  Now, can I--as I have said to Haredale, who 
quite agrees--can I possibly stand by, and suffer her to throw 
herself away (although she IS of a Catholic family), upon a young 
fellow who, as yet, has no heart at all?  It is no imputation upon 
him to say he has not, because young men who have plunged deeply 
into the frivolities and conventionalities of society, very seldom 
have.  Their hearts never grow, my dear ma'am, till after thirty.  
I don't believe, no, I do NOT believe, that I had any heart myself 
when I was Ned's age.'

'Oh sir,' said Mrs Varden, 'I think you must have had.  It's 
impossible that you, who have so much now, can ever have been 
without any.'

'I hope,' he answered, shrugging his shoulders meekly, 'I have a 
little; I hope, a very little--Heaven knows!  But to return to Ned; 
I have no doubt you thought, and therefore interfered benevolently 
in his behalf, that I objected to Miss Haredale.  How very 
natural!  My dear madam, I object to him--to him--emphatically to 
Ned himself.'

Mrs Varden was perfectly aghast at the disclosure.

'He has, if he honourably fulfils this solemn obligation of which I 
have told you--and he must be honourable, dear Mrs Varden, or he is 
no son of mine--a fortune within his reach.  He is of most 
expensive, ruinously expensive habits; and if, in a moment of 
caprice and wilfulness, he were to marry this young lady, and so 
deprive himself of the means of gratifying the tastes to which he 
has been so long accustomed, he would--my dear madam, he would 
break the gentle creature's heart.  Mrs Varden, my good lady, my 
dear soul, I put it to you--is such a sacrifice to be endured?  Is 
the female heart a thing to be trifled with in this way?  Ask your 
own, my dear madam.  Ask your own, I beseech you.'

'Truly,' thought Mrs Varden, 'this gentleman is a saint.  But,' she 
added aloud, and not unnaturally, 'if you take Miss Emma's lover 
away, sir, what becomes of the poor thing's heart then?'

'The very point,' said Mr Chester, not at all abashed, 'to which I 
wished to lead you.  A marriage with my son, whom I should be 
compelled to disown, would be followed by years of misery; they 
would be separated, my dear madam, in a twelvemonth.  To break off 
this attachment, which is more fancied than real, as you and I know 
very well, will cost the dear girl but a few tears, and she is 
happy again.  Take the case of your own daughter, the young lady 
downstairs, who is your breathing image'--Mrs Varden coughed and 
simpered--'there is a young man (I am sorry to say, a dissolute 
fellow, of very indifferent character) of whom I have heard Ned 
speak--Bullet was it--Pullet--Mullet--'

'There is a young man of the name of Joseph Willet, sir,' said Mrs 
Varden, folding her hands loftily.

'That's he,' cried Mr Chester.  'Suppose this Joseph Willet now, 
were to aspire to the affections of your charming daughter, and 
were to engage them.'

'It would be like his impudence,' interposed Mrs Varden, bridling, 
'to dare to think of such a thing!'

'My dear madam, that's the whole case.  I know it would be like his 
impudence.  It is like Ned's impudence to do as he has done; but 
you would not on that account, or because of a few tears from your 
beautiful daughter, refrain from checking their inclinations in 
their birth.  I meant to have reasoned thus with your husband when 
I saw him at Mrs Rudge's this evening--'

'My husband,' said Mrs Varden, interposing with emotion, 'would be 
a great deal better at home than going to Mrs Rudge's so often.  I 
don't know what he does there.  I don't see what occasion he has to 
busy himself in her affairs at all, sir.'

'If I don't appear to express my concurrence in those last 
sentiments of yours,' returned Mr Chester, 'quite so strongly as 
you might desire, it is because his being there, my dear madam, and 
not proving conversational, led me hither, and procured me the 
happiness of this interview with one, in whom the whole management, 
conduct, and prosperity of her family are centred, I perceive.'

With that he took Mrs Varden's hand again, and having pressed it to 
his lips with the highflown gallantry of the day--a little 
burlesqued to render it the more striking in the good lady's 
unaccustomed eyes--proceeded in the same strain of mingled 
sophistry, cajolery, and flattery, to entreat that her utmost 
influence might be exerted to restrain her husband and daughter 
from any further promotion of Edward's suit to Miss Haredale, and 
from aiding or abetting either party in any way.  Mrs Varden was 
but a woman, and had her share of vanity, obstinacy, and love of 
power.  She entered into a secret treaty of alliance, offensive and 
defensive, with her insinuating visitor; and really did believe, as 
many others would have done who saw and heard him, that in so doing 
she furthered the ends of truth, justice, and morality, in a very 
uncommon degree.

Overjoyed by the success of his negotiation, and mightily amused 
within himself, Mr Chester conducted her downstairs in the same 
state as before; and having repeated the previous ceremony of 
salutation, which also as before comprehended Dolly, took his 
leave; first completing the conquest of Miss Miggs's heart, by 
inquiring if 'this young lady' would light him to the door.

'Oh, mim,' said Miggs, returning with the candle.  'Oh gracious me, 
mim, there's a gentleman!  Was there ever such an angel to talk as 
he is--and such a sweet-looking man!  So upright and noble, that he 
seems to despise the very ground he walks on; and yet so mild and 
condescending, that he seems to say "but I will take notice on it 
too."  And to think of his taking you for Miss Dolly, and Miss 
Dolly for your sister--Oh, my goodness me, if I was master wouldn't 
I be jealous of him!'

Mrs Varden reproved her handmaid for this vain-speaking; but very 
gently and mildly--quite smilingly indeed--remarking that she was a 
foolish, giddy, light-headed girl, whose spirits carried her 
beyond all bounds, and who didn't mean half she said, or she would 
be quite angry with her.

'For my part,' said Dolly, in a thoughtful manner, 'I half believe 
Mr Chester is something like Miggs in that respect.  For all his 
politeness and pleasant speaking, I am pretty sure he was making 
game of us, more than once.'

'If you venture to say such a thing again, and to speak ill of 
people behind their backs in my presence, miss,' said Mrs Varden, 
'I shall insist upon your taking a candle and going to bed 
directly.  How dare you, Dolly?  I'm astonished at you.  The 
rudeness of your whole behaviour this evening has been disgraceful.  
Did anybody ever hear,' cried the enraged matron, bursting into 
tears, 'of a daughter telling her own mother she has been made game 
of!'

What a very uncertain temper Mrs Varden's was!



Chapter 28


Repairing to a noted coffee-house in Covent Garden when he left the 
locksmith's, Mr Chester sat long over a late dinner, entertaining 
himself exceedingly with the whimsical recollection of his recent 
proceedings, and congratulating himself very much on his great 
cleverness.  Influenced by these thoughts, his face wore an 
expression so benign and tranquil, that the waiter in immediate 
attendance upon him felt he could almost have died in his defence, 
and settled in his own mind (until the receipt of the bill, and a 
very small fee for very great trouble disabused it of the idea) 
that such an apostolic customer was worth half-a-dozen of the 
ordinary run of visitors, at least.

A visit to the gaming-table--not as a heated, anxious venturer, but 
one whom it was quite a treat to see staking his two or three 
pieces in deference to the follies of society, and smiling with 
equal benevolence on winners and losers--made it late before he 
reached home.  It was his custom to bid his servant go to bed at 
his own time unless he had orders to the contrary, and to leave a 
candle on the common stair.  There was a lamp on the landing by 
which he could always light it when he came home late, and having a 
key of the door about him he could enter and go to bed at his 
pleasure.

He opened the glass of the dull lamp, whose wick, burnt up and 
swollen like a drunkard's nose, came flying off in little 
carbuncles at the candle's touch, and scattering hot sparks about, 
rendered it matter of some difficulty to kindle the lazy taper; 
when a noise, as of a man snoring deeply some steps higher up, 
caused him to pause and listen.  It was the heavy breathing of a 
sleeper, close at hand.  Some fellow had lain down on the open 
staircase, and was slumbering soundly.  Having lighted the candle 
at length and opened his own door, he softly ascended, holding the 
taper high above his head, and peering cautiously about; curious to 
see what kind of man had chosen so comfortless a shelter for his 
lodging.

With his head upon the landing and his great limbs flung over half-
a-dozen stairs, as carelessly as though he were a dead man whom 
drunken bearers had thrown down by chance, there lay Hugh, face 
uppermost, his long hair drooping like some wild weed upon his 
wooden pillow, and his huge chest heaving with the sounds which so 
unwontedly disturbed the place and hour.

He who came upon him so unexpectedly was about to break his rest by 
thrusting him with his foot, when, glancing at his upturned face, 
he arrested himself in the very action, and stooping down and 
shading the candle with his hand, examined his features closely.  
Close as his first inspection was, it did not suffice, for he 
passed the light, still carefully shaded as before, across and 
across his face, and yet observed him with a searching eye.

While he was thus engaged, the sleeper, without any starting or 
turning round, awoke.  There was a kind of fascination in meeting 
his steady gaze so suddenly, which took from the other the presence 
of mind to withdraw his eyes, and forced him, as it were, to meet 
his look.  So they remained staring at each other, until Mr Chester 
at last broke silence, and asked him in a low voice, why he lay 
sleeping there.

'I thought,' said Hugh, struggling into a sitting posture and 
gazing at him intently, still, 'that you were a part of my dream.  
It was a curious one.  I hope it may never come true, master.'

'What makes you shiver?'

'The--the cold, I suppose,' he growled, as he shook himself and 
rose.  'I hardly know where I am yet.'

'Do you know me?' said Mr Chester.

'Ay, I know you,' he answered.  'I was dreaming of you--we're not 
where I thought we were.  That's a comfort.'

He looked round him as he spoke, and in particular looked above his 
head, as though he half expected to be standing under some object 
which had had existence in his dream.  Then he rubbed his eyes and 
shook himself again, and followed his conductor into his own rooms.

Mr Chester lighted the candles which stood upon his dressing-table, 
and wheeling an easy-chair towards the fire, which was yet 
burning, stirred up a cheerful blaze, sat down before it, and bade 
his uncouth visitor 'Come here,' and draw his boots off.

'You have been drinking again, my fine fellow,' he said, as Hugh 
went down on one knee, and did as he was told.

'As I'm alive, master, I've walked the twelve long miles, and 
waited here I don't know how long, and had no drink between my lips 
since dinner-time at noon.'

'And can you do nothing better, my pleasant friend, than fall 
asleep, and shake the very building with your snores?' said Mr 
Chester.  'Can't you dream in your straw at home, dull dog as you 
are, that you need come here to do it?--Reach me those slippers, 
and tread softly.'

Hugh obeyed in silence.

'And harkee, my dear young gentleman,' said Mr Chester, as he put 
them on, 'the next time you dream, don't let it be of me, but of 
some dog or horse with whom you are better acquainted.  Fill the 
glass once--you'll find it and the bottle in the same place--and 
empty it to keep yourself awake.'

Hugh obeyed again even more zealously--and having done so, 
presented himself before his patron.

'Now,' said Mr Chester, 'what do you want with me?'

'There was news to-day,' returned Hugh.  'Your son was at our 
house--came down on horseback.  He tried to see the young woman, 
but couldn't get sight of her.  He left some letter or some message 
which our Joe had charge of, but he and the old one quarrelled 
about it when your son had gone, and the old one wouldn't let it be 
delivered.  He says (that's the old one does) that none of his 
people shall interfere and get him into trouble.  He's a landlord, 
he says, and lives on everybody's custom.'

'He's a jewel,' smiled Mr Chester, 'and the better for being a dull 
one.--Well?'

'Varden's daughter--that's the girl I kissed--'

'--and stole the bracelet from upon the king's highway,' said Mr 
Chester, composedly.  'Yes; what of her?'

'She wrote a note at our house to the young woman, saying she lost 
the letter I brought to you, and you burnt.  Our Joe was to carry 
it, but the old one kept him at home all next day, on purpose that 
he shouldn't.  Next morning he gave it to me to take; and here it 
is.'

'You didn't deliver it then, my good friend?' said Mr Chester, 
twirling Dolly's note between his finger and thumb, and feigning to 
be surprised.

'I supposed you'd want to have it,' retorted Hugh.  'Burn one, burn 
all, I thought.'

'My devil-may-care acquaintance,' said Mr Chester--'really if you 
do not draw some nicer distinctions, your career will be cut short 
with most surprising suddenness.  Don't you know that the letter 
you brought to me, was directed to my son who resides in this very 
place?  And can you descry no difference between his letters and 
those addressed to other people?'

'If you don't want it,' said Hugh, disconcerted by this reproof, 
for he had expected high praise, 'give it me back, and I'll deliver 
it.  I don't know how to please you, master.'

'I shall deliver it,' returned his patron, putting it away after a 
moment's consideration, 'myself.  Does the young lady walk out, on 
fine mornings?'

'Mostly--about noon is her usual time.'

'Alone?'

'Yes, alone.'

'Where?'

'In the grounds before the house.--Them that the footpath crosses.'

'If the weather should be fine, I may throw myself in her way to-
morrow, perhaps,' said Mr Chester, as coolly as if she were one of 
his ordinary acquaintance.  'Mr Hugh, if I should ride up to the 
Maypole door, you will do me the favour only to have seen me once.  
You must suppress your gratitude, and endeavour to forget my 
forbearance in the matter of the bracelet.  It is natural it should 
break out, and it does you honour; but when other folks are by, you 
must, for your own sake and safety, be as like your usual self as 
though you owed me no obligation whatever, and had never stood 
within these walls.  You comprehend me?'

Hugh understood him perfectly.  After a pause he muttered that he 
hoped his patron would involve him in no trouble about this last 
letter; for he had kept it back solely with the view of pleasing 
him.  He was continuing in this strain, when Mr Chester with a 
most beneficent and patronising air cut him short by saying:

'My good fellow, you have my promise, my word, my sealed bond (for 
a verbal pledge with me is quite as good), that I will always 
protect you so long as you deserve it.  Now, do set your mind at 
rest.  Keep it at ease, I beg of you.  When a man puts himself in 
my power so thoroughly as you have done, I really feel as though he 
had a kind of claim upon me.  I am more disposed to mercy and 
forbearance under such circumstances than I can tell you, Hugh.  Do 
look upon me as your protector, and rest assured, I entreat you, 
that on the subject of that indiscretion, you may preserve, as long 
as you and I are friends, the lightest heart that ever beat within 
a human breast.  Fill that glass once more to cheer you on your 
road homewards--I am really quite ashamed to think how far you have 
to go--and then God bless you for the night.'

'They think,' said Hugh, when he had tossed the liquor down, 'that 
I am sleeping soundly in the stable.  Ha ha ha!  The stable door is 
shut, but the steed's gone, master.'

'You are a most convivial fellow,' returned his friend, 'and I love 
your humour of all things.  Good night!  Take the greatest 
possible care of yourself, for my sake!'

It was remarkable that during the whole interview, each had 
endeavoured to catch stolen glances of the other's face, and had 
never looked full at it.  They interchanged one brief and hasty 
glance as Hugh went out, averted their eyes directly, and so 
separated.  Hugh closed the double doors behind him, carefully and 
without noise; and Mr Chester remained in his easy-chair, with his 
gaze intently fixed upon the fire.

'Well!' he said, after meditating for a long time--and said with a 
deep sigh and an uneasy shifting of his attitude, as though he 
dismissed some other subject from his thoughts, and returned to 
that which had held possession of them all the day--the plot 
thickens; I have thrown the shell; it will explode, I think, in 
eight-and-forty hours, and should scatter these good folks 
amazingly.  We shall see!'

He went to bed and fell asleep, but had not slept long when he 
started up and thought that Hugh was at the outer door, calling in 
a strange voice, very different from his own, to be admitted.  The 
delusion was so strong upon him, and was so full of that vague 
terror of the night in which such visions have their being, that he 
rose, and taking his sheathed sword in his hand, opened the door, 
and looked out upon the staircase, and towards the spot where Hugh 
had lain asleep; and even spoke to him by name.  But all was dark 
and quiet, and creeping back to bed again, he fell, after an hour's 
uneasy watching, into a second sleep, and woke no more till 
morning.



Chapter 29


The thoughts of worldly men are for ever regulated by a moral law 
of gravitation, which, like the physical one, holds them down to 
earth.  The bright glory of day, and the silent wonders of a 
starlit night, appeal to their minds in vain.  There are no signs 
in the sun, or in the moon, or in the stars, for their reading.  
They are like some wise men, who, learning to know each planet by 
its Latin name, have quite forgotten such small heavenly 
constellations as Charity, Forbearance, Universal Love, and Mercy, 
although they shine by night and day so brightly that the blind may 
see them; and who, looking upward at the spangled sky, see nothing 
there but the reflection of their own great wisdom and book-
learning.

It is curious to imagine these people of the world, busy in 
thought, turning their eyes towards the countless spheres that 
shine above us, and making them reflect the only images their minds 
contain.  The man who lives but in the breath of princes, has 
nothing his sight but stars for courtiers' breasts.  The envious 
man beholds his neighbours' honours even in the sky; to the money-
hoarder, and the mass of worldly folk, the whole great universe 
above glitters with sterling coin--fresh from the mint--stamped 
with the sovereign's head--coming always between them and heaven, 
turn where they may.  So do the shadows of our own desires stand 
between us and our better angels, and thus their brightness is 
eclipsed.

Everything was fresh and gay, as though the world were but that 
morning made, when Mr Chester rode at a tranquil pace along the 
Forest road.  Though early in the season, it was warm and genial 
weather; the trees were budding into leaf, the hedges and the grass 
were green, the air was musical with songs of birds, and high above 
them all the lark poured out her richest melody.  In shady spots, 
the morning dew sparkled on each young leaf and blade of grass; 
and where the sun was shining, some diamond drops yet glistened 
brightly, as in unwillingness to leave so fair a world, and have 
such brief existence.  Even the light wind, whose rustling was as 
gentle to the ear as softly-falling water, had its hope and 
promise; and, leaving a pleasant fragrance in its track as it went 
fluttering by, whispered of its intercourse with Summer, and of his 
happy coming.

The solitary rider went glancing on among the trees, from sunlight 
into shade and back again, at the same even pace--looking about 
him, certainly, from time to time, but with no greater thought of 
the day or the scene through which he moved, than that he was 
fortunate (being choicely dressed) to have such favourable weather.  
He smiled very complacently at such times, but rather as if he were 
satisfied with himself than with anything else: and so went riding 
on, upon his chestnut cob, as pleasant to look upon as his own 
horse, and probably far less sensitive to the many cheerful 
influences by which he was surrounded.

In the course of time, the Maypole's massive chimneys rose upon his 
view: but he quickened not his pace one jot, and with the same cool 
gravity rode up to the tavern porch.  John Willet, who was toasting 
his red face before a great fire in the bar, and who, with 
surpassing foresight and quickness of apprehension, had been 
thinking, as he looked at the blue sky, that if that state of 
things lasted much longer, it might ultimately become necessary to 
leave off fires and throw the windows open, issued forth to hold 
his stirrup; calling lustily for Hugh.

'Oh, you're here, are you, sir?' said John, rather surprised by the 
quickness with which he appeared.  'Take this here valuable animal 
into the stable, and have more than particular care of him if you 
want to keep your place.  A mortal lazy fellow, sir; he needs a 
deal of looking after.'

'But you have a son,' returned Mr Chester, giving his bridle to 
Hugh as he dismounted, and acknowledging his salute by a careless 
motion of his hand towards his hat.  'Why don't you make HIM 
useful?'

'Why, the truth is, sir,' replied John with great importance, 'that 
my son--what, you're a-listening are you, villain?'

'Who's listening?' returned Hugh angrily.  'A treat, indeed, to 
hear YOU speak!  Would you have me take him in till he's cool?'

'Walk him up and down further off then, sir,' cried old John, 'and 
when you see me and a noble gentleman entertaining ourselves with 
talk, keep your distance.  If you don't know your distance, sir,' 
added Mr Willet, after an enormously long pause, during which he 
fixed his great dull eyes on Hugh, and waited with exemplary 
patience for any little property in the way of ideas that might 
come to him, 'we'll find a way to teach you, pretty soon.'

Hugh shrugged his shoulders scornfully, and in his reckless 
swaggering way, crossed to the other side of the little green, and 
there, with the bridle slung loosely over his shoulder, led the 
horse to and fro, glancing at his master every now and then from 
under his bushy eyebrows, with as sinister an aspect as one would 
desire to see.

Mr Chester, who, without appearing to do so, had eyed him 
attentively during this brief dispute, stepped into the porch, and 
turning abruptly to Mr Willet, said,

'You keep strange servants, John.'

'Strange enough to look at, sir, certainly,' answered the host; 
'but out of doors; for horses, dogs, and the likes of that; there 
an't a better man in England than is that Maypole Hugh yonder.  He 
an't fit for indoors,' added Mr Willet, with the confidential air 
of a man who felt his own superior nature.  'I do that; but if that 
chap had only a little imagination, sir--'

'He's an active fellow now, I dare swear,' said Mr Chester, in a 
musing tone, which seemed to suggest that he would have said the 
same had there been nobody to hear him.

'Active, sir!' retorted John, with quite an expression in his face; 
'that chap!  Hallo there!  You, sir!  Bring that horse here, and 
go and hang my wig on the weathercock, to show this gentleman 
whether you're one of the lively sort or not.'

Hugh made no answer, but throwing the bridle to his master, and 
snatching his wig from his head, in a manner so unceremonious and 
hasty that the action discomposed Mr Willet not a little, though 
performed at his own special desire, climbed nimbly to the very 
summit of the maypole before the house, and hanging the wig upon 
the weathercock, sent it twirling round like a roasting jack.  
Having achieved this performance, he cast it on the ground, and 
sliding down the pole with inconceivable rapidity, alighted on his 
feet almost as soon as it had touched the earth.

'There, sir,' said John, relapsing into his usual stolid state, 
'you won't see that at many houses, besides the Maypole, where 
there's good accommodation for man and beast--nor that neither, 
though that with him is nothing.'

This last remark bore reference to his vaulting on horseback, as 
upon Mr Chester's first visit, and quickly disappearing by the 
stable gate.

'That with him is nothing,' repeated Mr Willet, brushing his wig 
with his wrist, and inwardly resolving to distribute a small charge 
for dust and damage to that article of dress, through the various 
items of his guest's bill; 'he'll get out of a'most any winder in 
the house.  There never was such a chap for flinging himself about 
and never hurting his bones.  It's my opinion, sir, that it's 
pretty nearly allowing to his not having any imagination; and that 
if imagination could be (which it can't) knocked into him, he'd 
never be able to do it any more.  But we was a-talking, sir, about 
my son.'

'True, Willet, true,' said his visitor, turning again towards the 
landlord with his accustomed serenity of face.  'My good friend, 
what about him?'

It has been reported that Mr Willet, previously to making answer, 
winked.  But as he was never known to be guilty of such lightness 
of conduct either before or afterwards, this may be looked upon as 
a malicious invention of his enemies--founded, perhaps, upon the 
undisputed circumstance of his taking his guest by the third breast 
button of his coat, counting downwards from the chin, and pouring 
his reply into his ear:

'Sir,' whispered John, with dignity, 'I know my duty.  We want no 
love-making here, sir, unbeknown to parents.  I respect a certain 
young gentleman, taking him in the light of a young gentleman; I 
respect a certain young lady, taking her in the light of a young 
lady; but of the two as a couple, I have no knowledge, sir, none 
whatever.  My son, sir, is upon his patrole.'

'I thought I saw him looking through the corner window but this 
moment,' said Mr Chester, who naturally thought that being on 
patrole, implied walking about somewhere.

'No doubt you did, sir,' returned John.  'He is upon his patrole of 
honour, sir, not to leave the premises.  Me and some friends of 
mine that use the Maypole of an evening, sir, considered what was 
best to be done with him, to prevent his doing anything unpleasant 
in opposing your desires; and we've put him on his patrole.  And 
what's more, sir, he won't be off his patrole for a pretty long 
time to come, I can tell you that.'

When he had communicated this bright idea, which had its origin in 
the perusal by the village cronies of a newspaper, containing, 
among other matters, an account of how some officer pending the 
sentence of some court-martial had been enlarged on parole, Mr 
Willet drew back from his guest's ear, and without any visible 
alteration of feature, chuckled thrice audibly.  This nearest 
approach to a laugh in which he ever indulged (and that but seldom 
and only on extreme occasions), never even curled his lip or 
effected the smallest change in--no, not so much as a slight 
wagging of--his great, fat, double chin, which at these times, as 
at all others, remained a perfect desert in the broad map of his 
face; one changeless, dull, tremendous blank.

Lest it should be matter of surprise to any, that Mr Willet adopted 
this bold course in opposition to one whom he had often 
entertained, and who had always paid his way at the Maypole 
gallantly, it may be remarked that it was his very penetration and 
sagacity in this respect, which occasioned him to indulge in those 
unusual demonstrations of jocularity, just now recorded.  For Mr 
Willet, after carefully balancing father and son in his mental 
scales, had arrived at the distinct conclusion that the old 
gentleman was a better sort of a customer than the young one.  
Throwing his landlord into the same scale, which was already turned 
by this consideration, and heaping upon him, again, his strong 
desires to run counter to the unfortunate Joe, and his opposition 
as a general principle to all matters of love and matrimony, it 
went down to the very ground straightway, and sent the light cause 
of the younger gentleman flying upwards to the ceiling.  Mr 
Chester was not the kind of man to be by any means dim-sighted to 
Mr Willet's motives, but he thanked him as graciously as if he had 
been one of the most disinterested martyrs that ever shone on 
earth; and leaving him, with many complimentary reliances on his 
great taste and judgment, to prepare whatever dinner he might deem 
most fitting the occasion, bent his steps towards the Warren.

Dressed with more than his usual elegance; assuming a gracefulness 
of manner, which, though it was the result of long study, sat 
easily upon him and became him well; composing his features into 
their most serene and prepossessing expression; and setting in 
short that guard upon himself, at every point, which denoted that 
he attached no slight importance to the impression he was about to 
make; he entered the bounds of Miss Haredale's usual walk.  He had 
not gone far, or looked about him long, when he descried coming 
towards him, a female figure.  A glimpse of the form and dress as 
she crossed a little wooden bridge which lay between them, 
satisfied him that he had found her whom he desired to see.  He 
threw himself in her way, and a very few paces brought them close 
together.

He raised his hat from his head, and yielding the path, suffered 
her to pass him.  Then, as if the idea had but that moment 
occurred to him, he turned hastily back and said in an agitated 
voice:

'I beg pardon--do I address Miss Haredale?'

She stopped in some confusion at being so unexpectedly accosted by 
a stranger; and answered 'Yes.'

'Something told me,' he said, LOOKING a compliment to her beauty, 
'that it could be no other.  Miss Haredale, I bear a name which is 
not unknown to you--which it is a pride, and yet a pain to me to 
know, sounds pleasantly in your ears.  I am a man advanced in life, 
as you see.  I am the father of him whom you honour and distinguish 
above all other men.  May I for weighty reasons which fill me with 
distress, beg but a minute's conversation with you here?'

Who that was inexperienced in deceit, and had a frank and youthful 
heart, could doubt the speaker's truth--could doubt it too, when 
the voice that spoke, was like the faint echo of one she knew so 
well, and so much loved to hear?  She inclined her head, and 
stopping, cast her eyes upon the ground.

'A little more apart--among these trees.  It is an old man's hand, 
Miss Haredale; an honest one, believe me.'

She put hers in it as he said these words, and suffered him to lead 
her to a neighbouring seat.

'You alarm me, sir,' she said in a low voice.  'You are not the 
bearer of any ill news, I hope?'

'Of none that you anticipate,' he answered, sitting down beside 
her.  'Edward is well--quite well.  It is of him I wish to speak, 
certainly; but I have no misfortune to communicate.'

She bowed her head again, and made as though she would have begged 
him to proceed; but said nothing.

'I am sensible that I speak to you at a disadvantage, dear Miss 
Haredale.  Believe me that I am not so forgetful of the feelings of 
my younger days as not to know that you are little disposed to view 
me with favour.  You have heard me described as cold-hearted, 
calculating, selfish--'

'I have never, sir,'--she interposed with an altered manner and a 
firmer voice; 'I have never heard you spoken of in harsh or 
disrespectful terms.  You do a great wrong to Edward's nature if 
you believe him capable of any mean or base proceeding.'

'Pardon me, my sweet young lady, but your uncle--'

'Nor is it my uncle's nature either,' she replied, with a 
heightened colour in her cheek.  'It is not his nature to stab in 
the dark, nor is it mine to love such deeds.'

She rose as she spoke, and would have left him; but he detained her 
with a gentle hand, and besought her in such persuasive accents to 
hear him but another minute, that she was easily prevailed upon to 
comply, and so sat down again.

'And it is,' said Mr Chester, looking upward, and apostrophising 
the air; 'it is this frank, ingenuous, noble nature, Ned, that you 
can wound so lightly.  Shame--shame upon you, boy!'

She turned towards him quickly, and with a scornful look and 
flashing eyes.  There were tears in Mr Chester's eyes, but he 
dashed them hurriedly away, as though unwilling that his weakness 
should be known, and regarded her with mingled admiration and 
compassion.

'I never until now,' he said, 'believed, that the frivolous actions 
of a young man could move me like these of my own son.  I never 
knew till now, the worth of a woman's heart, which boys so lightly 
win, and lightly fling away.  Trust me, dear young lady, that I 
never until now did know your worth; and though an abhorrence of 
deceit and falsehood has impelled me to seek you out, and would 
have done so had you been the poorest and least gifted of your sex, 
I should have lacked the fortitude to sustain this interview could 
I have pictured you to my imagination as you really are.'

Oh!  If Mrs Varden could have seen the virtuous gentleman as he 
said these words, with indignation sparkling from his eyes--if she 
could have heard his broken, quavering voice--if she could have 
beheld him as he stood bareheaded in the sunlight, and with 
unwonted energy poured forth his eloquence!

With a haughty face, but pale and trembling too, Emma regarded him 
in silence.  She neither spoke nor moved, but gazed upon him as 
though she would look into his heart.

'I throw off,' said Mr Chester, 'the restraint which natural 
affection would impose on some men, and reject all bonds but those 
of truth and duty.  Miss Haredale, you are deceived; you are 
deceived by your unworthy lover, and my unworthy son.'

Still she looked at him steadily, and still said not one word.

'I have ever opposed his professions of love for you; you will do 
me the justice, dear Miss Haredale, to remember that.  Your uncle 
and myself were enemies in early life, and if I had sought 
retaliation, I might have found it here.  But as we grow older, we 
grow wiser--bitter, I would fain hope--and from the first, I have 
opposed him in this attempt.  I foresaw the end, and would have 
spared you, if I could.'

'Speak plainly, sir,' she faltered.  'You deceive me, or are 
deceived yourself.  I do not believe you--I cannot--I should not.'

'First,' said Mr Chester, soothingly, 'for there may be in your 
mind some latent angry feeling to which I would not appeal, pray 
take this letter.  It reached my hands by chance, and by mistake, 
and should have accounted to you (as I am told) for my son's not 
answering some other note of yours.  God forbid, Miss Haredale,' 
said the good gentleman, with great emotion, 'that there should be 
in your gentle breast one causeless ground of quarrel with him.  
You should know, and you will see, that he was in no fault here.'

There appeared something so very candid, so scrupulously 
honourable, so very truthful and just in this course something 
which rendered the upright person who resorted to it, so worthy of 
belief--that Emma's heart, for the first time, sunk within her.  
She turned away and burst into tears.

'I would,' said Mr Chester, leaning over her, and speaking in mild 
and quite venerable accents; 'I would, dear girl, it were my task 
to banish, not increase, those tokens of your grief.  My son, my 
erring son,--I will not call him deliberately criminal in this, for 
men so young, who have been inconstant twice or thrice before, act 
without reflection, almost without a knowledge of the wrong they 
do,--will break his plighted faith to you; has broken it even now.  
Shall I stop here, and having given you this warning, leave it to 
be fulfilled; or shall I go on?'

'You will go on, sir,' she answered, 'and speak more plainly yet, 
in justice both to him and me.'

'My dear girl,' said Mr Chester, bending over her more 
affectionately still; 'whom I would call my daughter, but the Fates 
forbid, Edward seeks to break with you upon a false and most 
unwarrantable pretence.  I have it on his own showing; in his own 
hand.  Forgive me, if I have had a watch upon his conduct; I am his 
father; I had a regard for your peace and his honour, and no better 
resource was left me.  There lies on his desk at this present 
moment, ready for transmission to you, a letter, in which he tells 
you that our poverty--our poverty; his and mine, Miss Haredale--
forbids him to pursue his claim upon your hand; in which he offers, 
voluntarily proposes, to free you from your pledge; and talks 
magnanimously (men do so, very commonly, in such cases) of being in 
time more worthy of your regard--and so forth.  A letter, to be 
plain, in which he not only jilts you--pardon the word; I would 
summon to your aid your pride and dignity--not only jilts you, I 
fear, in favour of the object whose slighting treatment first 
inspired his brief passion for yourself and gave it birth in 
wounded vanity, but affects to make a merit and a virtue of the 
act.'

She glanced proudly at him once more, as by an involuntary impulse, 
and with a swelling breast rejoined, 'If what you say be true, he 
takes much needless trouble, sir, to compass his design.  He's very 
tender of my peace of mind.  I quite thank him.'

'The truth of what I tell you, dear young lady,' he replied, 'you 
will test by the receipt or non-receipt of the letter of which I 
speak.  Haredale, my dear fellow, I am delighted to see you, 
although we meet under singular circumstances, and upon a 
melancholy occasion.  I hope you are very well.'

At these words the young lady raised her eyes, which were filled 
with tears; and seeing that her uncle indeed stood before them, and 
being quite unequal to the trial of hearing or of speaking one word 
more, hurriedly withdrew, and left them.  They stood looking at 
each other, and at her retreating figure, and for a long time 
neither of them spoke.

'What does this mean?  Explain it,' said Mr Haredale at length.  
'Why are you here, and why with her?'

'My dear friend,' rejoined the other, resuming his accustomed 
manner with infinite readiness, and throwing himself upon the bench 
with a weary air, 'you told me not very long ago, at that 
delightful old tavern of which you are the esteemed proprietor (and 
a most charming establishment it is for persons of rural pursuits 
and in robust health, who are not liable to take cold), that I had 
the head and heart of an evil spirit in all matters of deception.  
I thought at the time; I really did think; you flattered me.  But 
now I begin to wonder at your discernment, and vanity apart, do 
honestly believe you spoke the truth.  Did you ever counterfeit 
extreme ingenuousness and honest indignation?  My dear fellow, you 
have no conception, if you never did, how faint the effort makes 
one.'

Mr Haredale surveyed him with a look of cold contempt.  'You may 
evade an explanation, I know,' he said, folding his arms.  'But I 
must have it.  I can wait.'

'Not at all.  Not at all, my good fellow.  You shall not wait a 
moment,' returned his friend, as he lazily crossed his legs.  'The 
simplest thing in the world.  It lies in a nutshell.  Ned has 
written her a letter--a boyish, honest, sentimental composition, 
which remains as yet in his desk, because he hasn't had the heart 
to send it.  I have taken a liberty, for which my parental 
affection and anxiety are a sufficient excuse, and possessed 
myself of the contents.  I have described them to your niece (a 
most enchanting person, Haredale; quite an angelic creature), with 
a little colouring and description adapted to our purpose.  It's 
done.  You may be quite easy.  It's all over.  Deprived of their 
adherents and mediators; her pride and jealousy roused to the 
utmost; with nobody to undeceive her, and you to confirm me; you 
will find that their intercourse will close with her answer.  If 
she receives Ned's letter by to-morrow noon, you may date their 
parting from to-morrow night.  No thanks, I beg; you owe me none.  
I have acted for myself; and if I have forwarded our compact with 
all the ardour even you could have desired, I have done so 
selfishly, indeed.'

'I curse the compact, as you call it, with my whole heart and 
soul,' returned the other.  'It was made in an evil hour.  I have 
bound myself to a lie; I have leagued myself with you; and though I 
did so with a righteous motive, and though it cost me such an 
effort as haply few men know, I hate and despise myself for the 
deed.'

'You are very warm,' said Mr Chester with a languid smile.

'I AM warm.  I am maddened by your coldness.  'Death, Chester, if 
your blood ran warmer in your veins, and there were no restraints 
upon me, such as those that hold and drag me back--well; it is 
done; you tell me so, and on such a point I may believe you.  When 
I am most remorseful for this treachery, I will think of you and 
your marriage, and try to justify myself in such remembrances, for 
having torn asunder Emma and your son, at any cost.  Our bond is 
cancelled now, and we may part.'

Mr Chester kissed his hand gracefully; and with the same tranquil 
face he had preserved throughout--even when he had seen his 
companion so tortured and transported by his passion that his whole 
frame was shaken--lay in his lounging posture on the seat and 
watched him as he walked away.

'My scapegoat and my drudge at school,' he said, raising his head 
to look after him; 'my friend of later days, who could not keep his 
mistress when he had won her, and threw me in her way to carry off 
the prize; I triumph in the present and the past.  Bark on, ill-
favoured, ill-conditioned cur; fortune has ever been with me--I 
like to hear you.'

The spot where they had met, was in an avenue of trees.  Mr 
Haredale not passing out on either hand, had walked straight on.  
He chanced to turn his head when at some considerable distance, and 
seeing that his late companion had by that time risen and was 
looking after him, stood still as though he half expected him to 
follow and waited for his coming up.

'It MAY come to that one day, but not yet,' said Mr Chester, 
waving his hand, as though they were the best of friends, and 
turning away.  'Not yet, Haredale.  Life is pleasant enough to me; 
dull and full of heaviness to you.  No.  To cross swords with such 
a man--to indulge his humour unless upon extremity--would be weak 
indeed.'

For all that, he drew his sword as he walked along, and in an 
absent humour ran his eye from hilt to point full twenty times.  
But thoughtfulness begets wrinkles; remembering this, he soon put 
it up, smoothed his contracted brow, hummed a gay tune with greater 
gaiety of manner, and was his unruffled self again.



Chapter 30


A homely proverb recognises the existence of a troublesome class of 
persons who, having an inch conceded them, will take an ell.  Not 
to quote the illustrious examples of those heroic scourges of 
mankind, whose amiable path in life has been from birth to death 
through blood, and fire, and ruin, and who would seem to have 
existed for no better purpose than to teach mankind that as the 
absence of pain is pleasure, so the earth, purged of their 
presence, may be deemed a blessed place--not to quote such mighty 
instances, it will be sufficient to refer to old John Willet.

Old John having long encroached a good standard inch, full measure, 
on the liberty of Joe, and having snipped off a Flemish ell in the 
matter of the parole, grew so despotic and so great, that his 
thirst for conquest knew no bounds.  The more young Joe submitted, 
the more absolute old John became.  The ell soon faded into 
nothing.  Yards, furlongs, miles arose; and on went old John in the 
pleasantest manner possible, trimming off an exuberance in this 
place, shearing away some liberty of speech or action in that, and 
conducting himself in his small way with as much high mightiness 
and majesty, as the most glorious tyrant that ever had his statue 
reared in the public ways, of ancient or of modern times.

As great men are urged on to the abuse of power (when they need 
urging, which is not often), by their flatterers and dependents, so 
old John was impelled to these exercises of authority by the 
applause and admiration of his Maypole cronies, who, in the 
intervals of their nightly pipes and pots, would shake their heads 
and say that Mr Willet was a father of the good old English sort; 
that there were no new-fangled notions or modern ways in him; that 
he put them in mind of what their fathers were when they were boys; 
that there was no mistake about him; that it would be well for the 
country if there were more like him, and more was the pity that 
there were not; with many other original remarks of that nature.  
Then they would condescendingly give Joe to understand that it was 
all for his good, and he would be thankful for it one day; and in 
particular, Mr Cobb would acquaint him, that when he was his age, 
his father thought no more of giving him a parental kick, or a box 
on the ears, or a cuff on the head, or some little admonition of 
that sort, than he did of any other ordinary duty of life; and he 
would further remark, with looks of great significance, that but 
for this judicious bringing up, he might have never been the man he 
was at that present speaking; which was probable enough, as he was, 
beyond all question, the dullest dog of the party.  In short, 
between old John and old John's friends, there never was an 
unfortunate young fellow so bullied, badgered, worried, fretted, 
and brow-beaten; so constantly beset, or made so tired of his life, 
as poor Joe Willet.

This had come to be the recognised and established state of things; 
but as John was very anxious to flourish his supremacy before the 
eyes of Mr Chester, he did that day exceed himself, and did so 
goad and chafe his son and heir, that but for Joe's having made a 
solemn vow to keep his hands in his pockets when they were not 
otherwise engaged, it is impossible to say what he might have done 
with them.  But the longest day has an end, and at length Mr 
Chester came downstairs to mount his horse, which was ready at the 
door.

As old John was not in the way at the moment, Joe, who was sitting 
in the bar ruminating on his dismal fate and the manifold 
perfections of Dolly Varden, ran out to hold the guest's stirrup 
and assist him to mount.  Mr Chester was scarcely in the saddle, 
and Joe was in the very act of making him a graceful bow, when old 
John came diving out of the porch, and collared him.

'None of that, sir,' said John, 'none of that, sir.  No breaking of 
patroles.  How dare you come out of the door, sir, without leave?  
You're trying to get away, sir, are you, and to make a traitor of 
yourself again?  What do you mean, sir?'

'Let me go, father,' said Joe, imploringly, as he marked the smile 
upon their visitor's face, and observed the pleasure his disgrace 
afforded him.  'This is too bad.  Who wants to get away?'

'Who wants to get away!' cried John, shaking him.  'Why you do, 
sir, you do.  You're the boy, sir,' added John, collaring with one 
band, and aiding the effect of a farewell bow to the visitor with 
the other, 'that wants to sneak into houses, and stir up 
differences between noble gentlemen and their sons, are you, eh?  
Hold your tongue, sir.'

Joe made no effort to reply.  It was the crowning circumstance of 
his degradation.  He extricated himself from his father's grasp, 
darted an angry look at the departing guest, and returned into the 
house.

'But for her,' thought Joe, as he threw his arms upon a table in 
the common room, and laid his head upon them, 'but for Dolly, who I 
couldn't bear should think me the rascal they would make me out to 
be if I ran away, this house and I should part to-night.'

It being evening by this time, Solomon Daisy, Tom Cobb, and Long 
Parkes, were all in the common room too, and had from the window 
been witnesses of what had just occurred.  Mr Willet joining them 
soon afterwards, received the compliments of the company with great 
composure, and lighting his pipe, sat down among them.

'We'll see, gentlemen,' said John, after a long pause, 'who's the 
master of this house, and who isn't.  We'll see whether boys are to 
govern men, or men are to govern boys.'

'And quite right too,' assented Solomon Daisy with some approving 
nods; 'quite right, Johnny.  Very good, Johnny.  Well said, Mr 
Willet.  Brayvo, sir.'

John slowly brought his eyes to bear upon him, looked at him for a 
long time, and finally made answer, to the unspeakable 
consternation of his hearers, 'When I want encouragement from you, 
sir, I'll ask you for it.  You let me alone, sir.  I can get on 
without you, I hope.  Don't you tackle me, sir, if you please.'

'Don't take it ill, Johnny; I didn't mean any harm,' pleaded the 
little man.

'Very good, sir,' said John, more than usually obstinate after his 
late success.  'Never mind, sir.  I can stand pretty firm of 
myself, sir, I believe, without being shored up by you.'  And 
having given utterance to this retort, Mr Willet fixed his eyes 
upon the boiler, and fell into a kind of tobacco-trance.

The spirits of the company being somewhat damped by this 
embarrassing line of conduct on the part of their host, nothing 
more was said for a long time; but at length Mr Cobb took upon 
himself to remark, as he rose to knock the ashes out of his pipe, 
that he hoped Joe would thenceforth learn to obey his father in all 
things; that he had found, that day, he was not one of the sort of 
men who were to be trifled with; and that he would recommend him, 
poetically speaking, to mind his eye for the future.

'I'd recommend you, in return,' said Joe, looking up with a flushed 
face, 'not to talk to me.'

'Hold your tongue, sir,' cried Mr Willet, suddenly rousing himself, 
and turning round.

'I won't, father,' cried Joe, smiting the table with his fist, so 
that the jugs and glasses rung again; 'these things are hard enough 
to bear from you; from anybody else I never will endure them any 
more.  Therefore I say, Mr Cobb, don't talk to me.'

'Why, who are you,' said Mr Cobb, sneeringly, 'that you're not to 
be talked to, eh, Joe?'

To which Joe returned no answer, but with a very ominous shake of 
the head, resumed his old position, which he would have peacefully 
preserved until the house shut up at night, but that Mr Cobb, 
stimulated by the wonder of the company at the young man's 
presumption, retorted with sundry taunts, which proved too much for 
flesh and blood to bear.  Crowding into one moment the vexation and 
the wrath of years, Joe started up, overturned the table, fell upon 
his long enemy, pummelled him with all his might and main, and 
finished by driving him with surprising swiftness against a heap of 
spittoons in one corner; plunging into which, head foremost, with a 
tremendous crash, he lay at full length among the ruins, stunned 
and motionless.  Then, without waiting to receive the compliments 
of the bystanders on the victory be had won, he retreated to his 
own bedchamber, and considering himself in a state of siege, piled 
all the portable furniture against the door by way of barricade.

'I have done it now,' said Joe, as he sat down upon his bedstead 
and wiped his heated face.  'I knew it would come at last.  The 
Maypole and I must part company.  I'm a roving vagabond--she hates 
me for evermore--it's all over!'



Chapter 31


Pondering on his unhappy lot, Joe sat and listened for a long 
time, expecting every moment to hear their creaking footsteps on 
the stairs, or to be greeted by his worthy father with a summons to 
capitulate unconditionally, and deliver himself up straightway.  
But neither voice nor footstep came; and though some distant 
echoes, as of closing doors and people hurrying in and out of 
rooms, resounding from time to time through the great passages, and 
penetrating to his remote seclusion, gave note of unusual commotion 
downstairs, no nearer sound disturbed his place of retreat, which 
seemed the quieter for these far-off noises, and was as dull and 
full of gloom as any hermit's cell.

It came on darker and darker.  The old-fashioned furniture of the 
chamber, which was a kind of hospital for all the invalided 
movables in the house, grew indistinct and shadowy in its many 
shapes; chairs and tables, which by day were as honest cripples as 
need be, assumed a doubtful and mysterious character; and one old 
leprous screen of faded India leather and gold binding, which had 
kept out many a cold breath of air in days of yore and shut in many 
a jolly face, frowned on him with a spectral aspect, and stood at 
full height in its allotted corner, like some gaunt ghost who 
waited to be questioned.  A portrait opposite the window--a queer, 
old grey-eyed general, in an oval frame--seemed to wink and doze as 
the light decayed, and at length, when the last faint glimmering 
speck of day went out, to shut its eyes in good earnest, and fall 
sound asleep.  There was such a hush and mystery about everything, 
that Joe could not help following its example; and so went off into 
a slumber likewise, and dreamed of Dolly, till the clock of 
Chigwell church struck two.

Still nobody came.  The distant noises in the house had ceased, and 
out of doors all was quiet; save for the occasional barking of some 
deep-mouthed dog, and the shaking of the branches by the night 
wind.  He gazed mournfully out of window at each well-known object 
as it lay sleeping in the dim light of the moon; and creeping back 
to his former seat, thought about the late uproar, until, with long 
thinking of, it seemed to have occurred a month ago.  Thus, between 
dozing, and thinking, and walking to the window and looking out, 
the night wore away; the grim old screen, and the kindred chairs 
and tables, began slowly to reveal themselves in their accustomed 
forms; the grey-eyed general seemed to wink and yawn and rouse 
himself; and at last he was broad awake again, and very 
uncomfortable and cold and haggard he looked, in the dull grey 
light of morning.

The sun had begun to peep above the forest trees, and already flung 
across the curling mist bright bars of gold, when Joe dropped from 
his window on the ground below, a little bundle and his trusty 
stick, and prepared to descend himself.

It was not a very difficult task; for there were so many 
projections and gable ends in the way, that they formed a series of 
clumsy steps, with no greater obstacle than a jump of some few feet 
at last.  Joe, with his stick and bundle on his shoulder, quickly 
stood on the firm earth, and looked up at the old Maypole, it might 
be for the last time.

He didn't apostrophise it, for he was no great scholar.  He didn't 
curse it, for he had little ill-will to give to anything on earth.  
He felt more affectionate and kind to it than ever he had done in 
all his life before, so said with all his heart, 'God bless you!' 
as a parting wish, and turned away.

He walked along at a brisk pace, big with great thoughts of going 
for a soldier and dying in some foreign country where it was very 
hot and sandy, and leaving God knows what unheard-of wealth in 
prize-money to Dolly, who would be very much affected when she came 
to know of it; and full of such youthful visions, which were 
sometimes sanguine and sometimes melancholy, but always had her for 
their main point and centre, pushed on vigorously until the noise 
of London sounded in his ears, and the Black Lion hove in sight.

It was only eight o'clock then, and very much astonished the Black 
Lion was, to see him come walking in with dust upon his feet at 
that early hour, with no grey mare to bear him company.  But as he 
ordered breakfast to be got ready with all speed, and on its being 
set before him gave indisputable tokens of a hearty appetite, the 
Lion received him, as usual, with a hospitable welcome; and treated 
him with those marks of distinction, which, as a regular customer, 
and one within the freemasonry of the trade, he had a right to 
claim.

This Lion or landlord,--for he was called both man and beast, by 
reason of his having instructed the artist who painted his sign, to 
convey into the features of the lordly brute whose effigy it bore, 
as near a counterpart of his own face as his skill could compass 
and devise,--was a gentleman almost as quick of apprehension, and 
of almost as subtle a wit, as the mighty John himself.  But the 
difference between them lay in this: that whereas Mr Willet's 
extreme sagacity and acuteness were the efforts of unassisted 
nature, the Lion stood indebted, in no small amount, to beer; of 
which he swigged such copious draughts, that most of his faculties 
were utterly drowned and washed away, except the one great faculty 
of sleep, which he retained in surprising perfection.  The creaking 
Lion over the house-door was, therefore, to say the truth, rather a 
drowsy, tame, and feeble lion; and as these social representatives 
of a savage class are usually of a conventional character (being 
depicted, for the most part, in impossible attitudes and of 
unearthly colours), he was frequently supposed by the more ignorant 
and uninformed among the neighbours, to be the veritable portrait 
of the host as he appeared on the occasion of some great funeral 
ceremony or public mourning.

'What noisy fellow is that in the next room?' said Joe, when he had 
disposed of his breakfast, and had washed and brushed himself.

'A recruiting serjeant,' replied the Lion.

Joe started involuntarily.  Here was the very thing he had been 
dreaming of, all the way along.

'And I wish,' said the Lion, 'he was anywhere else but here.  The 
party make noise enough, but don't call for much.  There's great 
cry there, Mr Willet, but very little wool.  Your father wouldn't 
like 'em, I know.'

Perhaps not much under any circumstances.  Perhaps if he could have 
known what was passing at that moment in Joe's mind, he would have 
liked them still less.

'Is he recruiting for a--for a fine regiment?' said Joe, glancing 
at a little round mirror that hung in the bar.

'I believe he is,' replied the host.  'It's much the same thing, 
whatever regiment he's recruiting for.  I'm told there an't a deal 
of difference between a fine man and another one, when they're shot 
through and through.'

'They're not all shot,' said Joe.

'No,' the Lion answered, 'not all.  Those that are--supposing it's 
done easy--are the best off in my opinion.'

'Ah!' retorted Joe, 'but you don't care for glory.'

'For what?' said the Lion.

'Glory.'

'No,' returned the Lion, with supreme indifference.  'I don't.  
You're right in that, Mr Willet.  When Glory comes here, and calls 
for anything to drink and changes a guinea to pay for it, I'll give 
it him for nothing.  It's my belief, sir, that the Glory's arms 
wouldn't do a very strong business.'

These remarks were not at all comforting.  Joe walked out, stopped 
at the door of the next room, and listened.  The serjeant was 
describing a military life.  It was all drinking, he said, except 
that there were frequent intervals of eating and love-making.  A 
battle was the finest thing in the world--when your side won it--
and Englishmen always did that.  'Supposing you should be killed, 
sir?' said a timid voice in one corner.  'Well, sir, supposing you 
should be,' said the serjeant, 'what then?  Your country loves you, 
sir; his Majesty King George the Third loves you; your memory is 
honoured, revered, respected; everybody's fond of you, and grateful 
to you; your name's wrote down at full length in a book in the War 
Office.  Damme, gentlemen, we must all die some time, or another, 
eh?'

The voice coughed, and said no more.

Joe walked into the room.  A group of half-a-dozen fellows had 
gathered together in the taproom, and were listening with greedy 
ears.  One of them, a carter in a smockfrock, seemed wavering and 
disposed to enlist.  The rest, who were by no means disposed, 
strongly urged him to do so (according to the custom of mankind), 
backed the serjeant's arguments, and grinned among themselves.  'I 
say nothing, boys,' said the serjeant, who sat a little apart, 
drinking his liquor.  'For lads of spirit'--here he cast an eye on 
Joe--'this is the time.  I don't want to inveigle you.  The king's 
not come to that, I hope.  Brisk young blood is what we want; not 
milk and water.  We won't take five men out of six.  We want top-
sawyers, we do.  I'm not a-going to tell tales out of school, but, 
damme, if every gentleman's son that carries arms in our corps, 
through being under a cloud and having little differences with his 
relations, was counted up'--here his eye fell on Joe again, and so 
good-naturedly, that Joe beckoned him out.  He came directly.

'You're a gentleman, by G--!' was his first remark, as he slapped 
him on the back.  'You're a gentleman in disguise.  So am I.  Let's 
swear a friendship.'

Joe didn't exactly do that, but he shook hands with him, and 
thanked him for his good opinion.

'You want to serve,' said his new friend.  'You shall.  You were 
made for it.  You're one of us by nature.  What'll you take to 
drink?'

'Nothing just now,' replied Joe, smiling faintly.  'I haven't quite 
made up my mind.'

'A mettlesome fellow like you, and not made up his mind!' cried 
the serjeant.  'Here--let me give the bell a pull, and you'll make 
up your mind in half a minute, I know.'

'You're right so far'--answered Joe, 'for if you pull the bell 
here, where I'm known, there'll be an end of my soldiering 
inclinations in no time.  Look in my face.  You see me, do you?'

'I do,' replied the serjeant with an oath, 'and a finer young 
fellow or one better qualified to serve his king and country, I 
never set my--' he used an adjective in this place--'eyes on.

'Thank you,' said Joe, 'I didn't ask you for want of a compliment, 
but thank you all the same.  Do I look like a sneaking fellow or a 
liar?'

The serjeant rejoined with many choice asseverations that he 
didn't; and that if his (the serjeant's) own father were to say he 
did, he would run the old gentleman through the body cheerfully, 
and consider it a meritorious action.

Joe expressed his obligations, and continued, 'You can trust me 
then, and credit what I say.  I believe I shall enlist in your 
regiment to-night.  The reason I don't do so now is, because I 
don't want until to-night, to do what I can't recall.  Where shall 
I find you, this evening?'

His friend replied with some unwillingness, and after much 
ineffectual entreaty having for its object the immediate settlement 
of the business, that his quarters would be at the Crooked Billet 
in Tower Street; where he would be found waking until midnight, and 
sleeping until breakfast time to-morrow.

'And if I do come--which it's a million to one, I shall--when will 
you take me out of London?' demanded Joe.

'To-morrow morning, at half after eight o'clock,' replied the 
serjeant.  'You'll go abroad--a country where it's all sunshine and 
plunder--the finest climate in the world.'

'To go abroad,' said Joe, shaking hands with him, 'is the very 
thing I want.  You may expect me.'

'You're the kind of lad for us,' cried the serjeant, holding Joe's 
hand in his, in the excess of his admiration.  'You're the boy to 
push your fortune.  I don't say it because I bear you any envy, or 
would take away from the credit of the rise you'll make, but if I 
had been bred and taught like you, I'd have been a colonel by this 
time.'

'Tush, man!' said Joe, 'I'm not so young as that.  Needs must when 
the devil drives; and the devil that drives me is an empty pocket 
and an unhappy home.  For the present, good-bye.'

'For king and country!' cried the serjeant, flourishing his cap.

'For bread and meat!' cried Joe, snapping his fingers.  And so they 
parted.

He had very little money in his pocket; so little indeed, that 
after paying for his breakfast (which he was too honest and perhaps 
too proud to score up to his father's charge) he had but a penny 
left.  He had courage, notwithstanding, to resist all the 
affectionate importunities of the serjeant, who waylaid him at 
the door with many protestations of eternal friendship, and did in 
particular request that he would do him the favour to accept of 
only one shilling as a temporary accommodation.  Rejecting his 
offers both of cash and credit, Joe walked away with stick and 
bundle as before, bent upon getting through the day as he best 
could, and going down to the locksmith's in the dusk of the 
evening; for it should go hard, he had resolved, but he would have 
a parting word with charming Dolly Varden.

He went out by Islington and so on to Highgate, and sat on many 
stones and gates, but there were no voices in the bells to bid him 
turn.  Since the time of noble Whittington, fair flower of 
merchants, bells have come to have less sympathy with humankind.  
They only ring for money and on state occasions.  Wanderers have 
increased in number; ships leave the Thames for distant regions, 
carrying from stem to stern no other cargo; the bells are silent; 
they ring out no entreaties or regrets; they are used to it and 
have grown worldly.

Joe bought a roll, and reduced his purse to the condition (with a 
difference) of that celebrated purse of Fortunatus, which, 
whatever were its favoured owner's necessities, had one unvarying 
amount in it.  In these real times, when all the Fairies are dead 
and buried, there are still a great many purses which possess that 
quality.  The sum-total they contain is expressed in arithmetic by 
a circle, and whether it be added to or multiplied by its own 
amount, the result of the problem is more easily stated than any 
known in figures.

Evening drew on at last.  With the desolate and solitary feeling of 
one who had no home or shelter, and was alone utterly in the world 
for the first time, he bent his steps towards the locksmith's 
house.  He had delayed till now, knowing that Mrs Varden sometimes 
went out alone, or with Miggs for her sole attendant, to lectures 
in the evening; and devoutly hoping that this might be one of her 
nights of moral culture.

He had walked up and down before the house, on the opposite side of 
the way, two or three times, when as he returned to it again, he 
caught a glimpse of a fluttering skirt at the door.  It was 
Dolly's--to whom else could it belong? no dress but hers had such a 
flow as that.  He plucked up his spirits, and followed it into the 
workshop of the Golden Key.

His darkening the door caused her to look round.  Oh that face!  
'If it hadn't been for that,' thought Joe, 'I should never have 
walked into poor Tom Cobb.  She's twenty times handsomer than ever.  
She might marry a Lord!'

He didn't say this.  He only thought it--perhaps looked it also.  
Dolly was glad to see him, and was SO sorry her father and mother 
were away from home.  Joe begged she wouldn't mention it on any 
account.

Dolly hesitated to lead the way into the parlour, for there it was 
nearly dark; at the same time she hesitated to stand talking in the 
workshop, which was yet light and open to the street.  They had got 
by some means, too, before the little forge; and Joe having her 
hand in his (which he had no right to have, for Dolly only gave it 
him to shake), it was so like standing before some homely altar 
being married, that it was the most embarrassing state of things in 
the world.

'I have come,' said Joe, 'to say good-bye--to say good-bye for I 
don't know how many years; perhaps for ever.  I am going abroad.'

Now this was exactly what he should not have said.  Here he was, 
talking like a gentleman at large who was free to come and go and 
roam about the world at pleasure, when that gallant coachmaker had 
vowed but the night before that Miss Varden held him bound in 
adamantine chains; and had positively stated in so many words that 
she was killing him by inches, and that in a fortnight more or 
thereabouts he expected to make a decent end and leave the business 
to his mother.

Dolly released her hand and said 'Indeed!'  She remarked in the 
same breath that it was a fine night, and in short, betrayed no 
more emotion than the forge itself.

'I couldn't go,' said Joe, 'without coming to see you.  I hadn't 
the heart to.'

Dolly was more sorry than she could tell, that he should have taken 
so much trouble.  It was such a long way, and he must have such a 
deal to do.  And how WAS Mr Willet--that dear old gentleman--

'Is this all you say!' cried Joe.

All!  Good gracious, what did the man expect!  She was obliged to 
take her apron in her hand and run her eyes along the hem from 
corner to corner, to keep herself from laughing in his face;--not 
because his gaze confused her--not at all.

Joe had small experience in love affairs, and had no notion how 
different young ladies are at different times; he had expected to 
take Dolly up again at the very point where he had left her after 
that delicious evening ride, and was no more prepared for such an 
alteration than to see the sun and moon change places.  He had 
buoyed himself up all day with an indistinct idea that she would 
certainly say 'Don't go,' or 'Don't leave us,' or 'Why do you go?' 
or 'Why do you leave us?' or would give him some little 
encouragement of that sort; he had even entertained the possibility 
of her bursting into tears, of her throwing herself into his arms, 
of her falling down in a fainting fit without previous word or 
sign; but any approach to such a line of conduct as this, had been 
so far from his thoughts that he could only look at her in silent 
wonder.

Dolly in the meanwhile, turned to the corners of her apron, and 
measured the sides, and smoothed out the wrinkles, and was as 
silent as he.  At last after a long pause, Joe said good-bye.  
'Good-bye'--said Dolly--with as pleasant a smile as if he were 
going into the next street, and were coming back to supper; 'good-
bye.'

'Come,' said Joe, putting out both hands, 'Dolly, dear Dolly, don't 
let us part like this.  I love you dearly, with all my heart and 
soul; with as much truth and earnestness as ever man loved woman in 
this world, I do believe.  I am a poor fellow, as you know--poorer 
now than ever, for I have fled from home, not being able to bear it 
any longer, and must fight my own way without help.  You are 
beautiful, admired, are loved by everybody, are well off and happy; 
and may you ever be so!  Heaven forbid I should ever make you 
otherwise; but give me a word of comfort.  Say something kind to 
me.  I have no right to expect it of you, I know, but I ask it 
because I love you, and shall treasure the slightest word from you 
all through my life.  Dolly, dearest, have you nothing to say to 
me?'

No.  Nothing.  Dolly was a coquette by nature, and a spoilt child.  
She had no notion of being carried by storm in this way.  The 
coachmaker would have been dissolved in tears, and would have knelt 
down, and called himself names, and clasped his hands, and beat his 
breast, and tugged wildly at his cravat, and done all kinds of 
poetry.  Joe had no business to be going abroad.  He had no right 
to be able to do it.  If he was in adamantine chains, he couldn't.

'I have said good-bye,' said Dolly, 'twice.  Take your arm away 
directly, Mr Joseph, or I'll call Miggs.'

'I'll not reproach you,' answered Joe, 'it's my fault, no doubt.  I 
have thought sometimes that you didn't quite despise me, but I was 
a fool to think so.  Every one must, who has seen the life I have 
led--you most of all.  God bless you!'

He was gone, actually gone.  Dolly waited a little while, thinking 
he would return, peeped out at the door, looked up the street and 
down as well as the increasing darkness would allow, came in again, 
waited a little longer, went upstairs humming a tune, bolted 
herself in, laid her head down on her bed, and cried as if her 
heart would break.  And yet such natures are made up of so many 
contradictions, that if Joe Willet had come back that night, next 
day, next week, next month, the odds are a hundred to one she would 
have treated him in the very same manner, and have wept for it 
afterwards with the very same distress.

She had no sooner left the workshop than there cautiously peered 
out from behind the chimney of the forge, a face which had already 
emerged from the same concealment twice or thrice, unseen, and 
which, after satisfying itself that it was now alone, was followed 
by a leg, a shoulder, and so on by degrees, until the form of Mr 
Tappertit stood confessed, with a brown-paper cap stuck negligently 
on one side of its head, and its arms very much a-kimbo.

'Have my ears deceived me,' said the 'prentice, 'or do I dream! am 
I to thank thee, Fortun', or to cus thee--which?'

He gravely descended from his elevation, took down his piece of 
looking-glass, planted it against the wall upon the usual bench, 
twisted his head round, and looked closely at his legs.

'If they're a dream,' said Sim, 'let sculptures have such wisions, 
and chisel 'em out when they wake.  This is reality.  Sleep has no 
such limbs as them.  Tremble, Willet, and despair.  She's mine!  
She's mine!'

With these triumphant expressions, he seized a hammer and dealt a 
heavy blow at a vice, which in his mind's eye represented the 
sconce or head of Joseph Willet.  That done, he burst into a peal 
of laughter which startled Miss Miggs even in her distant kitchen, 
and dipping his head into a bowl of water, had recourse to a jack-
towel inside the closet door, which served the double purpose of 
smothering his feelings and drying his face.

Joe, disconsolate and down-hearted, but full of courage too, on 
leaving the locksmith's house made the best of his way to the 
Crooked Billet, and there inquired for his friend the serjeant, 
who, expecting no man less, received him with open arms.  In the 
course of five minutes after his arrival at that house of 
entertainment, he was enrolled among the gallant defenders of his 
native land; and within half an hour, was regaled with a steaming 
supper of boiled tripe and onions, prepared, as his friend assured 
him more than once, at the express command of his most Sacred 
Majesty the King.  To this meal, which tasted very savoury after 
his long fasting, he did ample justice; and when he had followed it 
up, or down, with a variety of loyal and patriotic toasts, he was 
conducted to a straw mattress in a loft over the stable, and 
locked in there for the night.

The next morning, he found that the obliging care of his martial 
friend had decorated his hat with sundry particoloured streamers, 
which made a very lively appearance; and in company with that 
officer, and three other military gentlemen newly enrolled, who 
were under a cloud so dense that it only left three shoes, a boot, 
and a coat and a half visible among them, repaired to the 
riverside.  Here they were joined by a corporal and four more 
heroes, of whom two were drunk and daring, and two sober and 
penitent, but each of whom, like Joe, had his dusty stick and 
bundle.  The party embarked in a passage-boat bound for Gravesend, 
whence they were to proceed on foot to Chatham; the wind was in 
their favour, and they soon left London behind them, a mere dark 
mist--a giant phantom in the air.



Chapter 32


Misfortunes, saith the adage, never come singly.  There is little 
doubt that troubles are exceedingly gregarious in their nature, and 
flying in flocks, are apt to perch capriciously; crowding on the 
heads of some poor wights until there is not an inch of room left 
on their unlucky crowns, and taking no more notice of others who 
offer as good resting-places for the soles of their feet, than if 
they had no existence.  It may have happened that a flight of 
troubles brooding over London, and looking out for Joseph Willet, 
whom they couldn't find, darted down haphazard on the first young 
man that caught their fancy, and settled on him instead.  However 
this may be, certain it is that on the very day of Joe's departure 
they swarmed about the ears of Edward Chester, and did so buzz and 
flap their wings, and persecute him, that he was most profoundly 
wretched.

It was evening, and just eight o'clock, when he and his father, 
having wine and dessert set before them, were left to themselves 
for the first time that day.  They had dined together, but a third 
person had been present during the meal, and until they met at 
table they had not seen each other since the previous night.

Edward was reserved and silent.  Mr Chester was more than usually 
gay; but not caring, as it seemed, to open a conversation with one 
whose humour was so different, he vented the lightness of his 
spirit in smiles and sparkling looks, and made no effort to awaken 
his attention.  So they remained for some time: the father lying on 
a sofa with his accustomed air of graceful negligence; the son 
seated opposite to him with downcast eyes, busied, it was plain, 
with painful and uneasy thoughts.

'My dear Edward,' said Mr Chester at length, with a most engaging 
laugh, 'do not extend your drowsy influence to the decanter.  
Suffer THAT to circulate, let your spirits be never so stagnant.'

Edward begged his pardon, passed it, and relapsed into his former 
state.

'You do wrong not to fill your glass,' said Mr Chester, holding up 
his own before the light.  'Wine in moderation--not in excess, for 
that makes men ugly--has a thousand pleasant influences.  It 
brightens the eye, improves the voice, imparts a new vivacity to 
one's thoughts and conversation: you should try it, Ned.'

'Ah father!' cried his son, 'if--'

'My good fellow,' interposed the parent hastily, as he set down his 
glass, and raised his eyebrows with a startled and horrified 
expression, 'for Heaven's sake don't call me by that obsolete and 
ancient name.  Have some regard for delicacy.  Am I grey, or 
wrinkled, do I go on crutches, have I lost my teeth, that you adopt 
such a mode of address?  Good God, how very coarse!'

'I was about to speak to you from my heart, sir,' returned Edward, 
'in the confidence which should subsist between us; and you check 
me in the outset.'

'Now DO, Ned, DO not,' said Mr Chester, raising his delicate hand 
imploringly, 'talk in that monstrous manner.  About to speak from 
your heart.  Don't you know that the heart is an ingenious part of 
our formation--the centre of the blood-vessels and all that sort of 
thing--which has no more to do with what you say or think, than 
your knees have?  How can you be so very vulgar and absurd?  These 
anatomical allusions should be left to gentlemen of the medical 
profession.  They are really not agreeable in society.  You quite 
surprise me, Ned.'

'Well! there are no such things to wound, or heal, or have regard 
for.  I know your creed, sir, and will say no more,' returned his 
son.

'There again,' said Mr Chester, sipping his wine, 'you are wrong.  
I distinctly say there are such things.  We know there are.  The 
hearts of animals--of bullocks, sheep, and so forth--are cooked and 
devoured, as I am told, by the lower classes, with a vast deal of 
relish.  Men are sometimes stabbed to the heart, shot to the heart; 
but as to speaking from the heart, or to the heart, or being warm-
hearted, or cold-hearted, or broken-hearted, or being all heart, or 
having no heart--pah! these things are nonsense, Ned.'

'No doubt, sir,' returned his son, seeing that he paused for him to 
speak.  'No doubt.'

'There's Haredale's niece, your late flame,' said Mr Chester, as a 
careless illustration of his meaning.  'No doubt in your mind she 
was all heart once.  Now she has none at all.  Yet she is the same 
person, Ned, exactly.'

'She is a changed person, sir,' cried Edward, reddening; 'and 
changed by vile means, I believe.'

'You have had a cool dismissal, have you?' said his father.  'Poor 
Ned!  I told you last night what would happen.--May I ask you for 
the nutcrackers?'

'She has been tampered with, and most treacherously deceived,' 
cried Edward, rising from his seat.  'I never will believe that the 
knowledge of my real position, given her by myself, has worked this 
change.  I know she is beset and tortured.  But though our contract 
is at an end, and broken past all redemption; though I charge upon 
her want of firmness and want of truth, both to herself and me; I 
do not now, and never will believe, that any sordid motive, or her 
own unbiassed will, has led her to this course--never!'

'You make me blush,' returned his father gaily, 'for the folly of 
your nature, in which--but we never know ourselves--I devoutly hope 
there is no reflection of my own.  With regard to the young lady 
herself, she has done what is very natural and proper, my dear 
fellow; what you yourself proposed, as I learn from Haredale; and 
what I predicted--with no great exercise of sagacity--she would do.  
She supposed you to be rich, or at least quite rich enough; and 
found you poor.  Marriage is a civil contract; people marry to 
better their worldly condition and improve appearances; it is an 
affair of house and furniture, of liveries, servants, equipage, and 
so forth.  The lady being poor and you poor also, there is an end 
of the matter.  You cannot enter upon these considerations, and 
have no manner of business with the ceremony.  I drink her health 
in this glass, and respect and honour her for her extreme good 
sense.  It is a lesson to you.  Fill yours, Ned.'

'It is a lesson,' returned his son, 'by which I hope I may never 
profit, and if years and experience impress it on--'

'Don't say on the heart,' interposed his father.

'On men whom the world and its hypocrisy have spoiled,' said Edward 
warmly, 'Heaven keep me from its knowledge.'

'Come, sir,' returned his father, raising himself a little on the 
sofa, and looking straight towards him; 'we have had enough of 
this.  Remember, if you please, your interest, your duty, your 
moral obligations, your filial affections, and all that sort of 
thing, which it is so very delightful and charming to reflect upon; 
or you will repent it.'

'I shall never repent the preservation of my self-respect, sir,' 
said Edward.  'Forgive me if I say that I will not sacrifice it at 
your bidding, and that I will not pursue the track which you would 
have me take, and to which the secret share you have had in this 
late separation tends.'

His father rose a little higher still, and looking at him as though 
curious to know if he were quite resolved and earnest, dropped 
gently down again, and said in the calmest voice--eating his nuts 
meanwhile,

'Edward, my father had a son, who being a fool like you, and, like 
you, entertaining low and disobedient sentiments, he disinherited 
and cursed one morning after breakfast.  The circumstance occurs to 
me with a singular clearness of recollection this evening.  I 
remember eating muffins at the time, with marmalade.  He led a 
miserable life (the son, I mean) and died early; it was a happy 
release on all accounts; he degraded the family very much.  It is a 
sad circumstance, Edward, when a father finds it necessary to 
resort to such strong measures.

'It is,' replied Edward, 'and it is sad when a son, proffering him 
his love and duty in their best and truest sense, finds himself 
repelled at every turn, and forced to disobey.  Dear father,' he 
added, more earnestly though in a gentler tone, 'I have reflected 
many times on what occurred between us when we first discussed this 
subject.  Let there be a confidence between us; not in terms, but 
truth.  Hear what I have to say.'

'As I anticipate what it is, and cannot fail to do so, Edward,' 
returned his father coldly, 'I decline.  I couldn't possibly.  I am 
sure it would put me out of temper, which is a state of mind I 
can't endure.  If you intend to mar my plans for your establishment 
in life, and the preservation of that gentility and becoming pride, 
which our family have so long sustained--if, in short, you are 
resolved to take your own course, you must take it, and my curse 
with it.  I am very sorry, but there's really no alternative.'

'The curse may pass your lips,' said Edward, 'but it will be but 
empty breath.  I do not believe that any man on earth has greater 
power to call one down upon his fellow--least of all, upon his own 
child--than he has to make one drop of rain or flake of snow fall 
from the clouds above us at his impious bidding.  Beware, sir, what 
you do.'

'You are so very irreligious, so exceedingly undutiful, so horribly 
profane,' rejoined his father, turning his face lazily towards 
him, and cracking another nut, 'that I positively must interrupt 
you here.  It is quite impossible we can continue to go on, upon 
such terms as these.  If you will do me the favour to ring the 
bell, the servant will show you to the door.  Return to this roof 
no more, I beg you.  Go, sir, since you have no moral sense 
remaining; and go to the Devil, at my express desire.  Good day.'

Edward left the room without another word or look, and turned his 
back upon the house for ever.

The father's face was slightly flushed and heated, but his manner 
was quite unchanged, as he rang the bell again, and addressed the 
servant on his entrance.

'Peak--if that gentleman who has just gone out--'

'I beg your pardon, sir, Mr Edward?'

'Were there more than one, dolt, that you ask the question?--If 
that gentleman should send here for his wardrobe, let him have it, 
do you hear?  If he should call himself at any time, I'm not at 
home.  You'll tell him so, and shut the door.'


So, it soon got whispered about, that Mr Chester was very 
unfortunate in his son, who had occasioned him great grief and 
sorrow.  And the good people who heard this and told it again, 
marvelled the more at his equanimity and even temper, and said what 
an amiable nature that man must have, who, having undergone so 
much, could be so placid and so calm.  And when Edward's name was 
spoken, Society shook its head, and laid its finger on its lip, and 
sighed, and looked very grave; and those who had sons about his 
age, waxed wrathful and indignant, and hoped, for Virtue's sake, 
that he was dead.  And the world went on turning round, as usual, 
for five years, concerning which this Narrative is silent.



Chapter 33


One wintry evening, early in the year of our Lord one thousand 
seven hundred and eighty, a keen north wind arose as it grew dark, 
and night came on with black and dismal looks.  A bitter storm of 
sleet, sharp, dense, and icy-cold, swept the wet streets, and 
rattled on the trembling windows.  Signboards, shaken past 
endurance in their creaking frames, fell crashing on the pavement; 
old tottering chimneys reeled and staggered in the blast; and many 
a steeple rocked again that night, as though the earth were 
troubled.

It was not a time for those who could by any means get light and 
warmth, to brave the fury of the weather.  In coffee-houses of the 
better sort, guests crowded round the fire, forgot to be political, 
and told each other with a secret gladness that the blast grew 
fiercer every minute.  Each humble tavern by the water-side, had 
its group of uncouth figures round the hearth, who talked of 
vessels foundering at sea, and all hands lost; related many a 
dismal tale of shipwreck and drowned men, and hoped that some they 
knew were safe, and shook their heads in doubt.  In private 
dwellings, children clustered near the blaze; listening with timid 
pleasure to tales of ghosts and goblins, and tall figures clad in 
white standing by bed-sides, and people who had gone to sleep in 
old churches and being overlooked had found themselves alone there 
at the dead hour of the night: until they shuddered at the thought 
of the dark rooms upstairs, yet loved to hear the wind moan too, 
and hoped it would continue bravely.  From time to time these happy 
indoor people stopped to listen, or one held up his finger and 
cried 'Hark!' and then, above the rumbling in the chimney, and the 
fast pattering on the glass, was heard a wailing, rushing sound, 
which shook the walls as though a giant's hand were on them; then a 
hoarse roar as if the sea had risen; then such a whirl and tumult 
that the air seemed mad; and then, with a lengthened howl, the 
waves of wind swept on, and left a moment's interval of rest.

Cheerily, though there were none abroad to see it, shone the 
Maypole light that evening.  Blessings on the red--deep, ruby, 
glowing red--old curtain of the window; blending into one rich 
stream of brightness, fire and candle, meat, drink, and company, 
and gleaming like a jovial eye upon the bleak waste out of doors!  
Within, what carpet like its crunching sand, what music merry as 
its crackling logs, what perfume like its kitchen's dainty breath, 
what weather genial as its hearty warmth!  Blessings on the old 
house, how sturdily it stood!  How did the vexed wind chafe and 
roar about its stalwart roof; how did it pant and strive with its 
wide chimneys, which still poured forth from their hospitable 
throats, great clouds of smoke, and puffed defiance in its face; 
how, above all, did it drive and rattle at the casement, emulous to 
extinguish that cheerful glow, which would not be put down and 
seemed the brighter for the conflict!

The profusion too, the rich and lavish bounty, of that goodly 
tavern!  It was not enough that one fire roared and sparkled on its 
spacious hearth; in the tiles which paved and compassed it, five 
hundred flickering fires burnt brightly also.  It was not enough 
that one red curtain shut the wild night out, and shed its cheerful 
influence on the room.  In every saucepan lid, and candlestick, and 
vessel of copper, brass, or tin that hung upon the walls, were 
countless ruddy hangings, flashing and gleaming with every motion 
of the blaze, and offering, let the eye wander where it might, 
interminable vistas of the same rich colour.  The old oak 
wainscoting, the beams, the chairs, the seats, reflected it in a 
deep, dull glimmer.  There were fires and red curtains in the very 
eyes of the drinkers, in their buttons, in their liquor, in the 
pipes they smoked.

Mr Willet sat in what had been his accustomed place five years 
before, with his eyes on the eternal boiler; and had sat there 
since the clock struck eight, giving no other signs of life than 
breathing with a loud and constant snore (though he was wide 
awake), and from time to time putting his glass to his lips, or 
knocking the ashes out of his pipe, and filling it anew.  It was 
now half-past ten.  Mr Cobb and long Phil Parkes were his 
companions, as of old, and for two mortal hours and a half, none of 
the company had pronounced one word.

Whether people, by dint of sitting together in the same place and 
the same relative positions, and doing exactly the same things for 
a great many years, acquire a sixth sense, or some unknown power of 
influencing each other which serves them in its stead, is a 
question for philosophy to settle.  But certain it is that old 
John Willet, Mr Parkes, and Mr Cobb, were one and all firmly of 
opinion that they were very jolly companions--rather choice spirits 
than otherwise; that they looked at each other every now and then 
as if there were a perpetual interchange of ideas going on among 
them; that no man considered himself or his neighbour by any means 
silent; and that each of them nodded occasionally when he caught 
the eye of another, as if he would say, 'You have expressed 
yourself extremely well, sir, in relation to that sentiment, and I 
quite agree with you.'

The room was so very warm, the tobacco so very good, and the fire 
so very soothing, that Mr Willet by degrees began to doze; but as 
he had perfectly acquired, by dint of long habit, the art of 
smoking in his sleep, and as his breathing was pretty much the 
same, awake or asleep, saving that in the latter case he sometimes 
experienced a slight difficulty in respiration (such as a carpenter 
meets with when he is planing and comes to a knot), neither of his 
companions was aware of the circumstance, until he met with one of 
these impediments and was obliged to try again.

'Johnny's dropped off,' said Mr Parkes in a whisper.

'Fast as a top,' said Mr Cobb.

Neither of them said any more until Mr Willet came to another knot--
one of surpassing obduracy--which bade fair to throw him into 
convulsions, but which he got over at last without waking, by an 
effort quite superhuman.

'He sleeps uncommon hard,' said Mr Cobb.

Mr Parkes, who was possibly a hard-sleeper himself, replied with 
some disdain, 'Not a bit on it;' and directed his eyes towards a 
handbill pasted over the chimney-piece, which was decorated at the 
top with a woodcut representing a youth of tender years running 
away very fast, with a bundle over his shoulder at the end of a 
stick, and--to carry out the idea--a finger-post and a milestone 
beside him.  Mr Cobb likewise turned his eyes in the same 
direction, and surveyed the placard as if that were the first time 
he had ever beheld it.  Now, this was a document which Mr Willet 
had himself indited on the disappearance of his son Joseph, 
acquainting the nobility and gentry and the public in general with 
the circumstances of his having left his home; describing his dress 
and appearance; and offering a reward of five pounds to any person 
or persons who would pack him up and return him safely to the 
Maypole at Chigwell, or lodge him in any of his Majesty's jails 
until such time as his father should come and claim him.  In this 
advertisement Mr Willet had obstinately persisted, despite the 
advice and entreaties of his friends, in describing his son as a 
'young boy;' and furthermore as being from eighteen inches to a 
couple of feet shorter than he really was; two circumstances which 
perhaps accounted, in some degree, for its never having been 
productive of any other effect than the transmission to Chigwell 
at various times and at a vast expense, of some five-and-forty 
runaways varying from six years old to twelve.

Mr Cobb and Mr Parkes looked mysteriously at this composition, at 
each other, and at old John.  From the time he had pasted it up 
with his own hands, Mr Willet had never by word or sign alluded to 
the subject, or encouraged any one else to do so.  Nobody had the 
least notion what his thoughts or opinions were, connected with it; 
whether he remembered it or forgot it; whether he had any idea that 
such an event had ever taken place.  Therefore, even while he 
slept, no one ventured to refer to it in his presence; and for such 
sufficient reasons, these his chosen friends were silent now.

Mr Willet had got by this time into such a complication of knots, 
that it was perfectly clear he must wake or die.  He chose the 
former alternative, and opened his eyes.

'If he don't come in five minutes,' said John, 'I shall have supper 
without him.'

The antecedent of this pronoun had been mentioned for the last time 
at eight o'clock.  Messrs Parkes and Cobb being used to this style 
of conversation, replied without difficulty that to be sure Solomon 
was very late, and they wondered what had happened to detain him.

'He an't blown away, I suppose,' said Parkes.  'It's enough to 
carry a man of his figure off his legs, and easy too.  Do you hear 
it?  It blows great guns, indeed.  There'll be many a crash in the 
Forest to-night, I reckon, and many a broken branch upon the ground 
to-morrow.'

'It won't break anything in the Maypole, I take it, sir,' returned 
old John.  'Let it try.  I give it leave--what's that?'

'The wind,' cried Parkes.  'It's howling like a Christian, and has 
been all night long.'

'Did you ever, sir,' asked John, after a minute's contemplation, 
'hear the wind say "Maypole"?'

'Why, what man ever did?' said Parkes.

'Nor "ahoy," perhaps?' added John.

'No.  Nor that neither.'

'Very good, sir,' said Mr Willet, perfectly unmoved; 'then if that 
was the wind just now, and you'll wait a little time without 
speaking, you'll hear it say both words very plain.'

Mr Willet was right.  After listening for a few moments, they could 
clearly hear, above the roar and tumult out of doors, this shout 
repeated; and that with a shrillness and energy, which denoted that 
it came from some person in great distress or terror.  They looked 
at each other, turned pale, and held their breath.  No man stirred.

It was in this emergency that Mr Willet displayed something of that 
strength of mind and plenitude of mental resource, which rendered 
him the admiration of all his friends and neighbours.  After 
looking at Messrs Parkes and Cobb for some time in silence, he 
clapped his two hands to his cheeks, and sent forth a roar which 
made the glasses dance and rafters ring--a long-sustained, 
discordant bellow, that rolled onward with the wind, and startling 
every echo, made the night a hundred times more boisterous--a deep, 
loud, dismal bray, that sounded like a human gong.  Then, with 
every vein in his head and face swollen with the great exertion, 
and his countenance suffused with a lively purple, he drew a little 
nearer to the fire, and turning his back upon it, said with dignity:

'If that's any comfort to anybody, they're welcome to it.  If it 
an't, I'm sorry for 'em.  If either of you two gentlemen likes to 
go out and see what's the matter, you can.  I'm not curious, 
myself.'

While he spoke the cry drew nearer and nearer, footsteps passed the 
window, the latch of the door was raised, it opened, was violently 
shut again, and Solomon Daisy, with a lighted lantern in his hand, 
and the rain streaming from his disordered dress, dashed into the 
room.

A more complete picture of terror than the little man presented, it 
would be difficult to imagine.  The perspiration stood in beads 
upon his face, his knees knocked together, his every limb trembled, 
the power of articulation was quite gone; and there he stood, 
panting for breath, gazing on them with such livid ashy looks, that 
they were infected with his fear, though ignorant of its occasion, 
and, reflecting his dismayed and horror-stricken visage, stared 
back again without venturing to question him; until old John 
Willet, in a fit of temporary insanity, made a dive at his cravat, 
and, seizing him by that portion of his dress, shook him to and fro 
until his very teeth appeared to rattle in his head.

'Tell us what's the matter, sir,' said John, 'or I'll kill you.  
Tell us what's the matter, sir, or in another second I'll have your 
head under the biler.  How dare you look like that?  Is anybody a-
following of you?  What do you mean?  Say something, or I'll be the 
death of you, I will.'

Mr Willet, in his frenzy, was so near keeping his word to the very 
letter (Solomon Daisy's eyes already beginning to roll in an 
alarming manner, and certain guttural sounds, as of a choking man, 
to issue from his throat), that the two bystanders, recovering in 
some degree, plucked him off his victim by main force, and placed 
the little clerk of Chigwell in a chair.  Directing a fearful gaze 
all round the room, he implored them in a faint voice to give him 
some drink; and above all to lock the house-door and close and bar 
the shutters of the room, without a moment's loss of time.  The 
latter request did not tend to reassure his hearers, or to fill 
them with the most comfortable sensations; they complied with it, 
however, with the greatest expedition; and having handed him a 
bumper of brandy-and-water, nearly boiling hot, waited to hear what 
he might have to tell them.

'Oh, Johnny,' said Solomon, shaking him by the hand.  'Oh, Parkes.  
Oh, Tommy Cobb.  Why did I leave this house to-night!  On the 
nineteenth of March--of all nights in the year, on the nineteenth 
of March!'

They all drew closer to the fire.  Parkes, who was nearest to the 
door, started and looked over his shoulder.  Mr Willet, with great 
indignation, inquired what the devil he meant by that--and then 
said, 'God forgive me,' and glanced over his own shoulder, and came 
a little nearer.

'When I left here to-night,' said Solomon Daisy, 'I little thought 
what day of the month it was.  I have never gone alone into the 
church after dark on this day, for seven-and-twenty years.  I have 
heard it said that as we keep our birthdays when we are alive, so 
the ghosts of dead people, who are not easy in their graves, keep 
the day they died upon.--How the wind roars!'

Nobody spoke.  All eyes were fastened on Solomon.

'I might have known,' he said, 'what night it was, by the foul 
weather.  There's no such night in the whole year round as this is, 
always.  I never sleep quietly in my bed on the nineteenth of 
March.'

'Go on,' said Tom Cobb, in a low voice.  'Nor I neither.'

Solomon Daisy raised his glass to his lips; put it down upon the 
floor with such a trembling hand that the spoon tinkled in it like 
a little bell; and continued thus:

'Have I ever said that we are always brought back to this subject 
in some strange way, when the nineteenth of this month comes round?  
Do you suppose it was by accident, I forgot to wind up the church-
clock?  I never forgot it at any other time, though it's such a 
clumsy thing that it has to be wound up every day.  Why should it 
escape my memory on this day of all others?

'I made as much haste down there as I could when I went from here, 
but I had to go home first for the keys; and the wind and rain 
being dead against me all the way, it was pretty well as much as I 
could do at times to keep my legs.  I got there at last, opened the 
church-door, and went in.  I had not met a soul all the way, and 
you may judge whether it was dull or not.  Neither of you would 
bear me company.  If you could have known what was to come, you'd 
have been in the right.

'The wind was so strong, that it was as much as I could do to shut 
the church-door by putting my whole weight against it; and even as 
it was, it burst wide open twice, with such strength that any of 
you would have sworn, if you had been leaning against it, as I was, 
that somebody was pushing on the other side.  However, I got the 
key turned, went into the belfry, and wound up the clock--which was 
very near run down, and would have stood stock-still in half an 
hour.

'As I took up my lantern again to leave the church, it came upon me 
all at once that this was the nineteenth of March.  It came upon me 
with a kind of shock, as if a hand had struck the thought upon my 
forehead; at the very same moment, I heard a voice outside the 
tower--rising from among the graves.'

Here old John precipitately interrupted the speaker, and begged 
that if Mr Parkes (who was seated opposite to him and was staring 
directly over his head) saw anything, he would have the goodness 
to mention it.  Mr Parkes apologised, and remarked that he was only 
listening; to which Mr Willet angrily retorted, that his listening 
with that kind of expression in his face was not agreeable, and 
that if he couldn't look like other people, he had better put his 
pocket-handkerchief over his head.  Mr Parkes with great submission 
pledged himself to do so, if again required, and John Willet 
turning to Solomon desired him to proceed.  After waiting until a 
violent gust of wind and rain, which seemed to shake even that 
sturdy house to its foundation, had passed away, the little man 
complied:

'Never tell me that it was my fancy, or that it was any other sound 
which I mistook for that I tell you of.  I heard the wind whistle 
through the arches of the church.  I heard the steeple strain and 
creak.  I heard the rain as it came driving against the walls.  I 
felt the bells shake.  I saw the ropes sway to and fro.  And I 
heard that voice.'

'What did it say?' asked Tom Cobb.

'I don't know what; I don't know that it spoke.  It gave a kind of 
cry, as any one of us might do, if something dreadful followed us 
in a dream, and came upon us unawares; and then it died off: 
seeming to pass quite round the church.'

'I don't see much in that,' said John, drawing a long breath, and 
looking round him like a man who felt relieved.

'Perhaps not,' returned his friend, 'but that's not all.'

'What more do you mean to say, sir, is to come?' asked John, 
pausing in the act of wiping his face upon his apron.  'What are 
you a-going to tell us of next?'

'What I saw.'

'Saw!' echoed all three, bending forward.

'When I opened the church-door to come out,' said the little man, 
with an expression of face which bore ample testimony to the 
sincerity of his conviction, 'when I opened the church-door to come 
out, which I did suddenly, for I wanted to get it shut again before 
another gust of wind came up, there crossed me--so close, that by 
stretching out my finger I could have touched it--something in the 
likeness of a man.  It was bare-headed to the storm.  It turned its 
face without stopping, and fixed its eyes on mine.  It was a ghost--
a spirit.'

'Whose?' they all three cried together.

In the excess of his emotion (for he fell back trembling in his 
chair, and waved his hand as if entreating them to question him no 
further), his answer was lost on all but old John Willet, who 
happened to be seated close beside him.

'Who!' cried Parkes and Tom Cobb, looking eagerly by turns at 
Solomon Daisy and at Mr Willet.  'Who was it?'

'Gentlemen,' said Mr Willet after a long pause, 'you needn't ask.  
The likeness of a murdered man.  This is the nineteenth of March.'

A profound silence ensued.

'If you'll take my advice,' said John, 'we had better, one and all, 
keep this a secret.  Such tales would not be liked at the Warren.  
Let us keep it to ourselves for the present time at all events, or 
we may get into trouble, and Solomon may lose his place.  Whether 
it was really as he says, or whether it wasn't, is no matter.  
Right or wrong, nobody would believe him.  As to the probabilities, 
I don't myself think,' said Mr Willet, eyeing the corners of the 
room in a manner which showed that, like some other philosophers, 
he was not quite easy in his theory, 'that a ghost as had been a 
man of sense in his lifetime, would be out a-walking in such 
weather--I only know that I wouldn't, if I was one.'

But this heretical doctrine was strongly opposed by the other 
three, who quoted a great many precedents to show that bad weather 
was the very time for such appearances; and Mr Parkes (who had had 
a ghost in his family, by the mother's side) argued the matter with 
so much ingenuity and force of illustration, that John was only 
saved from having to retract his opinion by the opportune 
appearance of supper, to which they applied themselves with a 
dreadful relish.  Even Solomon Daisy himself, by dint of the 
elevating influences of fire, lights, brandy, and good company, so 
far recovered as to handle his knife and fork in a highly 
creditable manner, and to display a capacity both of eating and 
drinking, such as banished all fear of his having sustained any 
lasting injury from his fright.

Supper done, they crowded round the fire again, and, as is common 
on such occasions, propounded all manner of leading questions 
calculated to surround the story with new horrors and surprises.  
But Solomon Daisy, notwithstanding these temptations, adhered so 
steadily to his original account, and repeated it so often, with 
such slight variations, and with such solemn asseverations of its 
truth and reality, that his hearers were (with good reason) more 
astonished than at first.  As he took John Willet's view of the 
matter in regard to the propriety of not bruiting the tale abroad, 
unless the spirit should appear to him again, in which case it 
would be necessary to take immediate counsel with the clergyman, it 
was solemnly resolved that it should be hushed up and kept quiet.  
And as most men like to have a secret to tell which may exalt their 
own importance, they arrived at this conclusion with perfect 
unanimity.

As it was by this time growing late, and was long past their usual 
hour of separating, the cronies parted for the night.  Solomon 
Daisy, with a fresh candle in his lantern, repaired homewards under 
the escort of long Phil Parkes and Mr Cobb, who were rather more 
nervous than himself.  Mr Willet, after seeing them to the door, 
returned to collect his thoughts with the assistance of the boiler, 
and to listen to the storm of wind and rain, which had not yet 
abated one jot of its fury.



Chapter 34


Before old John had looked at the boiler quite twenty minutes, he 
got his ideas into a focus, and brought them to bear upon Solomon 
Daisy's story.  The more he thought of it, the more impressed he 
became with a sense of his own wisdom, and a desire that Mr 
Haredale should be impressed with it likewise.  At length, to the 
end that he might sustain a principal and important character in 
the affair; and might have the start of Solomon and his two 
friends, through whose means he knew the adventure, with a variety 
of exaggerations, would be known to at least a score of people, and 
most likely to Mr Haredale himself, by breakfast-time to-morrow; he 
determined to repair to the Warren before going to bed.

'He's my landlord,' thought John, as he took a candle in his hand, 
and setting it down in a corner out of the wind's way, opened a 
casement in the rear of the house, looking towards the stables.  
'We haven't met of late years so often as we used to do--changes 
are taking place in the family--it's desirable that I should stand 
as well with them, in point of dignity, as possible--the whispering 
about of this here tale will anger him--it's good to have 
confidences with a gentleman of his natur', and set one's-self 
right besides.  Halloa there!  Hugh--Hugh.  Hal-loa!'

When he had repeated this shout a dozen times, and startled every 
pigeon from its slumbers, a door in one of the ruinous old 
buildings opened, and a rough voice demanded what was amiss now, 
that a man couldn't even have his sleep in quiet.

'What!  Haven't you sleep enough, growler, that you're not to be 
knocked up for once?' said John.

'No,' replied the voice, as the speaker yawned and shook himself.  
'Not half enough.'

'I don't know how you CAN sleep, with the wind a bellowsing and 
roaring about you, making the tiles fly like a pack of cards,' said 
John; 'but no matter for that.  Wrap yourself up in something or 
another, and come here, for you must go as far as the Warren with 
me.  And look sharp about it.'

Hugh, with much low growling and muttering, went back into his 
lair; and presently reappeared, carrying a lantern and a cudgel, 
and enveloped from head to foot in an old, frowzy, slouching horse-
cloth.  Mr Willet received this figure at the back-door, and 
ushered him into the bar, while he wrapped himself in sundry 
greatcoats and capes, and so tied and knotted his face in shawls 
and handkerchiefs, that how he breathed was a mystery.

'You don't take a man out of doors at near midnight in such weather, 
without putting some heart into him, do you, master?' said Hugh.

'Yes I do, sir,' returned Mr Willet.  'I put the heart (as you call 
it) into him when he has brought me safe home again, and his 
standing steady on his legs an't of so much consequence.  So hold 
that light up, if you please, and go on a step or two before, to 
show the way.'

Hugh obeyed with a very indifferent grace, and a longing glance at 
the bottles.  Old John, laying strict injunctions on his cook to 
keep the doors locked in his absence, and to open to nobody but 
himself on pain of dismissal, followed him into the blustering 
darkness out of doors.

The way was wet and dismal, and the night so black, that if Mr 
Willet had been his own pilot, he would have walked into a deep 
horsepond within a few hundred yards of his own house, and would 
certainly have terminated his career in that ignoble sphere of 
action.  But Hugh, who had a sight as keen as any hawk's, and, 
apart from that endowment, could have found his way blindfold to 
any place within a dozen miles, dragged old John along, quite deaf 
to his remonstrances, and took his own course without the slightest 
reference to, or notice of, his master.  So they made head against 
the wind as they best could; Hugh crushing the wet grass beneath 
his heavy tread, and stalking on after his ordinary savage 
fashion; John Willet following at arm's length, picking his 
steps, and looking about him, now for bogs and ditches, and now 
for such stray ghosts as might be wandering abroad, with looks of 
as much dismay and uneasiness as his immovable face was capable of 
expressing.

At length they stood upon the broad gravel-walk before the Warren-
house.  The building was profoundly dark, and none were moving near 
it save themselves.  From one solitary turret-chamber, however, 
there shone a ray of light; and towards this speck of comfort in 
the cold, cheerless, silent scene, Mr Willet bade his pilot lead 
him.

'The old room,' said John, looking timidly upward; 'Mr Reuben's own 
apartment, God be with us!  I wonder his brother likes to sit 
there, so late at night--on this night too.'

'Why, where else should he sit?' asked Hugh, holding the lantern to 
his breast, to keep the candle from the wind, while he trimmed it 
with his fingers.  'It's snug enough, an't it?'

'Snug!' said John indignantly.  'You have a comfortable idea of 
snugness, you have, sir.  Do you know what was done in that room, 
you ruffian?'

'Why, what is it the worse for that!' cried Hugh, looking into 
John's fat face.  'Does it keep out the rain, and snow, and wind, 
the less for that?  Is it less warm or dry, because a man was 
killed there?  Ha, ha, ha!  Never believe it, master.  One man's no 
such matter as that comes to.'

Mr Willet fixed his dull eyes on his follower, and began--by a 
species of inspiration--to think it just barely possible that he 
was something of a dangerous character, and that it might be 
advisable to get rid of him one of these days.  He was too prudent 
to say anything, with the journey home before him; and therefore 
turned to the iron gate before which this brief dialogue had 
passed, and pulled the handle of the bell that hung beside it.  The 
turret in which the light appeared being at one corner of the 
building, and only divided from the path by one of the garden-
walks, upon which this gate opened, Mr Haredale threw up the 
window directly, and demanded who was there.

'Begging pardon, sir,' said John, 'I knew you sat up late, and made 
bold to come round, having a word to say to you.'

'Willet--is it not?'

'Of the Maypole--at your service, sir.'

Mr Haredale closed the window, and withdrew.  He presently appeared 
at a door in the bottom of the turret, and coming across the 
garden-walk, unlocked the gate and let them in.

'You are a late visitor, Willet.  What is the matter?'

'Nothing to speak of, sir,' said John; 'an idle tale, I thought you 
ought to know of; nothing more.'

'Let your man go forward with the lantern, and give me your hand.  
The stairs are crooked and narrow.  Gently with your light, friend.  
You swing it like a censer.'

Hugh, who had already reached the turret, held it more steadily, 
and ascended first, turning round from time to time to shed his 
light downward on the steps.  Mr Haredale following next, eyed his 
lowering face with no great favour; and Hugh, looking down on him, 
returned his glances with interest, as they climbed the winding 
stairs.

It terminated in a little ante-room adjoining that from which they 
had seen the light.  Mr Haredale entered first, and led the way 
through it into the latter chamber, where he seated himself at a 
writing-table from which he had risen when they had rung the bell.

'Come in,' he said, beckoning to old John, who remained bowing at 
the door.  'Not you, friend,' he added hastily to Hugh, who entered 
also.  'Willet, why do you bring that fellow here?'

'Why, sir,' returned John, elevating his eyebrows, and lowering his 
voice to the tone in which the question had been asked him, 'he's a 
good guard, you see.'

'Don't be too sure of that,' said Mr Haredale, looking towards him 
as he spoke.  'I doubt it.  He has an evil eye.'

'There's no imagination in his eye,' returned Mr Willet, glancing 
over his shoulder at the organ in question, 'certainly.'

'There is no good there, be assured,' said Mr Haredale.  'Wait in 
that little room, friend, and close the door between us.'

Hugh shrugged his shoulders, and with a disdainful look, which 
showed, either that he had overheard, or that he guessed the 
purport of their whispering, did as he was told.  When he was shut 
out, Mr Haredale turned to John, and bade him go on with what he 
had to say, but not to speak too loud, for there were quick ears 
yonder.

Thus cautioned, Mr Willet, in an oily whisper, recited all that he 
had heard and said that night; laying particular stress upon his 
own sagacity, upon his great regard for the family, and upon his 
solicitude for their peace of mind and happiness.  The story moved 
his auditor much more than he had expected.  Mr Haredale often 
changed his attitude, rose and paced the room, returned again, 
desired him to repeat, as nearly as he could, the very words that 
Solomon had used, and gave so many other signs of being disturbed 
and ill at ease, that even Mr Willet was surprised.

'You did quite right,' he said, at the end of a long conversation, 
'to bid them keep this story secret.  It is a foolish fancy on the 
part of this weak-brained man, bred in his fears and superstition.  
But Miss Haredale, though she would know it to be so, would be 
disturbed by it if it reached her ears; it is too nearly connected 
with a subject very painful to us all, to be heard with 
indifference.  You were most prudent, and have laid me under a 
great obligation.  I thank you very much.'

This was equal to John's most sanguine expectations; but he would 
have preferred Mr Haredale's looking at him when he spoke, as if he 
really did thank him, to his walking up and down, speaking by fits 
and starts, often stopping with his eyes fixed on the ground, 
moving hurriedly on again, like one distracted, and seeming almost 
unconscious of what he said or did.

This, however, was his manner; and it was so embarrassing to John 
that he sat quite passive for a long time, not knowing what to 
do.  At length he rose.  Mr Haredale stared at him for a moment as 
though he had quite forgotten his being present, then shook hands 
with him, and opened the door.  Hugh, who was, or feigned to be, 
fast asleep on the ante-chamber floor, sprang up on their entrance, 
and throwing his cloak about him, grasped his stick and lantern, 
and prepared to descend the stairs.

'Stay,' said Mr Haredale.  'Will this man drink?'

'Drink!  He'd drink the Thames up, if it was strong enough, sir, 
replied John Willet.  'He'll have something when he gets home.  
He's better without it, now, sir.'

'Nay.  Half the distance is done,' said Hugh.  'What a hard master 
you are!  I shall go home the better for one glassful, halfway.  
Come!'

As John made no reply, Mr Haredale brought out a glass of liquor, 
and gave it to Hugh, who, as he took it in his hand, threw part of 
it upon the floor.

'What do you mean by splashing your drink about a gentleman's 
house, sir?' said John.

'I'm drinking a toast,' Hugh rejoined, holding the glass above his 
head, and fixing his eyes on Mr Haredale's face; 'a toast to this 
house and its master.'  With that he muttered something to himself, 
and drank the rest, and setting down the glass, preceded them 
without another word.

John was a good deal scandalised by this observance, but seeing 
that Mr Haredale took little heed of what Hugh said or did, and 
that his thoughts were otherwise employed, he offered no apology, 
and went in silence down the stairs, across the walk, and through 
the garden-gate.  They stopped upon the outer side for Hugh to hold 
the light while Mr Haredale locked it on the inner; and then John 
saw with wonder (as he often afterwards related), that he was very 
pale, and that his face had changed so much and grown so haggard 
since their entrance, that he almost seemed another man.

They were in the open road again, and John Willet was walking on 
behind his escort, as he had come, thinking very steadily of what 
be had just now seen, when Hugh drew him suddenly aside, and almost 
at the same instant three horsemen swept past--the nearest brushed 
his shoulder even then--who, checking their steeds as suddenly as 
they could, stood still, and waited for their coming up.



Chapter 35


When John Willet saw that the horsemen wheeled smartly round, and 
drew up three abreast in the narrow road, waiting for him and his 
man to join them, it occurred to him with unusual precipitation 
that they must be highwaymen; and had Hugh been armed with a 
blunderbuss, in place of his stout cudgel, he would certainly have 
ordered him to fire it off at a venture, and would, while the word 
of command was obeyed, have consulted his own personal safety in 
immediate flight.  Under the circumstances of disadvantage, 
however, in which he and his guard were placed, he deemed it 
prudent to adopt a different style of generalship, and therefore 
whispered his attendant to address them in the most peaceable and 
courteous terms.  By way of acting up to the spirit and letter of 
this instruction, Hugh stepped forward, and flourishing his staff 
before the very eyes of the rider nearest to him, demanded roughly 
what he and his fellows meant by so nearly galloping over them, and 
why they scoured the king's highway at that late hour of night.

The man whom be addressed was beginning an angry reply in the same 
strain, when be was checked by the horseman in the centre, who, 
interposing with an air of authority, inquired in a somewhat loud 
but not harsh or unpleasant voice:

'Pray, is this the London road?'

'If you follow it right, it is,' replied Hugh roughly.

'Nay, brother,' said the same person, 'you're but a churlish 
Englishman, if Englishman you be--which I should much doubt but for 
your tongue.  Your companion, I am sure, will answer me more 
civilly.  How say you, friend?'

'I say it IS the London road, sir,' answered John.  'And I wish,' 
he added in a subdued voice, as he turned to Hugh, 'that you was in 
any other road, you vagabond.  Are you tired of your life, sir, 
that you go a-trying to provoke three great neck-or-nothing chaps, 
that could keep on running over us, back'ards and for'ards, till we 
was dead, and then take our bodies up behind 'em, and drown us ten 
miles off?'

'How far is it to London?' inquired the same speaker.

'Why, from here, sir,' answered John, persuasively, 'it's thirteen 
very easy mile.'

The adjective was thrown in, as an inducement to the travellers to 
ride away with all speed; but instead of having the desired effect, 
it elicited from the same person, the remark, 'Thirteen miles!  
That's a long distance!' which was followed by a short pause of 
indecision.

'Pray,' said the gentleman, 'are there any inns hereabouts?'  At 
the word 'inns,' John plucked up his spirit in a surprising manner; 
his fears rolled off like smoke; all the landlord stirred within 
him.

'There are no inns,' rejoined Mr Willet, with a strong emphasis on 
the plural number; 'but there's a Inn--one Inn--the Maypole Inn.  
That's a Inn indeed.  You won't see the like of that Inn often.'

'You keep it, perhaps?' said the horseman, smiling.

'I do, sir,' replied John, greatly wondering how he had found this 
out.

'And how far is the Maypole from here?'

'About a mile'--John was going to add that it was the easiest mile 
in all the world, when the third rider, who had hitherto kept a 
little in the rear, suddenly interposed:

'And have you one excellent bed, landlord?  Hem!  A bed that you 
can recommend--a bed that you are sure is well aired--a bed that 
has been slept in by some perfectly respectable and unexceptionable 
person?'

'We don't take in no tagrag and bobtail at our house, sir,' 
answered John.  'And as to the bed itself--'

'Say, as to three beds,' interposed the gentleman who had spoken 
before; 'for we shall want three if we stay, though my friend only 
speaks of one.'

'No, no, my lord; you are too good, you are too kind; but your life 
is of far too much importance to the nation in these portentous 
times, to be placed upon a level with one so useless and so poor as 
mine.  A great cause, my lord, a mighty cause, depends on you.  You 
are its leader and its champion, its advanced guard and its van.  
It is the cause of our altars and our homes, our country and our 
faith.  Let ME sleep on a chair--the carpet--anywhere.  No one will 
repine if I take cold or fever.  Let John Grueby pass the night 
beneath the open sky--no one will repine for HIM.  But forty 
thousand men of this our island in the wave (exclusive of women and 
children) rivet their eyes and thoughts on Lord George Gordon; and 
every day, from the rising up of the sun to the going down of the 
same, pray for his health and vigour.  My lord,' said the speaker, 
rising in his stirrups, 'it is a glorious cause, and must not be 
forgotten.  My lord, it is a mighty cause, and must not be 
endangered.  My lord, it is a holy cause, and must not be 
deserted.'

'It IS a holy cause,' exclaimed his lordship, lifting up his hat 
with great solemnity.  'Amen.'

'John Grueby,' said the long-winded gentleman, in a tone of mild 
reproof, 'his lordship said Amen.'

'I heard my lord, sir,' said the man, sitting like a statue on his 
horse.

'And do not YOU say Amen, likewise?'

To which John Grueby made no reply at all, but sat looking straight 
before him.

'You surprise me, Grueby,' said the gentleman.  'At a crisis like 
the present, when Queen Elizabeth, that maiden monarch, weeps 
within her tomb, and Bloody Mary, with a brow of gloom and shadow, 
stalks triumphant--'

'Oh, sir,' cied the man, gruffly, 'where's the use of talking of 
Bloody Mary, under such circumstances as the present, when my 
lord's wet through, and tired with hard riding?  Let's either go on 
to London, sir, or put up at once; or that unfort'nate Bloody Mary 
will have more to answer for--and she's done a deal more harm in 
her grave than she ever did in her lifetime, I believe.'

By this time Mr Willet, who had never beard so many words spoken 
together at one time, or delivered with such volubility and 
emphasis as by the long-winded gentleman; and whose brain, being 
wholly unable to sustain or compass them, had quite given itself up 
for lost; recovered so far as to observe that there was ample 
accommodation at the Maypole for all the party: good beds; neat 
wines; excellent entertainment for man and beast; private rooms for 
large and small parties; dinners dressed upon the shortest notice; 
choice stabling, and a lock-up coach-house; and, in short, to run 
over such recommendatory scraps of language as were painted up on 
various portions of the building, and which in the course of some 
forty years he had learnt to repeat with tolerable correctness.  He 
was considering whether it was at all possible to insert any novel 
sentences to the same purpose, when the gentleman who had spoken 
first, turning to him of the long wind, exclaimed, 'What say you, 
Gashford?  Shall we tarry at this house he speaks of, or press 
forward?  You shall decide.'

'I would submit, my lord, then,' returned the person he appealed 
to, in a silky tone, 'that your health and spirits--so important, 
under Providence, to our great cause, our pure and truthful cause'--
here his lordship pulled off his hat again, though it was raining 
hard--'require refreshment and repose.'

'Go on before, landlord, and show the way,' said Lord George 
Gordon; 'we will follow at a footpace.'

'If you'll give me leave, my lord,' said John Grueby, in a low 
voice, 'I'll change my proper place, and ride before you.  The 
looks of the landlord's friend are not over honest, and it may be 
as well to be cautious with him.'

'John Grueby is quite right,' interposed Mr Gashford, falling back 
hastily.  'My lord, a life so precious as yours must not be put in 
peril.  Go forward, John, by all means.  If you have any reason to 
suspect the fellow, blow his brains out.'

John made no answer, but looking straight before him, as his custom 
seemed to be when the secretary spoke, bade Hugh push on, and 
followed close behind him.  Then came his lordship, with Mr Willet 
at his bridle rein; and, last of all, his lordship's secretary--for 
that, it seemed, was Gashford's office.

Hugh strode briskly on, often looking back at the servant, whose 
horse was close upon his heels, and glancing with a leer at his 
bolster case of pistols, by which he seemed to set great store.  He 
was a square-built, strong-made, bull-necked fellow, of the true 
English breed; and as Hugh measured him with his eye, he measured 
Hugh, regarding him meanwhile with a look of bluff disdain.  He was 
much older than the Maypole man, being to all appearance five-and-
forty; but was one of those self-possessed, hard-headed, 
imperturbable fellows, who, if they are ever beaten at fisticuffs, 
or other kind of warfare, never know it, and go on coolly till they 
win.

'If I led you wrong now,' said Hugh, tauntingly, 'you'd--ha ha ha!--
you'd shoot me through the head, I suppose.'

John Grueby took no more notice of this remark than if he had been 
deaf and Hugh dumb; but kept riding on quite comfortably, with his 
eyes fixed on the horizon.

'Did you ever try a fall with a man when you were young, master?' 
said Hugh.  'Can you make any play at single-stick?'

John Grueby looked at him sideways with the same contented air, but 
deigned not a word in answer.

'--Like this?' said Hugh, giving his cudgel one of those skilful 
flourishes, in which the rustic of that time delighted.  'Whoop!'

'--Or that,' returned John Grueby, beating down his guard with his 
whip, and striking him on the head with its butt end.  'Yes, I 
played a little once.  You wear your hair too long; I should have 
cracked your crown if it had been a little shorter.'

It was a pretty smart, loud-sounding rap, as it was, and evidently 
astonished Hugh; who, for the moment, seemed disposed to drag his 
new acquaintance from his saddle.  But his face betokening neither 
malice, triumph, rage, nor any lingering idea that he had given him 
offence; his eyes gazing steadily in the old direction, and his 
manner being as careless and composed as if he had merely brushed 
away a fly; Hugh was so puzzled, and so disposed to look upon him 
as a customer of almost supernatural toughness, that he merely 
laughed, and cried 'Well done!' then, sheering off a little, led 
the way in silence.

Before the lapse of many minutes the party halted at the Maypole 
door.  Lord George and his secretary quickly dismounting, gave 
their horses to their servant, who, under the guidance of Hugh, 
repaired to the stables.  Right glad to escape from the inclemency 
of the night, they followed Mr Willet into the common room, and 
stood warming themselves and drying their clothes before the 
cheerful fire, while he busied himself with such orders and 
preparations as his guest's high quality required.

As he bustled in and out of the room, intent on these 
arrangements, he had an opportunity of observing the two 
travellers, of whom, as yet, he knew nothing but the voice.  The 
lord, the great personage who did the Maypole so much honour, was 
about the middle height, of a slender make, and sallow complexion, 
with an aquiline nose, and long hair of a reddish brown, combed 
perfectly straight and smooth about his ears, and slightly 
powdered, but without the faintest vestige of a curl.  He was 
attired, under his greatcoat, in a full suit of black, quite free 
from any ornament, and of the most precise and sober cut.  The 
gravity of his dress, together with a certain lankness of cheek 
and stiffness of deportment, added nearly ten years to his age, 
but his figure was that of one not yet past thirty.  As he stood 
musing in the red glow of the fire, it was striking to observe his 
very bright large eye, which betrayed a restlessness of thought and 
purpose, singularly at variance with the studied composure and 
sobriety of his mien, and with his quaint and sad apparel.  It had 
nothing harsh or cruel in its expression; neither had his face, 
which was thin and mild, and wore an air of melancholy; but it was 
suggestive of an indefinable uneasiness; which infected those who 
looked upon him, and filled them with a kind of pity for the man: 
though why it did so, they would have had some trouble to explain.

Gashford, the secretary, was taller, angularly made, high-
shouldered, bony, and ungraceful.  His dress, in imitation of his 
superior, was demure and staid in the extreme; his manner, formal 
and constrained.  This gentleman had an overhanging brow, great 
hands and feet and ears, and a pair of eyes that seemed to have 
made an unnatural retreat into his head, and to have dug themselves 
a cave to hide in.  His manner was smooth and humble, but very sly 
and slinking.  He wore the aspect of a man who was always lying in 
wait for something that WOULDN'T come to pass; but he looked 
patient--very patient--and fawned like a spaniel dog.  Even now, 
while he warmed and rubbed his hands before the blaze, he had the 
air of one who only presumed to enjoy it in his degree as a 
commoner; and though he knew his lord was not regarding him, he 
looked into his face from time to time, and with a meek and 
deferential manner, smiled as if for practice.

Such were the guests whom old John Willet, with a fixed and leaden 
eye, surveyed a hundred times, and to whom he now advanced with a 
state candlestick in each hand, beseeching them to follow him into 
a worthier chamber.  'For my lord,' said John--it is odd enough, 
but certain people seem to have as great a pleasure in pronouncing 
titles as their owners have in wearing them--'this room, my lord, 
isn't at all the sort of place for your lordship, and I have to 
beg your lordship's pardon for keeping you here, my lord, one 
minute.'

With this address, John ushered them upstairs into the state 
apartment, which, like many other things of state, was cold and 
comfortless.  Their own footsteps, reverberating through the 
spacious room, struck upon their hearing with a hollow sound; and 
its damp and chilly atmosphere was rendered doubly cheerless by 
contrast with the homely warmth they had deserted.

It was of no use, however, to propose a return to the place they 
had quitted, for the preparations went on so briskly that there was 
no time to stop them.  John, with the tall candlesticks in his 
hands, bowed them up to the fireplace; Hugh, striding in with a 
lighted brand and pile of firewood, cast it down upon the hearth, 
and set it in a blaze; John Grueby (who had a great blue cockade in 
his hat, which he appeared to despise mightily) brought in the 
portmanteau he had carried on his horse, and placed it on the 
floor; and presently all three were busily engaged in drawing out 
the screen, laying the cloth, inspecting the beds, lighting fires 
in the bedrooms, expediting the supper, and making everything as 
cosy and as snug as might be, on so short a notice.  In less than 
an hour's time, supper had been served, and ate, and cleared away; 
and Lord George and his secretary, with slippered feet, and legs 
stretched out before the fire, sat over some hot mulled wine 
together.

'So ends, my lord,' said Gashford, filling his glass with great 
complacency, 'the blessed work of a most blessed day.'

'And of a blessed yesterday,' said his lordship, raising his head.

'Ah!'--and here the secretary clasped his hands--'a blessed 
yesterday indeed!  The Protestants of Suffolk are godly men and 
true.  Though others of our countrymen have lost their way in 
darkness, even as we, my lord, did lose our road to-night, theirs 
is the light and glory.'

'Did I move them, Gashford ?' said Lord George.

'Move them, my lord!  Move them!  They cried to be led on against 
the Papists, they vowed a dreadful vengeance on their heads, they 
roared like men possessed--'

'But not by devils,' said his lord.

'By devils! my lord!  By angels.'

'Yes--oh surely--by angels, no doubt,' said Lord George, thrusting 
his hands into his pockets, taking them out again to bite his 
nails, and looking uncomfortably at the fire.  'Of course by 
angels--eh Gashford?'

'You do not doubt it, my lord?' said the secretary.

'No--No,' returned his lord.  'No.  Why should I?  I suppose it 
would be decidedly irreligious to doubt it--wouldn't it, Gashford?  
Though there certainly were,' he added, without waiting for an 
answer, 'some plaguy ill-looking characters among them.'

'When you warmed,' said the secretary, looking sharply at the 
other's downcast eyes, which brightened slowly as he spoke; 'when 
you warmed into that noble outbreak; when you told them that you 
were never of the lukewarm or the timid tribe, and bade them take 
heed that they were prepared to follow one who would lead them on, 
though to the very death; when you spoke of a hundred and twenty 
thousand men across the Scottish border who would take their own 
redress at any time, if it were not conceded; when you cried 
"Perish the Pope and all his base adherents; the penal laws against 
them shall never be repealed while Englishmen have hearts and 
hands"--and waved your own and touched your sword; and when they 
cried "No Popery!" and you cried "No; not even if we wade in 
blood," and they threw up their hats and cried "Hurrah! not even if 
we wade in blood; No Popery!  Lord George!  Down with the Papists--
Vengeance on their heads:" when this was said and done, and a word 
from you, my lord, could raise or still the tumult--ah! then I felt 
what greatness was indeed, and thought, When was there ever power 
like this of Lord George Gordon's!'

'It's a great power.  You're right.  It is a great power!' he cried 
with sparkling eyes.  'But--dear Gashford--did I really say all 
that?'

'And how much more!' cried the secretary, looking upwards.  'Ah! 
how much more!'

'And I told them what you say, about the one hundred and forty 
thousand men in Scotland, did I!' he asked with evident delight.  
'That was bold.'

'Our cause is boldness.  Truth is always bold.'

'Certainly.  So is religion.  She's bold, Gashford?'

'The true religion is, my lord.'

'And that's ours,' he rejoined, moving uneasily in his seat, and 
biting his nails as though he would pare them to the quick.  'There 
can be no doubt of ours being the true one.  You feel as certain of 
that as I do, Gashford, don't you?'

'Does my lord ask ME,' whined Gashford, drawing his chair nearer 
with an injured air, and laying his broad flat hand upon the table; 
'ME,' he repeated, bending the dark hollows of his eyes upon him 
with an unwholesome smile, 'who, stricken by the magic of his 
eloquence in Scotland but a year ago, abjured the errors of the 
Romish church, and clung to him as one whose timely hand had 
plucked me from a pit?'

'True.  No--No.  I--I didn't mean it,' replied the other, shaking 
him by the hand, rising from his seat, and pacing restlessly about 
the room.  'It's a proud thing to lead the people, Gashford,' he 
added as he made a sudden halt.

'By force of reason too,' returned the pliant secretary.

'Ay, to be sure.  They may cough and jeer, and groan in Parliament, 
and call me fool and madman, but which of them can raise this human 
sea and make it swell and roar at pleasure?  Not one.'

'Not one,' repeated Gashford.

'Which of them can say for his honesty, what I can say for mine; 
which of them has refused a minister's bribe of one thousand 
pounds a year, to resign his seat in favour of another?  Not one.'

'Not one,' repeated Gashford again--taking the lion's share of the 
mulled wine between whiles.

'And as we are honest, true, and in a sacred cause, Gashford,' said 
Lord George with a heightened colour and in a louder voice, as he 
laid his fevered hand upon his shoulder, 'and are the only men who 
regard the mass of people out of doors, or are regarded by them, we 
will uphold them to the last; and will raise a cry against these 
un-English Papists which shall re-echo through the country, and 
roll with a noise like thunder.  I will be worthy of the motto on 
my coat of arms, "Called and chosen and faithful."

'Called,' said the secretary, 'by Heaven.'

'I am.'

'Chosen by the people.'

'Yes.'

'Faithful to both.'

'To the block!'

It would be difficult to convey an adequate idea of the excited 
manner in which he gave these answers to the secretary's 
promptings; of the rapidity of his utterance, or the violence of 
his tone and gesture; in which, struggling through his Puritan's 
demeanour, was something wild and ungovernable which broke through 
all restraint.  For some minutes he walked rapidly up and down the 
room, then stopping suddenly, exclaimed,

'Gashford--YOU moved them yesterday too.  Oh yes!  You did.'

'I shone with a reflected light, my lord,' replied the humble 
secretary, laying his hand upon his heart.  'I did my best.'

'You did well,' said his master, 'and are a great and worthy 
instrument.  If you will ring for John Grueby to carry the 
portmanteau into my room, and will wait here while I undress, we 
will dispose of business as usual, if you're not too tired.'

'Too tired, my lord!--But this is his consideration!  Christian 
from head to foot.'  With which soliloquy, the secretary tilted the 
jug, and looked very hard into the mulled wine, to see how much 
remained.

John Willet and John Grueby appeared together.  The one bearing the 
great candlesticks, and the other the portmanteau, showed the 
deluded lord into his chamber; and left the secretary alone, to 
yawn and shake himself, and finally to fall asleep before the fire.

'Now, Mr Gashford sir,' said John Grueby in his ear, after what 
appeared to him a moment of unconsciousness; 'my lord's abed.'

'Oh.  Very good, John,' was his mild reply.  'Thank you, John.  
Nobody need sit up.  I know my room.'

'I hope you're not a-going to trouble your head to-night, or my 
lord's head neither, with anything more about Bloody Mary,' said 
John.  'I wish the blessed old creetur had never been born.'

'I said you might go to bed, John,' returned the secretary.  'You 
didn't hear me, I think.'

'Between Bloody Marys, and blue cockades, and glorious Queen 
Besses, and no Poperys, and Protestant associations, and making of 
speeches,' pursued John Grueby, looking, as usual, a long way off, 
and taking no notice of this hint, 'my lord's half off his head.  
When we go out o' doors, such a set of ragamuffins comes a-
shouting after us, "Gordon forever!" that I'm ashamed of myself 
and don't know where to look.  When we're indoors, they come a-
roaring and screaming about the house like so many devils; and my 
lord instead of ordering them to be drove away, goes out into the 
balcony and demeans himself by making speeches to 'em, and calls 
'em "Men of England," and "Fellow-countrymen," as if he was fond of 
'em and thanked 'em for coming.  I can't make it out, but they're 
all mixed up somehow or another with that unfort'nate Bloody Mary, 
and call her name out till they're hoarse.  They're all Protestants 
too--every man and boy among 'em: and Protestants are very fond of 
spoons, I find, and silver-plate in general, whenever area-gates is 
left open accidentally.  I wish that was the worst of it, and that 
no more harm might be to come; but if you don't stop these ugly 
customers in time, Mr Gashford (and I know you; you're the man that 
blows the fire), you'll find 'em grow a little bit too strong for 
you.  One of these evenings, when the weather gets warmer and 
Protestants are thirsty, they'll be pulling London down,--and I 
never heard that Bloody Mary went as far as THAT.'

Gashford had vanished long ago, and these remarks had been bestowed 
on empty air.  Not at all discomposed by the discovery, John Grueby 
fixed his hat on, wrongside foremost that he might be unconscious 
of the shadow of the obnoxious cockade, and withdrew to bed; 
shaking his head in a very gloomy and prophetic manner until he 
reached his chamber.



Chapter 36


Gashford, with a smiling face, but still with looks of profound 
deference and humility, betook himself towards his master's room, 
smoothing his hair down as he went, and humming a psalm tune.  As 
he approached Lord George's door, he cleared his throat and hummed 
more vigorously.

There was a remarkable contrast between this man's occupation at 
the moment, and the expression of his countenance, which was 
singularly repulsive and malicious.  His beetling brow almost 
obscured his eyes; his lip was curled contemptuously; his very 
shoulders seemed to sneer in stealthy whisperings with his great 
flapped ears.

'Hush!' he muttered softly, as he peeped in at the chamber-door.  
'He seems to be asleep.  Pray Heaven he is!  Too much watching, too 
much care, too much thought--ah! Lord preserve him for a martyr!  
He is a saint, if ever saint drew breath on this bad earth.'

Placing his light upon a table, he walked on tiptoe to the fire, 
and sitting in a chair before it with his back towards the bed, 
went on communing with himself like one who thought aloud:

'The saviour of his country and his country's religion, the friend 
of his poor countrymen, the enemy of the proud and harsh; beloved 
of the rejected and oppressed, adored by forty thousand bold and 
loyal English hearts--what happy slumbers his should be!'  And here 
he sighed, and warmed his hands, and shook his head as men do when 
their hearts are full, and heaved another sigh, and warmed his 
hands again.

'Why, Gashford?' said Lord George, who was lying broad awake, upon 
his side, and had been staring at him from his entrance.

'My--my lord,' said Gashford, starting and looking round as though 
in great surprise.  'I have disturbed you!'

'I have not been sleeping.'

'Not sleeping!' he repeated, with assumed confusion.  'What can I 
say for having in your presence given utterance to thoughts--but 
they were sincere--they were sincere!' exclaimed the secretary, 
drawing his sleeve in a hasty way across his eyes; 'and why should 
I regret your having heard them?'

'Gashford,' said the poor lord, stretching out his hand with 
manifest emotion.  'Do not regret it.  You love me well, I know--
too well.  I don't deserve such homage.'

Gashford made no reply, but grasped the hand and pressed it to his 
lips.  Then rising, and taking from the trunk a little desk, he 
placed it on a table near the fire, unlocked it with a key he 
carried in his pocket, sat down before it, took out a pen, and, 
before dipping it in the inkstand, sucked it--to compose the 
fashion of his mouth perhaps, on which a smile was hovering yet.

'How do our numbers stand since last enrolling-night?' inquired 
Lord George.  'Are we really forty thousand strong, or do we still 
speak in round numbers when we take the Association at that amount?'

'Our total now exceeds that number by a score and three,' Gashford 
replied, casting his eyes upon his papers.

'The funds?'

'Not VERY improving; but there is some manna in the wilderness, my 
lord.  Hem!  On Friday night the widows' mites dropped in.  "Forty 
scavengers, three and fourpence.  An aged pew-opener of St Martin's 
parish, sixpence.  A bell-ringer of the established church, 
sixpence.  A Protestant infant, newly born, one halfpenny.  The 
United Link Boys, three shillings--one bad.  The anti-popish 
prisoners in Newgate, five and fourpence.  A friend in Bedlam, 
half-a-crown.  Dennis the hangman, one shilling."'

'That Dennis,' said his lordship, 'is an earnest man.  I marked him 
in the crowd in Welbeck Street, last Friday.'

'A good man,' rejoined the secretary, 'a staunch, sincere, and 
truly zealous man.'

'He should be encouraged,' said Lord George.  'Make a note of 
Dennis.  I'll talk with him.'

Gashford obeyed, and went on reading from his list:

'"The Friends of Reason, half-a-guinea.  The Friends of Liberty, 
half-a-guinea.  The Friends of Peace, half-a-guinea.  The Friends 
of Charity, half-a-guinea.  The Friends of Mercy, half-a-guinea.  
The Associated Rememberers of Bloody Mary, half-a-guinea.  The 
United Bulldogs, half-a-guinea."'

'The United Bulldogs,' said Lord George, biting his nails most 
horribly, 'are a new society, are they not?'

'Formerly the 'Prentice Knights, my lord.  The indentures of the 
old members expiring by degrees, they changed their name, it seems, 
though they still have 'prentices among them, as well as workmen.'

'What is their president's name?' inquired Lord George.

'President,' said Gashford, reading, 'Mr Simon Tappertit.'

'I remember him.  The little man, who sometimes brings an elderly 
sister to our meetings, and sometimes another female too, who is 
conscientious, I have no doubt, but not well-favoured?'

'The very same, my lord.'

'Tappertit is an earnest man,' said Lord George, thoughtfully.  
'Eh, Gashford?'

'One of the foremost among them all, my lord.  He snuffs the battle 
from afar, like the war-horse.  He throws his hat up in the street 
as if he were inspired, and makes most stirring speeches from the 
shoulders of his friends.'

'Make a note of Tappertit,' said Lord George Gordon.  'We may 
advance him to a place of trust.'

'That,' rejoined the secretary, doing as he was told, 'is all--
except Mrs Varden's box (fourteenth time of opening), seven 
shillings and sixpence in silver and copper, and half-a-guinea in 
gold; and Miggs (being the saving of a quarter's wages), one-and-
threepence.'

'Miggs,' said Lord George.  'Is that a man?'

'The name is entered on the list as a woman,' replied the 
secretary.  'I think she is the tall spare female of whom you spoke 
just now, my lord, as not being well-favoured, who sometimes comes 
to hear the speeches--along with Tappertit and Mrs Varden.'

'Mrs Varden is the elderly lady then, is she?'

The secretary nodded, and rubbed the bridge of his nose with the 
feather of his pen.

'She is a zealous sister,' said Lord George.  'Her collection goes 
on prosperously, and is pursued with fervour.  Has her husband 
joined?'

'A malignant,' returned the secretary, folding up his papers.  
'Unworthy such a wife.  He remains in outer darkness and steadily 
refuses.'

'The consequences be upon his own head!--Gashford!'

'My lord!'

'You don't think,' he turned restlessly in his bed as he spoke, 
'these people will desert me, when the hour arrives?  I have spoken 
boldly for them, ventured much, suppressed nothing.  They'll not 
fall off, will they?'

'No fear of that, my lord,' said Gashford, with a meaning look, 
which was rather the involuntary expression of his own thoughts 
than intended as any confirmation of his words, for the other's 
face was turned away.  'Be sure there is no fear of that.'

'Nor,' he said with a more restless motion than before, 'of their--
but they CAN sustain no harm from leaguing for this purpose.  Right 
is on our side, though Might may be against us.  You feel as sure 
of that as I--honestly, you do?'

The secretary was beginning with 'You do not doubt,' when the other 
interrupted him, and impatiently rejoined:

'Doubt.  No.  Who says I doubt?  If I doubted, should I cast away 
relatives, friends, everything, for this unhappy country's sake; 
this unhappy country,' he cried, springing up in bed, after 
repeating the phrase 'unhappy country's sake' to himself, at least 
a dozen times, 'forsaken of God and man, delivered over to a 
dangerous confederacy of Popish powers; the prey of corruption, 
idolatry, and despotism!  Who says I doubt?  Am I called, and 
chosen, and faithful?  Tell me.  Am I, or am I not?'

'To God, the country, and yourself,' cried Gashford.

'I am.  I will be.  I say again, I will be: to the block.  Who says 
as much!  Do you?  Does any man alive?'

The secretary drooped his head with an expression of perfect 
acquiescence in anything that had been said or might be; and Lord 
George gradually sinking down upon his pillow, fell asleep.

Although there was something very ludicrous in his vehement manner, 
taken in conjunction with his meagre aspect and ungraceful 
presence, it would scarcely have provoked a smile in any man of 
kindly feeling; or even if it had, he would have felt sorry and 
almost angry with himself next moment, for yielding to the impulse.  
This lord was sincere in his violence and in his wavering.  A 
nature prone to false enthusiasm, and the vanity of being a leader, 
were the worst qualities apparent in his composition.  All the rest 
was weakness--sheer weakness; and it is the unhappy lot of 
thoroughly weak men, that their very sympathies, affections, 
confidences--all the qualities which in better constituted minds 
are virtues--dwindle into foibles, or turn into downright vices.

Gashford, with many a sly look towards the bed, sat chuckling at 
his master's folly, until his deep and heavy breathing warned him 
that he might retire.  Locking his desk, and replacing it within 
the trunk (but not before he had taken from a secret lining two 
printed handbills), he cautiously withdrew; looking back, as he 
went, at the pale face of the slumbering man, above whose head the 
dusty plumes that crowned the Maypole couch, waved drearily and 
sadly as though it were a bier.

Stopping on the staircase to listen that all was quiet, and to take 
off his shoes lest his footsteps should alarm any light sleeper who 
might be near at hand, he descended to the ground floor, and thrust 
one of his bills beneath the great door of the house.  That done, 
he crept softly back to his own chamber, and from the window let 
another fall--carefully wrapt round a stone to save it from the 
wind--into the yard below.

They were addressed on the back 'To every Protestant into whose 
hands this shall come,' and bore within what follows:

'Men and Brethren.  Whoever shall find this letter, will take it as 
a warning to join, without delay, the friends of Lord George 
Gordon.  There are great events at hand; and the times are 
dangerous and troubled.  Read this carefully, keep it clean, and 
drop it somewhere else.  For King and Country.  Union.'

'More seed, more seed,' said Gashford as he closed the window.  
'When will the harvest come!'



Chapter 37


To surround anything, however monstrous or ridiculous, with an air 
of mystery, is to invest it with a secret charm, and power of 
attraction which to the crowd is irresistible.  False priests, 
false prophets, false doctors, false patriots, false prodigies of 
every kind, veiling their proceedings in mystery, have always 
addressed themselves at an immense advantage to the popular 
credulity, and have been, perhaps, more indebted to that resource 
in gaining and keeping for a time the upper hand of Truth and 
Common Sense, than to any half-dozen items in the whole catalogue 
of imposture.  Curiosity is, and has been from the creation of the 
world, a master-passion.  To awaken it, to gratify it by slight 
degrees, and yet leave something always in suspense, is to 
establish the surest hold that can be had, in wrong, on the 
unthinking portion of mankind.

If a man had stood on London Bridge, calling till he was hoarse, 
upon the passers-by, to join with Lord George Gordon, although for 
an object which no man understood, and which in that very incident 
had a charm of its own,--the probability is, that he might have 
influenced a score of people in a month.  If all zealous 
Protestants had been publicly urged to join an association for the 
avowed purpose of singing a hymn or two occasionally, and hearing 
some indifferent speeches made, and ultimately of petitioning 
Parliament not to pass an act for abolishing the penal laws against 
Roman Catholic priests, the penalty of perpetual imprisonment 
denounced against those who educated children in that persuasion, 
and the disqualification of all members of the Romish church to 
inherit real property in the United Kingdom by right of purchase or 
descent,--matters so far removed from the business and bosoms of 
the mass, might perhaps have called together a hundred people.  But 
when vague rumours got abroad, that in this Protestant association 
a secret power was mustering against the government for undefined 
and mighty purposes; when the air was filled with whispers of a 
confederacy among the Popish powers to degrade and enslave England, 
establish an inquisition in London, and turn the pens of Smithfield 
market into stakes and cauldrons; when terrors and alarms which no 
man understood were perpetually broached, both in and out of 
Parliament, by one enthusiast who did not understand himself, and 
bygone bugbears which had lain quietly in their graves for 
centuries, were raised again to haunt the ignorant and credulous; 
when all this was done, as it were, in the dark, and secret 
invitations to join the Great Protestant Association in defence of 
religion, life, and liberty, were dropped in the public ways, 
thrust under the house-doors, tossed in at windows, and pressed 
into the hands of those who trod the streets by night; when they 
glared from every wall, and shone on every post and pillar, so that 
stocks and stones appeared infected with the common fear, urging 
all men to join together blindfold in resistance of they knew not 
what, they knew not why;--then the mania spread indeed, and the 
body, still increasing every day, grew forty thousand strong.

So said, at least, in this month of March, 1780, Lord George 
Gordon, the Association's president.  Whether it was the fact or 
otherwise, few men knew or cared to ascertain.  It had never made 
any public demonstration; had scarcely ever been heard of, save 
through him; had never been seen; and was supposed by many to be 
the mere creature of his disordered brain.  He was accustomed to 
talk largely about numbers of men--stimulated, as it was inferred, 
by certain successful disturbances, arising out of the same 
subject, which had occurred in Scotland in the previous year; was 
looked upon as a cracked-brained member of the lower house, who 
attacked all parties and sided with none, and was very little 
regarded.  It was known that there was discontent abroad--there 
always is; he had been accustomed to address the people by placard, 
speech, and pamphlet, upon other questions; nothing had come, in 
England, of his past exertions, and nothing was apprehended from 
his present.  Just as he has come upon the reader, he had come, 
from time to time, upon the public, and been forgotten in a day; as 
suddenly as he appears in these pages, after a blank of five long 
years, did he and his proceedings begin to force themselves, about 
this period, upon the notice of thousands of people, who had 
mingled in active life during the whole interval, and who, without 
being deaf or blind to passing events, had scarcely ever thought of 
him before.

'My lord,' said Gashford in his ear, as he drew the curtains of his 
bed betimes; 'my lord!'

'Yes--who's that?  What is it?'

'The clock has struck nine,' returned the secretary, with meekly 
folded hands.  'You have slept well?  I hope you have slept well?  
If my prayers are heard, you are refreshed indeed.'

'To say the truth, I have slept so soundly,' said Lord George, 
rubbing his eyes and looking round the room, 'that I don't remember 
quite--what place is this?'

'My lord!' cried Gashford, with a smile.

'Oh!' returned his superior.  'Yes.  You're not a Jew then?'

'A Jew!' exclaimed the pious secretary, recoiling.

'I dreamed that we were Jews, Gashford.  You and I--both of us--
Jews with long beards.'

'Heaven forbid, my lord!  We might as well be Papists.'

'I suppose we might,' returned the other, very quickly.  'Eh?  You 
really think so, Gashford?'

'Surely I do,' the secretary cried, with looks of great surprise.

'Humph!' he muttered.  'Yes, that seems reasonable.'

'I hope my lord--' the secretary began.

'Hope!' he echoed, interrupting him.  'Why do you say, you hope?  
There's no harm in thinking of such things.'

'Not in dreams,' returned the Secretary.

'In dreams!  No, nor waking either.'

--'"Called, and chosen, and faithful,"' said Gashford, taking up 
Lord George's watch which lay upon a chair, and seeming to read the 
inscription on the seal, abstractedly.

It was the slightest action possible, not obtruded on his notice, 
and apparently the result of a moment's absence of mind, not worth 
remark.  But as the words were uttered, Lord George, who had been 
going on impetuously, stopped short, reddened, and was silent.  
Apparently quite unconscious of this change in his demeanour, the 
wily Secretary stepped a little apart, under pretence of pulling up 
the window-blind, and returning when the other had had time to 
recover, said:

'The holy cause goes bravely on, my lord.  I was not idle, even 
last night.  I dropped two of the handbills before I went to bed, 
and both are gone this morning.  Nobody in the house has mentioned 
the circumstance of finding them, though I have been downstairs 
full half-an-hour.  One or two recruits will be their first fruit, 
I predict; and who shall say how many more, with Heaven's blessing 
on your inspired exertions!'

'It was a famous device in the beginning,' replied Lord George; 'an 
excellent device, and did good service in Scotland.  It was quite 
worthy of you.  You remind me not to be a sluggard, Gashford, when 
the vineyard is menaced with destruction, and may be trodden down 
by Papist feet.  Let the horses be saddled in half-an-hour.  We 
must be up and doing!'

He said this with a heightened colour, and in a tone of such 
enthusiasm, that the secretary deemed all further prompting 
needless, and withdrew.

--'Dreamed he was a Jew,' he said thoughtfully, as he closed the 
bedroom door.  'He may come to that before he dies.  It's like 
enough.  Well!  After a time, and provided I lost nothing by it, I 
don't see why that religion shouldn't suit me as well as any 
other.  There are rich men among the Jews; shaving is very 
troublesome;--yes, it would suit me well enough.  For the present, 
though, we must be Christian to the core.  Our prophetic motto will 
suit all creeds in their turn, that's a comfort.'  Reflecting on 
this source of consolation, he reached the sitting-room, and rang 
the bell for breakfast.

Lord George was quickly dressed (for his plain toilet was easily 
made), and as he was no less frugal in his repasts than in his 
Puritan attire, his share of the meal was soon dispatched.  The 
secretary, however, more devoted to the good things of this world, 
or more intent on sustaining his strength and spirits for the sake 
of the Protestant cause, ate and drank to the last minute, and 
required indeed some three or four reminders from John Grueby, 
before he could resolve to tear himself away from Mr Willet's 
plentiful providing.

At length he came downstairs, wiping his greasy mouth, and having 
paid John Willet's bill, climbed into his saddle.  Lord George, who 
had been walking up and down before the house talking to himself 
with earnest gestures, mounted his horse; and returning old John 
Willet's stately bow, as well as the parting salutation of a dozen 
idlers whom the rumour of a live lord being about to leave the 
Maypole had gathered round the porch, they rode away, with stout 
John Grueby in the rear.

If Lord George Gordon had appeared in the eyes of Mr Willet, 
overnight, a nobleman of somewhat quaint and odd exterior, the 
impression was confirmed this morning, and increased a hundredfold.  
Sitting bolt upright upon his bony steed, with his long, straight 
hair, dangling about his face and fluttering in the wind; his limbs 
all angular and rigid, his elbows stuck out on either side 
ungracefully, and his whole frame jogged and shaken at every motion 
of his horse's feet; a more grotesque or more ungainly figure can 
hardly be conceived.  In lieu of whip, he carried in his hand a 
great gold-headed cane, as large as any footman carries in these 
days, and his various modes of holding this unwieldy weapon--now 
upright before his face like the sabre of a horse-soldier, now over 
his shoulder like a musket, now between his finger and thumb, but 
always in some uncouth and awkward fashion--contributed in no small 
degree to the absurdity of his appearance.  Stiff, lank, and 
solemn, dressed in an unusual manner, and ostentatiously 
exhibiting--whether by design or accident--all his peculiarities of 
carriage, gesture, and conduct, all the qualities, natural and 
artificial, in which he differed from other men; he might have 
moved the sternest looker-on to laughter, and fully provoked the 
smiles and whispered jests which greeted his departure from the 
Maypole inn.

Quite unconscious, however, of the effect he produced, he trotted 
on beside his secretary, talking to himself nearly all the way, 
until they came within a mile or two of London, when now and then 
some passenger went by who knew him by sight, and pointed him out 
to some one else, and perhaps stood looking after him, or cried in 
jest or earnest as it might be, 'Hurrah Geordie!  No Popery!'  At 
which he would gravely pull off his hat, and bow.  When they 
reached the town and rode along the streets, these notices became 
more frequent; some laughed, some hissed, some turned their heads 
and smiled, some wondered who he was, some ran along the pavement 
by his side and cheered.  When this happened in a crush of carts 
and chairs and coaches, he would make a dead stop, and pulling off 
his hat, cry, 'Gentlemen, No Popery!' to which the gentlemen would 
respond with lusty voices, and with three times three; and then, on 
he would go again with a score or so of the raggedest, following at 
his horse's heels, and shouting till their throats were parched.

The old ladies too--there were a great many old ladies in the 
streets, and these all knew him.  Some of them--not those of the 
highest rank, but such as sold fruit from baskets and carried 
burdens--clapped their shrivelled hands, and raised a weazen, 
piping, shrill 'Hurrah, my lord.'  Others waved their hands or 
handkerchiefs, or shook their fans or parasols, or threw up windows 
and called in haste to those within, to come and see.  All these 
marks of popular esteem, he received with profound gravity and 
respect; bowing very low, and so frequently that his hat was more 
off his head than on; and looking up at the houses as he passed 
along, with the air of one who was making a public entry, and yet 
was not puffed up or proud.

So they rode (to the deep and unspeakable disgust of John Grueby) 
the whole length of Whitechapel, Leadenhall Street, and Cheapside, 
and into St Paul's Churchyard.  Arriving close to the cathedral, he 
halted; spoke to Gashford; and looking upward at its lofty dome, 
shook his head, as though he said, 'The Church in Danger!'  Then to 
be sure, the bystanders stretched their throats indeed; and he went 
on again with mighty acclamations from the mob, and lower bows than 
ever.

So along the Strand, up Swallow Street, into the Oxford Road, and 
thence to his house in Welbeck Street, near Cavendish Square, 
whither he was attended by a few dozen idlers; of whom he took 
leave on the steps with this brief parting, 'Gentlemen, No Popery.  
Good day.  God bless you.'  This being rather a shorter address 
than they expected, was received with some displeasure, and cries 
of 'A speech! a speech!' which might have been complied with, but 
that John Grueby, making a mad charge upon them with all three 
horses, on his way to the stables, caused them to disperse into the 
adjoining fields, where they presently fell to pitch and toss, 
chuck-farthing, odd or even, dog-fighting, and other Protestant 
recreations.

In the afternoon Lord George came forth again, dressed in a black 
velvet coat, and trousers and waistcoat of the Gordon plaid, all of 
the same Quaker cut; and in this costume, which made him look a 
dozen times more strange and singular than before, went down on 
foot to Westminster.  Gashford, meanwhile, bestirred himself in 
business matters; with which he was still engaged when, shortly 
after dusk, John Grueby entered and announced a visitor.

'Let him come in,' said Gashford.

'Here! come in!' growled John to somebody without; 'You're a 
Protestant, an't you?'

'I should think so,' replied a deep, gruff voice.

'You've the looks of it,' said John Grueby.  'I'd have known you 
for one, anywhere.'  With which remark he gave the visitor 
admission, retired, and shut the door.

The man who now confronted Gashford, was a squat, thickset 
personage, with a low, retreating forehead, a coarse shock head of 
hair, and eyes so small and near together, that his broken nose 
alone seemed to prevent their meeting and fusing into one of the 
usual size.  A dingy handkerchief twisted like a cord about his 
neck, left its great veins exposed to view, and they were swollen 
and starting, as though with gulping down strong passions, malice, 
and ill-will.  His dress was of threadbare velveteen--a faded, 
rusty, whitened black, like the ashes of a pipe or a coal fire 
after a day's extinction; discoloured with the soils of many a 
stale debauch, and reeking yet with pot-house odours.  In lieu of 
buckles at his knees, he wore unequal loops of packthread; and in 
his grimy hands he held a knotted stick, the knob of which was 
carved into a rough likeness of his own vile face.  Such was the 
visitor who doffed his three-cornered hat in Gashford's presence, 
and waited, leering, for his notice.

'Ah! Dennis!' cried the secretary.  'Sit down.'

'I see my lord down yonder--' cried the man, with a jerk of his 
thumb towards the quarter that he spoke of, 'and he says to me, 
says my lord, "If you've nothing to do, Dennis, go up to my house 
and talk with Muster Gashford."  Of course I'd nothing to do, you 
know.  These an't my working hours.  Ha ha!  I was a-taking the air 
when I see my lord, that's what I was doing.  I takes the air by 
night, as the howls does, Muster Gashford.'

And sometimes in the day-time, eh?' said the secretary--'when you 
go out in state, you know.'

'Ha ha!' roared the fellow, smiting his leg; 'for a gentleman as 
'ull say a pleasant thing in a pleasant way, give me Muster 
Gashford agin' all London and Westminster!  My lord an't a bad 'un 
at that, but he's a fool to you.  Ah to be sure,--when I go out in 
state.'

'And have your carriage,' said the secretary; 'and your chaplain, 
eh? and all the rest of it?'

'You'll be the death of me,' cried Dennis, with another roar, 'you 
will.  But what's in the wind now, Muster Gashford,' he asked 
hoarsely, 'Eh?  Are we to be under orders to pull down one of them 
Popish chapels--or what?'

'Hush!' said the secretary, suffering the faintest smile to play 
upon his face.  'Hush!  God bless me, Dennis!  We associate, you 
know, for strictly peaceable and lawful purposes.'

'I know, bless you,' returned the man, thrusting his tongue into 
his cheek; 'I entered a' purpose, didn't I!'

'No doubt,' said Gashford, smiling as before.  And when he said so, 
Dennis roared again, and smote his leg still harder, and falling 
into fits of laughter, wiped his eyes with the corner of his 
neckerchief, and cried, 'Muster Gashford agin' all England hollow!'

'Lord George and I were talking of you last night,' said Gashford, 
after a pause.  'He says you are a very earnest fellow.'

'So I am,' returned the hangman.

'And that you truly hate the Papists.'

'So I do,' and he confirmed it with a good round oath.  'Lookye 
here, Muster Gashford,' said the fellow, laying his hat and stick 
upon the floor, and slowly beating the palm of one hand with the 
fingers of the other; 'Ob-serve.  I'm a constitutional officer that 
works for my living, and does my work creditable.  Do I, or do I 
not?'

'Unquestionably.'

'Very good.  Stop a minute.  My work, is sound, Protestant, 
constitutional, English work.  Is it, or is it not?'

'No man alive can doubt it.'

'Nor dead neither.  Parliament says this here--says Parliament, "If 
any man, woman, or child, does anything which goes again a certain 
number of our acts"--how many hanging laws may there be at this 
present time, Muster Gashford?  Fifty?'

'I don't exactly know how many,' replied Gashford, leaning back in 
his chair and yawning; 'a great number though.'

'Well, say fifty.  Parliament says, "If any man, woman, or child, 
does anything again any one of them fifty acts, that man, woman, or 
child, shall be worked off by Dennis."  George the Third steps in 
when they number very strong at the end of a sessions, and says, 
"These are too many for Dennis.  I'll have half for myself and 
Dennis shall have half for himself;" and sometimes he throws me in 
one over that I don't expect, as he did three year ago, when I got 
Mary Jones, a young woman of nineteen who come up to Tyburn with a 
infant at her breast, and was worked off for taking a piece of 
cloth off the counter of a shop in Ludgate Hill, and putting it 
down again when the shopman see her; and who had never done any 
harm before, and only tried to do that, in consequence of her 
husband having been pressed three weeks previous, and she being 
left to beg, with two young children--as was proved upon the trial.  
Ha ha!--Well!  That being the law and the practice of England, is 
the glory of England, an't it, Muster Gashford?'

'Certainly,' said the secretary.

'And in times to come,' pursued the hangman, 'if our grandsons 
should think of their grandfathers' times, and find these things 
altered, they'll say, "Those were days indeed, and we've been going 
down hill ever since."  Won't they, Muster Gashford?'

'I have no doubt they will,' said the secretary.

'Well then, look here,' said the hangman.  'If these Papists gets 
into power, and begins to boil and roast instead of hang, what 
becomes of my work!  If they touch my work that's a part of so many 
laws, what becomes of the laws in general, what becomes of the 
religion, what becomes of the country!--Did you ever go to church, 
Muster Gashford?'

'Ever!' repeated the secretary with some indignation; 'of course.'

'Well,' said the ruffian, 'I've been once--twice, counting the time 
I was christened--and when I heard the Parliament prayed for, and 
thought how many new hanging laws they made every sessions, I 
considered that I was prayed for.  Now mind, Muster Gashford,' said 
the fellow, taking up his stick and shaking it with a ferocious 
air, 'I mustn't have my Protestant work touched, nor this here 
Protestant state of things altered in no degree, if I can help it; 
I mustn't have no Papists interfering with me, unless they come to 
be worked off in course of law; I mustn't have no biling, no 
roasting, no frying--nothing but hanging.  My lord may well call 
me an earnest fellow.  In support of the great Protestant principle 
of having plenty of that, I'll,' and here he beat his club upon the 
ground, 'burn, fight, kill--do anything you bid me, so that it's 
bold and devilish--though the end of it was, that I got hung 
myself.--There, Muster Gashford!'

He appropriately followed up this frequent prostitution of a noble 
word to the vilest purposes, by pouring out in a kind of ecstasy at 
least a score of most tremendous oaths; then wiped his heated face 
upon his neckerchief, and cried, 'No Popery!  I'm a religious man, 
by G--!'

Gashford had leant back in his chair, regarding him with eyes so 
sunken, and so shadowed by his heavy brows, that for aught the 
hangman saw of them, he might have been stone blind.  He remained 
smiling in silence for a short time longer, and then said, slowly 
and distinctly:

'You are indeed an earnest fellow, Dennis--a most valuable fellow--
the staunchest man I know of in our ranks.  But you must calm 
yourself; you must be peaceful, lawful, mild as any lamb.  I am 
sure you will be though.'

'Ay, ay, we shall see, Muster Gashford, we shall see.  You won't 
have to complain of me,' returned the other, shaking his head.

'I am sure I shall not,' said the secretary in the same mild tone, 
and with the same emphasis.  'We shall have, we think, about next 
month, or May, when this Papist relief bill comes before the house, 
to convene our whole body for the first time.  My lord has thoughts 
of our walking in procession through the streets--just as an 
innocent display of strength--and accompanying our petition down to 
the door of the House of Commons.'

'The sooner the better,' said Dennis, with another oath.

'We shall have to draw up in divisions, our numbers being so large; 
and, I believe I may venture to say,' resumed Gashford, affecting 
not to hear the interruption, 'though I have no direct instructions 
to that effect--that Lord George has thought of you as an excellent 
leader for one of these parties.  I have no doubt you would be an 
admirable one.'

'Try me,' said the fellow, with an ugly wink.

'You would be cool, I know,' pursued the secretary, still smiling, 
and still managing his eyes so that he could watch him closely, and 
really not be seen in turn, 'obedient to orders, and perfectly 
temperate.  You would lead your party into no danger, I am certain.'

'I'd lead them, Muster Gashford,'--the hangman was beginning in a 
reckless way, when Gashford started forward, laid his finger on his 
lips, and feigned to write, just as the door was opened by John 
Grueby.

'Oh!' said John, looking in; 'here's another Protestant.'

'Some other room, John,' cried Gashford in his blandest voice.  'I 
am engaged just now.'

But John had brought this new visitor to the door, and he walked in 
unbidden, as the words were uttered; giving to view the form and 
features, rough attire, and reckless air, of Hugh.



Chapter 38


The secretary put his hand before his eyes to shade them from the 
glare of the lamp, and for some moments looked at Hugh with a 
frowning brow, as if he remembered to have seen him lately, but 
could not call to mind where, or on what occasion.  His uncertainty 
was very brief, for before Hugh had spoken a word, he said, as his 
countenance cleared up:

'Ay, ay, I recollect.  It's quite right, John, you needn't wait.  
Don't go, Dennis.'

'Your servant, master,' said Hugh, as Grueby disappeared.

'Yours, friend,' returned the secretary in his smoothest manner.  
'What brings YOU here?  We left nothing behind us, I hope?'

Hugh gave a short laugh, and thrusting his hand into his breast, 
produced one of the handbills, soiled and dirty from lying out of 
doors all night, which he laid upon the secretary's desk after 
flattening it upon his knee, and smoothing out the wrinkles with 
his heavy palm.

'Nothing but that, master.  It fell into good hands, you see.'

'What is this!' said Gashford, turning it over with an air of 
perfectly natural surprise.  'Where did you get it from, my good 
fellow; what does it mean?  I don't understand this at all.'

A little disconcerted by this reception, Hugh looked from the 
secretary to Dennis, who had risen and was standing at the table 
too, observing the stranger by stealth, and seeming to derive the 
utmost satisfaction from his manners and appearance.  Considering 
himself silently appealed to by this action, Mr Dennis shook his 
head thrice, as if to say of Gashford, 'No.  He don't know anything 
at all about it.  I know he don't.  I'll take my oath he don't;' 
and hiding his profile from Hugh with one long end of his frowzy 
neckerchief, nodded and chuckled behind this screen in extreme 
approval of the secretary's proceedings.

'It tells the man that finds it, to come here, don't it?' asked 
Hugh.  'I'm no scholar, myself, but I showed it to a friend, and he 
said it did.'

'It certainly does,' said Gashford, opening his eyes to their 
utmost width; 'really this is the most remarkable circumstance I 
have ever known.  How did you come by this piece of paper, my good 
friend?'

'Muster Gashford,' wheezed the hangman under his breath, 'agin' all 
Newgate!'

Whether Hugh heard him, or saw by his manner that he was being 
played upon, or perceived the secretary's drift of himself, he came 
in his blunt way to the point at once.

'Here!' he said, stretching out his hand and taking it back; 'never 
mind the bill, or what it says, or what it don't say.  You don't 
know anything about it, master,--no more do I,--no more does he,' 
glancing at Dennis.  'None of us know what it means, or where it 
comes from: there's an end of that.  Now I want to make one against 
the Catholics, I'm a No-Popery man, and ready to be sworn in.  
That's what I've come here for.'

'Put him down on the roll, Muster Gashford,' said Dennis 
approvingly.  'That's the way to go to work--right to the end at 
once, and no palaver.'

'What's the use of shooting wide of the mark, eh, old boy!' cried 
Hugh.

'My sentiments all over!' rejoined the hangman.  'This is the sort 
of chap for my division, Muster Gashford.  Down with him, sir.  Put 
him on the roll.  I'd stand godfather to him, if he was to be 
christened in a bonfire, made of the ruins of the Bank of England.'

With these and other expressions of confidence of the like 
flattering kind, Mr Dennis gave him a hearty slap on the back, 
which Hugh was not slow to return.

'No Popery, brother!' cried the hangman.

'No Property, brother!' responded Hugh.

'Popery, Popery,' said the secretary with his usual mildness.

'It's all the same!' cried Dennis.  'It's all right.  Down with 
him, Muster Gashford.  Down with everybody, down with everything!  
Hurrah for the Protestant religion!  That's the time of day, 
Muster Gashford!'

The secretary regarded them both with a very favourable expression 
of countenance, while they gave loose to these and other 
demonstrations of their patriotic purpose; and was about to make 
some remark aloud, when Dennis, stepping up to him, and shading his 
mouth with his hand, said, in a hoarse whisper, as he nudged him 
with his elbow:

'Don't split upon a constitutional officer's profession, Muster 
Gashford.  There are popular prejudices, you know, and he mightn't 
like it.  Wait till he comes to be more intimate with me.  He's a 
fine-built chap, an't he?'

'A powerful fellow indeed!'

'Did you ever, Muster Gashford,' whispered Dennis, with a horrible 
kind of admiration, such as that with which a cannibal might regard 
his intimate friend, when hungry,--'did you ever--and here he drew 
still closer to his ear, and fenced his mouth with both his open 
bands--'see such a throat as his?  Do but cast your eye upon it.  
There's a neck for stretching, Muster Gashford!'

The secretary assented to this proposition with the best grace he 
could assume--it is difficult to feign a true professional relish: 
which is eccentric sometimes--and after asking the candidate a few 
unimportant questions, proceeded to enrol him a member of the Great 
Protestant Association of England.  If anything could have exceeded 
Mr Dennis's joy on the happy conclusion of this ceremony, it would 
have been the rapture with which he received the announcement that 
the new member could neither read nor write: those two arts being 
(as Mr Dennis swore) the greatest possible curse a civilised 
community could know, and militating more against the professional 
emoluments and usefulness of the great constitutional office he had 
the honour to hold, than any adverse circumstances that could 
present themselves to his imagination.

The enrolment being completed, and Hugh having been informed by 
Gashford, in his peculiar manner, of the peaceful and strictly 
lawful objects contemplated by the body to which he now belonged--
during which recital Mr Dennis nudged him very much with his elbow, 
and made divers remarkable faces--the secretary gave them both to 
understand that he desired to be alone.  Therefore they took their 
leaves without delay, and came out of the house together.

'Are you walking, brother?' said Dennis.

'Ay!' returned Hugh.  'Where you will.'

'That's social,' said his new friend.  'Which way shall we take?  
Shall we go and have a look at doors that we shall make a pretty 
good clattering at, before long--eh, brother?'

Hugh answering in the affirmative, they went slowly down to 
Westminster, where both houses of Parliament were then sitting.  
Mingling in the crowd of carriages, horses, servants, chairmen, 
link-boys, porters, and idlers of all kinds, they lounged about; 
while Hugh's new friend pointed out to him significantly the weak 
parts of the building, how easy it was to get into the lobby, and 
so to the very door of the House of Commons; and how plainly, when 
they marched down there in grand array, their roars and shouts 
would be heard by the members inside; with a great deal more to the 
same purpose, all of which Hugh received with manifest delight.

He told him, too, who some of the Lords and Commons were, by name, 
as they came in and out; whether they were friendly to the Papists 
or otherwise; and bade him take notice of their liveries and 
equipages, that he might be sure of them, in case of need.  
Sometimes he drew him close to the windows of a passing carriage, 
that he might see its master's face by the light of the lamps; and, 
both in respect of people and localities, he showed so much 
acquaintance with everything around, that it was plain he had often 
studied there before; as indeed, when they grew a little more 
confidential, he confessed he had.

Perhaps the most striking part of all this was, the number of 
people--never in groups of more than two or three together--who 
seemed to be skulking about the crowd for the same purpose.  To the 
greater part of these, a slight nod or a look from Hugh's companion 
was sufficient greeting; but, now and then, some man would come and 
stand beside him in the throng, and, without turning his head or 
appearing to communicate with him, would say a word or two in a low 
voice, which he would answer in the same cautious manner.  Then 
they would part, like strangers.  Some of these men often 
reappeared again unexpectedly in the crowd close to Hugh, and, as 
they passed by, pressed his hand, or looked him sternly in the 
face; but they never spoke to him, nor he to them; no, not a word.

It was remarkable, too, that whenever they happened to stand where 
there was any press of people, and Hugh chanced to be looking 
downward, he was sure to see an arm stretched out--under his own 
perhaps, or perhaps across him--which thrust some paper into the 
hand or pocket of a bystander, and was so suddenly withdrawn that 
it was impossible to tell from whom it came; nor could he see in 
any face, on glancing quickly round, the least confusion or 
surprise.  They often trod upon a paper like the one he carried in 
his breast, but his companion whispered him not to touch it or to 
take it up,--not even to look towards it,--so there they let them 
lie, and passed on.

When they had paraded the street and all the avenues of the 
building in this manner for near two hours, they turned away, and 
his friend asked him what he thought of what he had seen, and 
whether he was prepared for a good hot piece of work if it should 
come to that.  The hotter the better,' said Hugh, 'I'm prepared for 
anything.'--'So am I,' said his friend, 'and so are many of us; 
and they shook hands upon it with a great oath, and with many 
terrible imprecations on the Papists.

As they were thirsty by this time, Dennis proposed that they should 
repair together to The Boot, where there was good company and 
strong liquor.  Hugh yielding a ready assent, they bent their steps 
that way with no loss of time.

This Boot was a lone house of public entertainment, situated in the 
fields at the back of the Foundling Hospital; a very solitary spot 
at that period, and quite deserted after dark.  The tavern stood at 
some distance from any high road, and was approachable only by a 
dark and narrow lane; so that Hugh was much surprised to find 
several people drinking there, and great merriment going on.  He 
was still more surprised to find among them almost every face that 
had caught his attention in the crowd; but his companion having 
whispered him outside the door, that it was not considered good 
manners at The Boot to appear at all curious about the company, he 
kept his own counsel, and made no show of recognition.

Before putting his lips to the liquor which was brought for them, 
Dennis drank in a loud voice the health of Lord George Gordon, 
President of the Great Protestant Association; which toast Hugh 
pledged likewise, with corresponding enthusiasm.  A fiddler who was 
present, and who appeared to act as the appointed minstrel of the 
company, forthwith struck up a Scotch reel; and that in tones so 
invigorating, that Hugh and his friend (who had both been drinking 
before) rose from their seats as by previous concert, and, to the 
great admiration of the assembled guests, performed an 
extemporaneous No-Popery Dance.



Chapter 39


The applause which the performance of Hugh and his new friend 
elicited from the company at The Boot, had not yet subsided, and 
the two dancers were still panting from their exertions, which had 
been of a rather extreme and violent character, when the party was 
reinforced by the arrival of some more guests, who, being a 
detachment of United Bulldogs, were received with very flattering 
marks of distinction and respect.

The leader of this small party--for, including himself, they were 
but three in number--was our old acquaintance, Mr Tappertit, who 
seemed, physically speaking, to have grown smaller with years 
(particularly as to his legs, which were stupendously little), but 
who, in a moral point of view, in personal dignity and self-esteem, 
had swelled into a giant.  Nor was it by any means difficult for 
the most unobservant person to detect this state of feeling in the 
quondam 'prentice, for it not only proclaimed itself impressively 
and beyond mistake in his majestic walk and kindling eye, but found 
a striking means of revelation in his turned-up nose, which scouted 
all things of earth with deep disdain, and sought communion with 
its kindred skies.

Mr Tappertit, as chief or captain of the Bulldogs, was attended by 
his two lieutenants; one, the tall comrade of his younger life; the 
other, a 'Prentice Knight in days of yore--Mark Gilbert, bound in 
the olden time to Thomas Curzon of the Golden Fleece.  These 
gentlemen, like himself, were now emancipated from their 'prentice 
thraldom, and served as journeymen; but they were, in humble 
emulation of his great example, bold and daring spirits, and 
aspired to a distinguished state in great political events.  Hence 
their connection with the Protestant Association of England, 
sanctioned by the name of Lord George Gordon; and hence their 
present visit to The Boot.

'Gentlemen!' said Mr Tappertit, taking off his hat as a great 
general might in addressing his troops.  'Well met.  My lord does 
me and you the honour to send his compliments per self.'

'You've seen my lord too, have you?' said Dennis.  'I see him this 
afternoon.'

'My duty called me to the Lobby when our shop shut up; and I saw 
him there, sir,' Mr Tappertit replied, as he and his lieutenants 
took their seats.  'How do YOU do?'

'Lively, master, lively,' said the fellow.  'Here's a new brother, 
regularly put down in black and white by Muster Gashford; a credit 
to the cause; one of the stick-at-nothing sort; one arter my own 
heart.  D'ye see him?  Has he got the looks of a man that'll do, do 
you think?' he cried, as he slapped Hugh on the back.

'Looks or no looks,' said Hugh, with a drunken flourish of his arm, 
'I'm the man you want.  I hate the Papists, every one of 'em.  They 
hate me and I hate them.  They do me all the harm they can, and 
I'll do them all the harm I can.  Hurrah!'

'Was there ever,' said Dennis, looking round the room, when the 
echo of his boisterous voice bad died away; 'was there ever such a 
game boy!  Why, I mean to say, brothers, that if Muster Gashford 
had gone a hundred mile and got together fifty men of the common 
run, they wouldn't have been worth this one.'

The greater part of the company implicitly subscribed to this 
opinion, and testified their faith in Hugh by nods and looks of 
great significance.  Mr Tappertit sat and contemplated him for a 
long time in silence, as if he suspended his judgment; then drew a 
little nearer to him, and eyed him over more carefully; then went 
close up to him, and took him apart into a dark corner.

'I say,' he began, with a thoughtful brow, 'haven't I seen you 
before?'

'It's like you may,' said Hugh, in his careless way.  'I don't 
know; shouldn't wonder.'

'No, but it's very easily settled,' returned Sim.  'Look at me.  
Did you ever see ME before?  You wouldn't be likely to forget it, 
you know, if you ever did.  Look at me.  Don't be afraid; I won't 
do you any harm.  Take a good look--steady now.'

The encouraging way in which Mr Tappertit made this request, and 
coupled it with an assurance that he needn't be frightened, amused 
Hugh mightily--so much indeed, that be saw nothing at all of the 
small man before him, through closing his eyes in a fit of hearty 
laughter, which shook his great broad sides until they ached again.

'Come!' said Mr Tappertit, growing a little impatient under this 
disrespectful treatment.  'Do you know me, feller?'

'Not I,' cried Hugh.  'Ha ha ha!  Not I!  But I should like to.'

'And yet I'd have wagered a seven-shilling piece," said Mr 
Tappertit, folding his arms, and confronting him with his legs wide 
apart and firmly planted on the ground, 'that you once were hostler 
at the Maypole.'

Hugh opened his eyes on hearing this, and looked at him in great 
surprise.

'--And so you were, too,' said Mr Tappertit, pushing him away with 
a condescending playfulness.  'When did MY eyes ever deceive--
unless it was a young woman!  Don't you know me now?'

'Why it an't--' Hugh faltered.

'An't it?' said Mr Tappertit.  'Are you sure of that?  You remember 
G. Varden, don't you?'

Certainly Hugh did, and he remembered D. Varden too; but that he 
didn't tell him.

'You remember coming down there, before I was out of my time, to 
ask after a vagabond that had bolted off, and left his disconsolate 
father a prey to the bitterest emotions, and all the rest of it--
don't you?' said Mr Tappertit.

'Of course I do!' cried Hugh.  'And I saw you there.'

'Saw me there!' said Mr Tappertit.  'Yes, I should think you did 
see me there.  The place would be troubled to go on without me.  
Don't you remember my thinking you liked the vagabond, and on that 
account going to quarrel with you; and then finding you detested 
him worse than poison, going to drink with you?  Don't you remember 
that?'

'To be sure!' cried Hugh.

'Well! and are you in the same mind now?' said Mr Tappertit.

'Yes!' roared Hugh.

'You speak like a man,' said Mr Tappertit, 'and I'll shake hands 
with you.'  With these conciliatory expressions he suited the 
action to the word; and Hugh meeting his advances readily, they 
performed the ceremony with a show of great heartiness.

'I find,' said Mr Tappertit, looking round on the assembled guests, 
'that brother What's-his-name and I are old acquaintance.--You 
never heard anything more of that rascal, I suppose, eh?'

'Not a syllable,' replied Hugh.  'I never want to.  I don't believe 
I ever shall.  He's dead long ago, I hope.'

'It's to be hoped, for the sake of mankind in general and the 
happiness of society, that he is,' said Mr Tappertit, rubbing his 
palm upon his legs, and looking at it between whiles.  'Is your 
other hand at all cleaner?  Much the same.  Well, I'll owe you 
another shake.  We'll suppose it done, if you've no objection.'

Hugh laughed again, and with such thorough abandonment to his mad 
humour, that his limbs seemed dislocated, and his whole frame in 
danger of tumbling to pieces; but Mr Tappertit, so far from 
receiving this extreme merriment with any irritation, was pleased 
to regard it with the utmost favour, and even to join in it, so far 
as one of his gravity and station could, with any regard to that 
decency and decorum which men in high places are expected to 
maintain.

Mr Tappertit did not stop here, as many public characters might 
have done, but calling up his brace of lieutenants, introduced Hugh 
to them with high commendation; declaring him to be a man who, at 
such times as those in which they lived, could not be too much 
cherished.  Further, he did him the honour to remark, that he would 
be an acquisition of which even the United Bulldogs might be proud; 
and finding, upon sounding him, that he was quite ready and willing 
to enter the society (for he was not at all particular, and would 
have leagued himself that night with anything, or anybody, for any 
purpose whatsoever), caused the necessary preliminaries to be gone 
into upon the spot.  This tribute to his great merit delighted no 
man more than Mr Dennis, as he himself proclaimed with several rare 
and surprising oaths; and indeed it gave unmingled satisfaction to 
the whole assembly.

'Make anything you like of me!' cried Hugh, flourishing the can he 
had emptied more than once.  'Put me on any duty you please.  I'm 
your man.  I'll do it.  Here's my captain--here's my leader.  Ha ha 
ha!  Let him give me the word of command, and I'll fight the whole 
Parliament House single-handed, or set a lighted torch to the 
King's Throne itself!'  With that, he smote Mr Tappertit on the 
back, with such violence that his little body seemed to shrink into 
a mere nothing; and roared again until the very foundlings near at 
hand were startled in their beds.

In fact, a sense of something whimsical in their companionship 
seemed to have taken entire possession of his rude brain.  The bare 
fact of being patronised by a great man whom he could have crushed 
with one hand, appeared in his eyes so eccentric and humorous, that 
a kind of ferocious merriment gained the mastery over him, and 
quite subdued his brutal nature.  He roared and roared again; 
toasted Mr Tappertit a hundred times; declared himself a Bulldog to 
the core; and vowed to be faithful to him to the last drop of blood 
in his veins.

All these compliments Mr Tappertit received as matters of course--
flattering enough in their way, but entirely attributable to his 
vast superiority.  His dignified self-possession only delighted 
Hugh the more; and in a word, this giant and dwarf struck up a 
friendship which bade fair to be of long continuance, as the one 
held it to be his right to command, and the other considered it an 
exquisite pleasantry to obey.  Nor was Hugh by any means a passive 
follower, who scrupled to act without precise and definite orders; 
for when Mr Tappertit mounted on an empty cask which stood by way 
of rostrum in the room, and volunteered a speech upon the alarming 
crisis then at hand, he placed himself beside the orator, and 
though he grinned from ear to ear at every word he said, threw out 
such expressive hints to scoffers in the management of his cudgel, 
that those who were at first the most disposed to interrupt, became 
remarkably attentive, and were the loudest in their approbation.

It was not all noise and jest, however, at The Boot, nor were the 
whole party listeners to the speech.  There were some men at the 
other end of the room (which was a long, low-roofed chamber) in 
earnest conversation all the time; and when any of this group went 
out, fresh people were sure to come in soon afterwards and sit down 
in their places, as though the others had relieved them on some 
watch or duty; which it was pretty clear they did, for these 
changes took place by the clock, at intervals of half an hour.  
These persons whispered very much among themselves, and kept aloof, 
and often looked round, as jealous of their speech being overheard; 
some two or three among them entered in books what seemed to be 
reports from the others; when they were not thus employed) one of 
them would turn to the newspapers which were strewn upon the table, 
and from the St James's Chronicle, the Herald, Chronicle, or 
Public Advertiser, would read to the rest in a low voice some 
passage having reference to the topic in which they were all so 
deeply interested.  But the great attraction was a pamphlet called 
The Thunderer, which espoused their own opinions, and was supposed 
at that time to emanate directly from the Association.  This was 
always in request; and whether read aloud, to an eager knot of 
listeners, or by some solitary man, was certain to be followed by 
stormy talking and excited looks.

In the midst of all his merriment, and admiration of his captain, 
Hugh was made sensible by these and other tokens, of the presence 
of an air of mystery, akin to that which had so much impressed him 
out of doors.  It was impossible to discard a sense that something 
serious was going on, and that under the noisy revel of the public-
house, there lurked unseen and dangerous matter.  Little affected 
by this, however, he was perfectly satisfied with his quarters and 
would have remained there till morning, but that his conductor rose 
soon after midnight, to go home; Mr Tappertit following his 
example, left him no excuse to stay.  So they all three left the 
house together: roaring a No-Popery song until the fields 
resounded with the dismal noise.

Cheer up, captain!' cried Hugh, when they had roared themselves out 
of breath.  'Another stave!'

Mr Tappertit, nothing loath, began again; and so the three went 
staggering on, arm-in-arm, shouting like madmen, and defying the 
watch with great valour.  Indeed this did not require any unusual 
bravery or boldness, as the watchmen of that time, being selected 
for the office on account of excessive age and extraordinary 
infirmity, had a custom of shutting themselves up tight in their 
boxes on the first symptoms of disturbance, and remaining there 
until they disappeared.  In these proceedings, Mr Dennis, who had a 
gruff voice and lungs of considerable power, distinguished himself 
very much, and acquired great credit with his two companions.

'What a queer fellow you are!' said Mr Tappertit.  'You're so 
precious sly and close.  Why don't you ever tell what trade you're 
of?'

'Answer the captain instantly,' cried Hugh, beating his hat down on 
his head; 'why don't you ever tell what trade you're of?'

'I'm of as gen-teel a calling, brother, as any man in England--as 
light a business as any gentleman could desire.'

'Was you 'prenticed to it?' asked Mr Tappertit.

'No.  Natural genius,' said Mr Dennis.  'No 'prenticing.  It come 
by natur'.  Muster Gashford knows my calling.  Look at that hand of 
mine--many and many a job that hand has done, with a neatness and 
dex-terity, never known afore.  When I look at that hand,' said Mr 
Dennis, shaking it in the air, 'and remember the helegant bits of 
work it has turned off, I feel quite molloncholy to think it should 
ever grow old and feeble.  But sich is life!'

He heaved a deep sigh as he indulged in these reflections, and 
putting his fingers with an absent air on Hugh's throat, and 
particularly under his left ear, as if he were studying the 
anatomical development of that part of his frame, shook his head in 
a despondent manner and actually shed tears.

'You're a kind of artist, I suppose--eh!' said Mr Tappertit.

'Yes,' rejoined Dennis; 'yes--I may call myself a artist--a fancy 
workman--art improves natur'--that's my motto.'

'And what do you call this?' said Mr Tappertit taking his stick out 
of his hand.

'That's my portrait atop,' Dennis replied; 'd'ye think it's like?'

'Why--it's a little too handsome,' said Mr Tappertit.  'Who did it?  
You?'

'I!' repeated Dennis, gazing fondly on his image.  'I wish I had 
the talent.  That was carved by a friend of mine, as is now no 
more.  The very day afore he died, he cut that with his pocket-
knife from memory!  "I'll die game," says my friend, "and my last 
moments shall be dewoted to making Dennis's picter."  That's it.'

'That was a queer fancy, wasn't it?' said Mr Tappertit.

'It WAS a queer fancy,' rejoined the other, breathing on his 
fictitious nose, and polishing it with the cuff of his coat, 'but 
he was a queer subject altogether--a kind of gipsy--one of the 
finest, stand-up men, you ever see.  Ah!  He told me some things 
that would startle you a bit, did that friend of mine, on the 
morning when he died.'

'You were with him at the time, were you?' said Mr Tappertit.

'Yes,' he answered with a curious look, 'I was there.  Oh! yes 
certainly, I was there.  He wouldn't have gone off half as 
comfortable without me.  I had been with three or four of his 
family under the same circumstances.  They were all fine fellows.'

'They must have been fond of you,' remarked Mr Tappertit, looking 
at him sideways.

'I don't know that they was exactly fond of me,' said Dennis, with 
a little hesitation, 'but they all had me near 'em when they 
departed.  I come in for their wardrobes too.  This very handkecher 
that you see round my neck, belonged to him that I've been speaking 
of--him as did that likeness.'

Mr Tappertit glanced at the article referred to, and appeared to 
think that the deceased's ideas of dress were of a peculiar and by 
no means an expensive kind.  He made no remark upon the point, 
however, and suffered his mysterious companion to proceed without 
interruption.

'These smalls,' said Dennis, rubbing his legs; 'these very smalls--
they belonged to a friend of mine that's left off sich incumbrances 
for ever: this coat too--I've often walked behind this coat, in the 
street, and wondered whether it would ever come to me: this pair of 
shoes have danced a hornpipe for another man, afore my eyes, full 
half-a-dozen times at least: and as to my hat,' he said, taking it 
off, and whirling it round upon his fist--'Lord! I've seen this hat 
go up Holborn on the box of a hackney-coach--ah, many and many a 
day!'

'You don't mean to say their old wearers are ALL dead, I hope?' 
said Mr Tappertit, falling a little distance from him as he spoke.

'Every one of 'em,' replied Dennis.  'Every man Jack!'

There was something so very ghastly in this circumstance, and it 
appeared to account, in such a very strange and dismal manner, for 
his faded dress--which, in this new aspect, seemed discoloured by 
the earth from graves--that Mr Tappertit abruptly found he was 
going another way, and, stopping short, bade him good night with 
the utmost heartiness.  As they happened to be near the Old Bailey, 
and Mr Dennis knew there were turnkeys in the lodge with whom he 
could pass the night, and discuss professional subjects of common 
interest among them before a rousing fire, and over a social glass, 
he separated from his companions without any great regret, and 
warmly shaking hands with Hugh, and making an early appointment for 
their meeting at The Boot, left them to pursue their road.

'That's a strange sort of man,' said Mr Tappertit, watching the 
hackney-coachman's hat as it went bobbing down the street.  'I 
don't know what to make of him.  Why can't he have his smalls made 
to order, or wear live clothes at any rate?'

'He's a lucky man, captain,' cried Hugh.  'I should like to have 
such friends as his.'

'I hope he don't get 'em to make their wills, and then knock 'em on 
the head,' said Mr Tappertit, musing.  'But come.  The United B.'s 
expect me.  On!--What's the matter?'

'I quite forgot,' said Hugh, who had started at the striking of a 
neighbouring clock.  'I have somebody to see to-night--I must turn 
back directly.  The drinking and singing put it out of my head.  
It's well I remembered it!'

Mr Tappertit looked at him as though he were about to give 
utterance to some very majestic sentiments in reference to this act 
of desertion, but as it was clear, from Hugh's hasty manner, that 
the engagement was one of a pressing nature, he graciously forbore, 
and gave him his permission to depart immediately, which Hugh 
acknowledged with a roar of laughter.

'Good night, captain!' he cried.  'I am yours to the death, 
remember!'

'Farewell!' said Mr Tappertit, waving his hand.  'Be bold and 
vigilant!'

'No Popery, captain!' roared Hugh.

'England in blood first!' cried his desperate leader.  Whereat Hugh 
cheered and laughed, and ran off like a greyhound.

'That man will prove a credit to my corps,' said Simon, turning 
thoughtfully upon his heel.  'And let me see.  In an altered state 
of society--which must ensue if we break out and are victorious--
when the locksmith's child is mine, Miggs must be got rid of 
somehow, or she'll poison the tea-kettle one evening when I'm out.  
He might marry Miggs, if he was drunk enough.  It shall be done.  
I'll make a note of it.'



Chapter 40


Little thinking of the plan for his happy settlement in life which 
had suggested itself to the teeming brain of his provident 
commander, Hugh made no pause until Saint Dunstan's giants struck 
the hour above him, when he worked the handle of a pump which stood 
hard by, with great vigour, and thrusting his head under the spout, 
let the water gush upon him until a little stream ran down from 
every uncombed hair, and he was wet to the waist.  Considerably 
refreshed by this ablution, both in mind and body, and almost 
sobered for the time, he dried himself as he best could; then 
crossed the road, and plied the knocker of the Middle Temple gate.

The night-porter looked through a small grating in the portal with 
a surly eye, and cried 'Halloa!' which greeting Hugh returned in 
kind, and bade him open quickly.

'We don't sell beer here,' cried the man; 'what else do you want?'

'To come in,' Hugh replied, with a kick at the door.

'Where to go?'

'Paper Buildings.'

'Whose chambers?'

'Sir John Chester's.'  Each of which answers, he emphasised with 
another kick.

After a little growling on the other side, the gate was opened, and 
he passed in: undergoing a close inspection from the porter as he 
did so.

'YOU wanting Sir John, at this time of night!' said the man.

'Ay!' said Hugh.  'I!  What of that?'

'Why, I must go with you and see that you do, for I don't believe 
it.'

'Come along then.'

Eyeing him with suspicious looks, the man, with key and lantern, 
walked on at his side, and attended him to Sir John Chester's door, 
at which Hugh gave one knock, that echoed through the dark 
staircase like a ghostly summons, and made the dull light tremble 
in the drowsy lamp.

'Do you think he wants me now?' said Hugh.

Before the man had time to answer, a footstep was heard within, a 
light appeared, and Sir John, in his dressing-gown and slippers, 
opened the door.

'I ask your pardon, Sir John,' said the porter, pulling off his 
hat.  'Here's a young man says he wants to speak to you.  It's late 
for strangers.  I thought it best to see that all was right.'

'Aha!' cried Sir John, raising his eyebrows.  'It's you, 
messenger, is it?  Go in.  Quite right, friend.  I commend your 
prudence highly.  Thank you.  God bless you.  Good night.'

To be commended, thanked, God-blessed, and bade good night by one 
who carried 'Sir' before his name, and wrote himself M.P. to boot, 
was something for a porter.  He withdrew with much humility and 
reverence.  Sir John followed his late visitor into the dressing-
room, and sitting in his easy-chair before the fire, and moving it 
so that he could see him as he stood, hat in hand, beside the door, 
looked at him from head to foot.

The old face, calm and pleasant as ever; the complexion, quite 
juvenile in its bloom and clearness; the same smile; the wonted 
precision and elegance of dress; the white, well-ordered teeth; the 
delicate hands; the composed and quiet manner; everything as it 
used to be: no mark of age or passion, envy, hate, or discontent: 
all unruffled and serene, and quite delightful to behold.

He wrote himself M.P.--but how?  Why, thus.  It was a proud family--
more proud, indeed, than wealthy.  He had stood in danger of 
arrest; of bailiffs, and a jail--a vulgar jail, to which the common 
people with small incomes went.  Gentlemen of ancient houses have 
no privilege of exemption from such cruel laws--unless they are of 
one great house, and then they have.  A proud man of his stock and 
kindred had the means of sending him there.  He offered--not indeed 
to pay his debts, but to let him sit for a close borough until his 
own son came of age, which, if he lived, would come to pass in 
twenty years.  It was quite as good as an Insolvent Act, and 
infinitely more genteel.  So Sir John Chester was a member of 
Parliament.

But how Sir John?  Nothing so simple, or so easy.  One touch with a 
sword of state, and the transformation was effected.  John Chester, 
Esquire, M.P., attended court--went up with an address--headed a 
deputation.  Such elegance of manner, so many graces of deportment, 
such powers of conversation, could never pass unnoticed.  Mr was 
too common for such merit.  A man so gentlemanly should have been--
but Fortune is capricious--born a Duke: just as some dukes should 
have been born labourers.  He caught the fancy of the king, knelt 
down a grub, and rose a butterfly.  John Chester, Esquire, was 
knighted and became Sir John.

'I thought when you left me this evening, my esteemed 
acquaintance,' said Sir John after a pretty long silence, 'that you 
intended to return with all despatch?'

'So I did, master.'

'And so you have?' he retorted, glancing at his watch.  'Is that 
what you would say?'

Instead of replying, Hugh changed the leg on which he leant, 
shuffled his cap from one hand to the other, looked at the ground, 
the wall, the ceiling, and finally at Sir John himself; before 
whose pleasant face he lowered his eyes again, and fixed them on 
the floor.

'And how have you been employing yourself in the meanwhile?' quoth 
Sir John, lazily crossing his legs.  'Where have you been? what 
harm have you been doing?'

'No harm at all, master,' growled Hugh, with humility.  'I have 
only done as you ordered.'

'As I WHAT?' returned Sir John.

'Well then,' said Hugh uneasily, 'as you advised, or said I ought, 
or said I might, or said that you would do, if you was me.  Don't 
be so hard upon me, master.'

Something like an expression of triumph in the perfect control he 
had established over this rough instrument appeared in the knight's 
face for an instant; but it vanished directly, as he said--paring 
his nails while speaking:

'When you say I ordered you, my good fellow, you imply that I 
directed you to do something for me--something I wanted done--
something for my own ends and purposes--you see?  Now I am sure I 
needn't enlarge upon the extreme absurdity of such an idea, however 
unintentional; so please--' and here he turned his eyes upon him--
'to be more guarded.  Will you?'

'I meant to give you no offence,' said Hugh.  'I don't know what to 
say.  You catch me up so very short.'

'You will be caught up much shorter, my good friend--infinitely 
shorter--one of these days, depend upon it,' replied his patron 
calmly.  'By-the-bye, instead of wondering why you have been so 
long, my wonder should be why you came at all.  Why did you?'

'You know, master,' said Hugh, 'that I couldn't read the bill I 
found, and that supposing it to be something particular from the 
way it was wrapped up, I brought it here.'

'And could you ask no one else to read it, Bruin?' said Sir John.

'No one that I could trust with secrets, master.  Since Barnaby 
Rudge was lost sight of for good and all--and that's five years 
ago--I haven't talked with any one but you.'

'You have done me honour, I am sure.'

'I have come to and fro, master, all through that time, when there 
was anything to tell, because I knew that you'd be angry with me if 
I stayed away,' said Hugh, blurting the words out, after an 
embarrassed silence; 'and because I wished to please you if I 
could, and not to have you go against me.  There.  That's the true 
reason why I came to-night.  You know that, master, I am sure.'

'You are a specious fellow,' returned Sir John, fixing his eyes 
upon him, 'and carry two faces under your hood, as well as the 
best.  Didn't you give me in this room, this evening, any other 
reason; no dislike of anybody who has slighted you lately, on all 
occasions, abused you, treated you with rudeness; acted towards 
you, more as if you were a mongrel dog than a man like himself?'

'To be sure I did!' cried Hugh, his passion rising, as the other 
meant it should; 'and I say it all over now, again.  I'd do 
anything to have some revenge on him--anything.  And when you told 
me that he and all the Catholics would suffer from those who joined 
together under that handbill, I said I'd make one of 'em, if their 
master was the devil himself.  I AM one of 'em.  See whether I am 
as good as my word and turn out to be among the foremost, or no.  I 
mayn't have much head, master, but I've head enough to remember 
those that use me ill.  You shall see, and so shall he, and so 
shall hundreds more, how my spirit backs me when the time comes.  
My bark is nothing to my bite.  Some that I know had better have a 
wild lion among 'em than me, when I am fairly loose--they had!'

The knight looked at him with a smile of far deeper meaning than 
ordinary; and pointing to the old cupboard, followed him with his 
eyes while he filled and drank a glass of liquor; and smiled when 
his back was turned, with deeper meaning yet.

'You are in a blustering mood, my friend,' he said, when Hugh 
confronted him again.

'Not I, master!' cried Hugh.  'I don't say half I mean.  I can't.  
I haven't got the gift.  There are talkers enough among us; I'll be 
one of the doers.'

'Oh! you have joined those fellows then?' said Sir John, with an 
air of most profound indifference.

'Yes.  I went up to the house you told me of; and got put down upon 
the muster.  There was another man there, named Dennis--'

'Dennis, eh!' cried Sir John, laughing.  'Ay, ay! a pleasant 
fellow, I believe?'

'A roaring dog, master--one after my own heart--hot upon the matter 
too--red hot.'

'So I have heard,' replied Sir John, carelessly.  'You don't happen 
to know his trade, do you?'

'He wouldn't say,' cried Hugh.  'He keeps it secret.'

'Ha ha!' laughed Sir John.  'A strange fancy--a weakness with some 
persons--you'll know it one day, I dare swear.'

'We're intimate already,' said Hugh.

'Quite natural!  And have been drinking together, eh?' pursued Sir 
John.  'Did you say what place you went to in company, when you 
left Lord George's?'

Hugh had not said or thought of saying, but he told him; and this 
inquiry being followed by a long train of questions, he related all 
that had passed both in and out of doors, the kind of people he had 
seen, their numbers, state of feeling, mode of conversation, 
apparent expectations and intentions.  His questioning was so 
artfully contrived, that he seemed even in his own eyes to 
volunteer all this information rather than to have it wrested from 
him; and he was brought to this state of feeling so naturally, that 
when Mr Chester yawned at length and declared himself quite wearied 
out, he made a rough kind of excuse for having talked so much.

'There--get you gone,' said Sir John, holding the door open in his 
hand.  'You have made a pretty evening's work.  I told you not to 
do this.  You may get into trouble.  You'll have an opportunity of 
revenging yourself on your proud friend Haredale, though, and for 
that, you'd hazard anything, I suppose?'

'I would,' retorted Hugh, stopping in his passage out and looking 
back; 'but what do I risk!  What do I stand a chance of losing, 
master?  Friends, home?  A fig for 'em all; I have none; they are 
nothing to me.  Give me a good scuffle; let me pay off old scores 
in a bold riot where there are men to stand by me; and then use me 
as you like--it don't matter much to me what the end is!'

'What have you done with that paper?' said Sir John.

'I have it here, master.'

'Drop it again as you go along; it's as well not to keep such 
things about you.'

Hugh nodded, and touching his cap with an air of as much respect as 
he could summon up, departed.

Sir John, fastening the doors behind him, went back to his 
dressing-room, and sat down once again before the fire, at which 
he gazed for a long time, in earnest meditation.

'This happens fortunately,' he said, breaking into a smile, 'and 
promises well.  Let me see.  My relative and I, who are the most 
Protestant fellows in the world, give our worst wishes to the Roman 
Catholic cause; and to Saville, who introduces their bill, I have 
a personal objection besides; but as each of us has himself for 
the first article in his creed, we cannot commit ourselves by 
joining with a very extravagant madman, such as this Gordon most 
undoubtedly is.  Now really, to foment his disturbances in secret, 
through the medium of such a very apt instrument as my savage 
friend here, may further our real ends; and to express at all 
becoming seasons, in moderate and polite terms, a disapprobation of 
his proceedings, though we agree with him in principle, will 
certainly be to gain a character for honesty and uprightness of 
purpose, which cannot fail to do us infinite service, and to raise 
us into some importance.  Good!  So much for public grounds.  As to 
private considerations, I confess that if these vagabonds WOULD 
make some riotous demonstration (which does not appear impossible), 
and WOULD inflict some little chastisement on Haredale as a not 
inactive man among his sect, it would be extremely agreeable to my 
feelings, and would amuse me beyond measure.  Good again!  Perhaps 
better!'

When he came to this point, he took a pinch of snuff; then 
beginning slowly to undress, he resumed his meditations, by saying 
with a smile:

'I fear, I DO fear exceedingly, that my friend is following fast in 
the footsteps of his mother.  His intimacy with Mr Dennis is very 
ominous.  But I have no doubt he must have come to that end any 
way.  If I lend him a helping hand, the only difference is, that he 
may, upon the whole, possibly drink a few gallons, or puncheons, or 
hogsheads, less in this life than he otherwise would.  It's no 
business of mine.  It's a matter of very small importance!'

So he took another pinch of snuff, and went to bed.



Chapter 41


From the workshop of the Golden Key, there issued forth a tinkling 
sound, so merry and good-humoured, that it suggested the idea of 
some one working blithely, and made quite pleasant music.  No man 
who hammered on at a dull monotonous duty, could have brought such 
cheerful notes from steel and iron; none but a chirping, healthy, 
honest-hearted fellow, who made the best of everything, and felt 
kindly towards everybody, could have done it for an instant.  He 
might have been a coppersmith, and still been musical.  If he had 
sat in a jolting waggon, full of rods of iron, it seemed as if he 
would have brought some harmony out of it.

Tink, tink, tink--clear as a silver bell, and audible at every 
pause of the streets' harsher noises, as though it said, 'I don't 
care; nothing puts me out; I am resolved to he happy.'  Women 
scolded, children squalled, heavy carts went rumbling by, horrible 
cries proceeded from the lungs of hawkers; still it struck in 
again, no higher, no lower, no louder, no softer; not thrusting 
itself on people's notice a bit the more for having been outdone by 
louder sounds--tink, tink, tink, tink, tink.

It was a perfect embodiment of the still small voice, free from all 
cold, hoarseness, huskiness, or unhealthiness of any kind; foot-
passengers slackened their pace, and were disposed to linger near 
it; neighbours who had got up splenetic that morning, felt good-
humour stealing on them as they heard it, and by degrees became 
quite sprightly; mothers danced their babies to its ringing; still 
the same magical tink, tink, tink, came gaily from the workshop of 
the Golden Key.

Who but the locksmith could have made such music!  A gleam of sun 
shining through the unsashed window, and chequering the dark 
workshop with a broad patch of light, fell full upon him, as though 
attracted by his sunny heart.  There he stood working at his anvil, 
his face all radiant with exercise and gladness, his sleeves turned 
up, his wig pushed off his shining forehead--the easiest, freest, 
happiest man in all the world.  Beside him sat a sleek cat, purring 
and winking in the light, and falling every now and then into an 
idle doze, as from excess of comfort.  Toby looked on from a tall 
bench hard by; one beaming smile, from his broad nut-brown face 
down to the slack-baked buckles in his shoes.  The very locks that 
hung around had something jovial in their rust, and seemed like 
gouty gentlemen of hearty natures, disposed to joke on their 
infirmities.  There was nothing surly or severe in the whole scene.  
It seemed impossible that any one of the innumerable keys could fit 
a churlish strong-box or a prison-door.  Cellars of beer and wine, 
rooms where there were fires, books, gossip, and cheering laughter--
these were their proper sphere of action.  Places of distrust and 
cruelty, and restraint, they would have left quadruple-locked for 
ever.

Tink, tink, tink.  The locksmith paused at last, and wiped his 
brow.  The silence roused the cat, who, jumping softly down, crept 
to the door, and watched with tiger eyes a bird-cage in an opposite 
window.  Gabriel lifted Toby to his mouth, and took a hearty 
draught.

Then, as he stood upright, with his head flung back, and his portly 
chest thrown out, you would have seen that Gabriel's lower man was 
clothed in military gear.  Glancing at the wall beyond, there might 
have been espied, hanging on their several pegs, a cap and feather, 
broadsword, sash, and coat of scarlet; which any man learned in 
such matters would have known from their make and pattern to be the 
uniform of a serjeant in the Royal East London Volunteers.

As the locksmith put his mug down, empty, on the bench whence it 
had smiled on him before, he glanced at these articles with a 
laughing eye, and looking at them with his head a little on one 
side, as though he would get them all into a focus, said, leaning 
on his hammer:

'Time was, now, I remember, when I was like to run mad with the 
desire to wear a coat of that colour.  If any one (except my 
father) had called me a fool for my pains, how I should have fired 
and fumed!  But what a fool I must have been, sure-ly!'

'Ah!' sighed Mrs Varden, who had entered unobserved.  'A fool 
indeed.  A man at your time of life, Varden, should know better 
now.'

'Why, what a ridiculous woman you are, Martha,' said the locksmith, 
turning round with a smile.

'Certainly,' replied Mrs V. with great demureness.  'Of course I 
am.  I know that, Varden.  Thank you.'

'I mean--' began the locksmith.

'Yes,' said his wife, 'I know what you mean.  You speak quite plain 
enough to be understood, Varden.  It's very kind of you to adapt 
yourself to my capacity, I am sure.'

'Tut, tut, Martha,' rejoined the locksmith; 'don't take offence at 
nothing.  I mean, how strange it is of you to run down 
volunteering, when it's done to defend you and all the other women, 
and our own fireside and everybody else's, in case of need.'

'It's unchristian,' cried Mrs Varden, shaking her head.

'Unchristian!' said the locksmith.  'Why, what the devil--'

Mrs Varden looked at the ceiling, as in expectation that the 
consequence of this profanity would be the immediate descent of the 
four-post bedstead on the second floor, together with the best 
sitting-room on the first; but no visible judgment occurring, she 
heaved a deep sigh, and begged her husband, in a tone of 
resignation, to go on, and by all means to blaspheme as much as 
possible, because he knew she liked it.

The locksmith did for a moment seem disposed to gratify her, but he 
gave a great gulp, and mildly rejoined:

'I was going to say, what on earth do you call it unchristian for?  
Which would be most unchristian, Martha--to sit quietly down and 
let our houses be sacked by a foreign army, or to turn out like men 
and drive 'em off?  Shouldn't I be a nice sort of a Christian, if I 
crept into a corner of my own chimney and looked on while a parcel 
of whiskered savages bore off Dolly--or you?'

When he said 'or you,' Mrs Varden, despite herself, relaxed into a 
smile.  There was something complimentary in the idea.  'In such a 
state of things as that, indeed--' she simpered.

'As that!' repeated the locksmith.  'Well, that would be the state 
of things directly.  Even Miggs would go.  Some black tambourine-
player, with a great turban on, would be bearing HER off, and, 
unless the tambourine-player was proof against kicking and 
scratching, it's my belief he'd have the worst of it.  Ha ha ha!  
I'd forgive the tambourine-player.  I wouldn't have him interfered 
with on any account, poor fellow.'  And here the locksmith laughed 
again so heartily, that tears came into his eyes--much to Mrs 
Varden's indignation, who thought the capture of so sound a 
Protestant and estimable a private character as Miggs by a pagan 
negro, a circumstance too shocking and awful for contemplation.

The picture Gabriel had drawn, indeed, threatened serious 
consequences, and would indubitably have led to them, but luckily 
at that moment a light footstep crossed the threshold, and Dolly, 
running in, threw her arms round her old father's neck and hugged 
him tight.

'Here she is at last!' cried Gabriel.  'And how well you look, 
Doll, and how late you are, my darling!'

How well she looked?  Well?  Why, if he had exhausted every 
laudatory adjective in the dictionary, it wouldn't have been praise 
enough.  When and where was there ever such a plump, roguish, 
comely, bright-eyed, enticing, bewitching, captivating, maddening 
little puss in all this world, as Dolly!  What was the Dolly of 
five years ago, to the Dolly of that day!  How many coachmakers, 
saddlers, cabinet-makers, and professors of other useful arts, had 
deserted their fathers, mothers, sisters, brothers, and, most of 
all, their cousins, for the love of her!  How many unknown 
gentlemen--supposed to be of mighty fortunes, if not titles--had 
waited round the corner after dark, and tempted Miggs the 
incorruptible, with golden guineas, to deliver offers of marriage 
folded up in love-letters!  How many disconsolate fathers and 
substantial tradesmen had waited on the locksmith for the same 
purpose, with dismal tales of how their sons had lost their 
appetites, and taken to shut themselves up in dark bedrooms, and 
wandering in desolate suburbs with pale faces, and all because of 
Dolly Varden's loveliness and cruelty!  How many young men, in all 
previous times of unprecedented steadiness, had turned suddenly 
wild and wicked for the same reason, and, in an ecstasy of 
unrequited love, taken to wrench off door-knockers, and invert the 
boxes of rheumatic watchmen!  How had she recruited the king's 
service, both by sea and land, through rendering desperate his 
loving subjects between the ages of eighteen and twenty-five!  How 
many young ladies had publicly professed, with tears in their eyes, 
that for their tastes she was much too short, too tall, too bold, 
too cold, too stout, too thin, too fair, too dark--too everything 
but handsome!  How many old ladies, taking counsel together, had 
thanked Heaven their daughters were not like her, and had hoped she 
might come to no harm, and had thought she would come to no good, 
and had wondered what people saw in her, and had arrived at the 
conclusion that she was 'going off' in her looks, or had never come 
on in them, and that she was a thorough imposition and a popular 
mistake!

And yet here was this same Dolly Varden, so whimsical and hard to 
please that she was Dolly Varden still, all smiles and dimples and 
pleasant looks, and caring no more for the fifty or sixty young 
fellows who at that very moment were breaking their hearts to marry 
her, than if so many oysters had been crossed in love and opened 
afterwards.

Dolly hugged her father as has been already stated, and having 
hugged her mother also, accompanied both into the little parlour 
where the cloth was already laid for dinner, and where Miss Miggs--
a trifle more rigid and bony than of yore--received her with a sort 
of hysterical gasp, intended for a smile.  Into the hands of that 
young virgin, she delivered her bonnet and walking dress (all of a 
dreadful, artful, and designing kind), and then said with a laugh, 
which rivalled the locksmith's music, 'How glad I always am to be 
at home again!'

'And how glad we always are, Doll,' said her father, putting back 
the dark hair from her sparkling eyes, 'to have you at home.  Give 
me a kiss.'

If there had been anybody of the male kind there to see her do it--
but there was not--it was a mercy.

'I don't like your being at the Warren,' said the locksmith, 'I 
can't bear to have you out of my sight.  And what is the news over 
yonder, Doll?'

'What news there is, I think you know already,' replied his 
daughter.  'I am sure you do though.'

'Ay?' cried the locksmith.  'What's that?'

'Come, come,' said Dolly, 'you know very well.  I want you to tell 
me why Mr Haredale--oh, how gruff he is again, to be sure!--has 
been away from home for some days past, and why he is travelling 
about (we know he IS travelling, because of his letters) without 
telling his own niece why or wherefore.'

'Miss Emma doesn't want to know, I'll swear,' returned the 
locksmith.

'I don't know that,' said Dolly; 'but I do, at any rate.  Do tell 
me.  Why is he so secret, and what is this ghost story, which 
nobody is to tell Miss Emma, and which seems to be mixed up with 
his going away?  Now I see you know by your colouring so.'

'What the story means, or is, or has to do with it, I know no more 
than you, my dear,' returned the locksmith, 'except that it's some 
foolish fear of little Solomon's--which has, indeed, no meaning in 
it, I suppose.  As to Mr Haredale's journey, he goes, as I believe--'

'Yes,' said Dolly.

'As I believe,' resumed the locksmith, pinching her cheek, 'on 
business, Doll.  What it may be, is quite another matter.  Read 
Blue Beard, and don't be too curious, pet; it's no business of 
yours or mine, depend upon that; and here's dinner, which is much 
more to the purpose.'

Dolly might have remonstrated against this summary dismissal of the 
subject, notwithstanding the appearance of dinner, but at the 
mention of Blue Beard Mrs Varden interposed, protesting she could 
not find it in her conscience to sit tamely by, and hear her child 
recommended to peruse the adventures of a Turk and Mussulman--far 
less of a fabulous Turk, which she considered that potentate to be.  
She held that, in such stirring and tremendous times as those in 
which they lived, it would be much more to the purpose if Dolly 
became a regular subscriber to the Thunderer, where she would have 
an opportunity of reading Lord George Gordon's speeches word for 
word, which would be a greater comfort and solace to her, than a 
hundred and fifty Blue Beards ever could impart.  She appealed in 
support of this proposition to Miss Miggs, then in waiting, who 
said that indeed the peace of mind she had derived from the perusal 
of that paper generally, but especially of one article of the very 
last week as ever was, entitled 'Great Britain drenched in gore,' 
exceeded all belief; the same composition, she added, had also 
wrought such a comforting effect on the mind of a married sister of 
hers, then resident at Golden Lion Court, number twenty-sivin, 
second bell-handle on the right-hand door-post, that, being in a 
delicate state of health, and in fact expecting an addition to her 
family, she had been seized with fits directly after its perusal, 
and had raved of the Inquisition ever since; to the great 
improvement of her husband and friends.  Miss Miggs went on to say 
that she would recommend all those whose hearts were hardened to 
hear Lord George themselves, whom she commended first, in respect 
of his steady Protestantism, then of his oratory, then of his eyes, 
then of his nose, then of his legs, and lastly of his figure 
generally, which she looked upon as fit for any statue, prince, or 
angel, to which sentiment Mrs Varden fully subscribed.

Mrs Varden having cut in, looked at a box upon the mantelshelf, 
painted in imitation of a very red-brick dwelling-house, with a 
yellow roof; having at top a real chimney, down which voluntary 
subscribers dropped their silver, gold, or pence, into the parlour; 
and on the door the counterfeit presentment of a brass plate, 
whereon was legibly inscribed 'Protestant Association:'--and 
looking at it, said, that it was to her a source of poignant misery 
to think that Varden never had, of all his substance, dropped 
anything into that temple, save once in secret--as she afterwards 
discovered--two fragments of tobacco-pipe, which she hoped would 
not be put down to his last account.  That Dolly, she was grieved 
to say, was no less backward in her contributions, better loving, 
as it seemed, to purchase ribbons and such gauds, than to encourage 
the great cause, then in such heavy tribulation; and that she did 
entreat her (her father she much feared could not be moved) not to 
despise, but imitate, the bright example of Miss Miggs, who flung 
her wages, as it were, into the very countenance of the Pope, and 
bruised his features with her quarter's money.

'Oh, mim,' said Miggs, 'don't relude to that.  I had no intentions, 
mim, that nobody should know.  Such sacrifices as I can make, are 
quite a widder's mite.  It's all I have,' cried Miggs with a great 
burst of tears--for with her they never came on by degrees--'but 
it's made up to me in other ways; it's well made up.'

This was quite true, though not perhaps in the sense that Miggs 
intended.  As she never failed to keep her self-denial full in Mrs 
Varden's view, it drew forth so many gifts of caps and gowns and 
other articles of dress, that upon the whole the red-brick house 
was perhaps the best investment for her small capital she could 
possibly have hit upon; returning her interest, at the rate of 
seven or eight per cent in money, and fifty at least in personal 
repute and credit.

'You needn't cry, Miggs,' said Mrs Varden, herself in tears; 'you 
needn't be ashamed of it, though your poor mistress IS on the same 
side.'

Miggs howled at this remark, in a peculiarly dismal way, and said 
she knowed that master hated her.  That it was a dreadful thing to 
live in families and have dislikes, and not give satisfactions.  
That to make divisions was a thing she could not abear to think of, 
neither could her feelings let her do it.  That if it was master's 
wishes as she and him should part, it was best they should part, 
and she hoped he might be the happier for it, and always wished him 
well, and that he might find somebody as would meet his 
dispositions.  It would be a hard trial, she said, to part from 
such a missis, but she could meet any suffering when her conscience 
told her she was in the rights, and therefore she was willing even 
to go that lengths.  She did not think, she added, that she could 
long survive the separations, but, as she was hated and looked upon 
unpleasant, perhaps her dying as soon as possible would be the best 
endings for all parties.  With this affecting conclusion, Miss 
Miggs shed more tears, and sobbed abundantly.

'Can you bear this, Varden?' said his wife in a solemn voice, 
laying down her knife and fork.

'Why, not very well, my dear,' rejoined the locksmith, 'but I try 
to keep my temper.'

'Don't let there be words on my account, mim,' sobbed Miggs.  'It's 
much the best that we should part.  I wouldn't stay--oh, gracious 
me!--and make dissensions, not for a annual gold mine, and found in 
tea and sugar.'

Lest the reader should be at any loss to discover the cause of Miss 
Miggs's deep emotion, it may be whispered apart that, happening to 
be listening, as her custom sometimes was, when Gabriel and his 
wife conversed together, she had heard the locksmith's joke 
relative to the foreign black who played the tambourine, and 
bursting with the spiteful feelings which the taunt awoke in her 
fair breast, exploded in the manner we have witnessed.  Matters 
having now arrived at a crisis, the locksmith, as usual, and for 
the sake of peace and quietness, gave in.

'What are you crying for, girl?' he said.  'What's the matter with 
you?  What are you talking about hatred for?  I don't hate you; I 
don't hate anybody.  Dry your eyes and make yourself agreeable, in 
Heaven's name, and let us all be happy while we can.'

The allied powers deeming it good generalship to consider this a 
sufficient apology on the part of the enemy, and confession of 
having been in the wrong, did dry their eyes and take it in good 
part.  Miss Miggs observed that she bore no malice, no not to her 
greatest foe, whom she rather loved the more indeed, the greater 
persecution she sustained.  Mrs Varden approved of this meek and 
forgiving spirit in high terms, and incidentally declared as a 
closing article of agreement, that Dolly should accompany her to 
the Clerkenwell branch of the association, that very night.  This 
was an extraordinary instance of her great prudence and policy; 
having had this end in view from the first, and entertaining a 
secret misgiving that the locksmith (who was bold when Dolly was in 
question) would object, she had backed Miss Miggs up to this 
point, in order that she might have him at a disadvantage.  The 
manoeuvre succeeded so well that Gabriel only made a wry face, and 
with the warning he had just had, fresh in his mind, did not dare 
to say one word.

The difference ended, therefore, in Miggs being presented with a 
gown by Mrs Varden and half-a-crown by Dolly, as if she had 
eminently distinguished herself in the paths of morality and 
goodness.  Mrs V., according to custom, expressed her hope that 
Varden would take a lesson from what had passed and learn more 
generous conduct for the time to come; and the dinner being now 
cold and nobody's appetite very much improved by what had passed, 
they went on with it, as Mrs Varden said, 'like Christians.'

As there was to be a grand parade of the Royal East London 
Volunteers that afternoon, the locksmith did no more work; but sat 
down comfortably with his pipe in his mouth, and his arm round his 
pretty daughter's waist, looking lovingly on Mrs V., from time to 
time, and exhibiting from the crown of his head to the sole of his 
foot, one smiling surface of good humour.  And to be sure, when it 
was time to dress him in his regimentals, and Dolly, hanging about 
him in all kinds of graceful winning ways, helped to button and 
buckle and brush him up and get him into one of the tightest coats 
that ever was made by mortal tailor, he was the proudest father in 
all England.

'What a handy jade it is!' said the locksmith to Mrs Varden, who 
stood by with folded hands--rather proud of her husband too--while 
Miggs held his cap and sword at arm's length, as if mistrusting 
that the latter might run some one through the body of its own 
accord; 'but never marry a soldier, Doll, my dear.'

Dolly didn't ask why not, or say a word, indeed, but stooped her 
head down very low to tie his sash.

'I never wear this dress,' said honest Gabriel, 'but I think of 
poor Joe Willet.  I loved Joe; he was always a favourite of mine.  
Poor Joe!--Dear heart, my girl, don't tie me in so tight.'

Dolly laughed--not like herself at all--the strangest little laugh 
that could be--and held her head down lower still.

'Poor Joe!' resumed the locksmith, muttering to himself; 'I always 
wish he had come to me.  I might have made it up between them, if 
he had.  Ah! old John made a great mistake in his way of acting by 
that lad--a great mistake.--Have you nearly tied that sash, my 
dear?'

What an ill-made sash it was!  There it was, loose again and 
trailing on the ground.  Dolly was obliged to kneel down, and 
recommence at the beginning.

'Never mind young Willet, Varden,' said his wife frowning; 'you 
might find some one more deserving to talk about, I think.'

Miss Miggs gave a great sniff to the same effect.

'Nay, Martha,' cried the locksmith, 'don't let us bear too hard 
upon him.  If the lad is dead indeed, we'll deal kindly by his 
memory.'

'A runaway and a vagabond!' said Mrs Varden.

Miss Miggs expressed her concurrence as before.

'A runaway, my dear, but not a vagabond,' returned the locksmith in 
a gentle tone.  'He behaved himself well, did Joe--always--and was 
a handsome, manly fellow.  Don't call him a vagabond, Martha.'

Mrs Varden coughed--and so did Miggs.

'He tried hard to gain your good opinion, Martha, I can tell you,' 
said the locksmith smiling, and stroking his chin.  'Ah! that he 
did.  It seems but yesterday that he followed me out to the Maypole 
door one night, and begged me not to say how like a boy they used 
him--say here, at home, he meant, though at the time, I recollect, 
I didn't understand.  "And how's Miss Dolly, sir?" says Joe,' 
pursued the locksmith, musing sorrowfully, 'Ah!  Poor Joe!'

'Well, I declare,' cried Miggs.  'Oh! Goodness gracious me!'

'What's the matter now?' said Gabriel, turning sharply to her, 
'Why, if here an't Miss Dolly,' said the handmaid, stooping down to 
look into her face, 'a-giving way to floods of tears.  Oh mim! oh 
sir.  Raly it's give me such a turn,' cried the susceptible damsel, 
pressing her hand upon her side to quell the palpitation of her 
heart, 'that you might knock me down with a feather.'

The locksmith, after glancing at Miss Miggs as if he could have 
wished to have a feather brought straightway, looked on with a 
broad stare while Dolly hurried away, followed by that sympathising 
young woman: then turning to his wife, stammered out, 'Is Dolly 
ill?  Have I done anything?  Is it my fault?'

'Your fault!' cried Mrs V. reproachfully.  'There--you had better 
make haste out.'

'What have I done?' said poor Gabriel.  'It was agreed that Mr 
Edward's name was never to be mentioned, and I have not spoken of 
him, have I?'

Mrs Varden merely replied that she had no patience with him, and 
bounced off after the other two.  The unfortunate locksmith wound 
his sash about him, girded on his sword, put on his cap, and walked 
out.

'I am not much of a dab at my exercise,' he said under his breath, 
'but I shall get into fewer scrapes at that work than at this.  
Every man came into the world for something; my department seems to 
be to make every woman cry without meaning it.  It's rather hard!'

But he forgot it before he reached the end of the street, and went 
on with a shining face, nodding to the neighbours, and showering 
about his friendly greetings like mild spring rain.



Chapter 42


The Royal East London Volunteers made a brilliant sight that day: 
formed into lines, squares, circles, triangles, and what not, to 
the beating of drums, and the streaming of flags; and performed a 
vast number of complex evolutions, in all of which Serjeant Varden 
bore a conspicuous share.  Having displayed their military prowess 
to the utmost in these warlike shows, they marched in glittering 
order to the Chelsea Bun House, and regaled in the adjacent taverns 
until dark.  Then at sound of drum they fell in again, and 
returned amidst the shouting of His Majesty's lieges to the place 
from whence they came.

The homeward march being somewhat tardy,--owing to the un-
soldierlike behaviour of certain corporals, who, being gentlemen of 
sedentary pursuits in private life and excitable out of doors, 
broke several windows with their bayonets, and rendered it 
imperative on the commanding officer to deliver them over to a 
strong guard, with whom they fought at intervals as they came 
along,--it was nine o'clock when the locksmith reached home.  A 
hackney-coach was waiting near his door; and as he passed it, Mr 
Haredale looked from the window and called him by his name.

'The sight of you is good for sore eyes, sir,' said the locksmith, 
stepping up to him.  'I wish you had walked in though, rather than 
waited here.'

'There is nobody at home, I find,' Mr Haredale answered; 'besides, 
I desired to be as private as I could.'

'Humph!' muttered the locksmith, looking round at his house.  
'Gone with Simon Tappertit to that precious Branch, no doubt.'

Mr Haredale invited him to come into the coach, and, if he were not 
tired or anxious to go home, to ride with him a little way that 
they might have some talk together.  Gabriel cheerfully complied, 
and the coachman mounting his box drove off.

'Varden,' said Mr Haredale, after a minute's pause, 'you will be 
amazed to hear what errand I am on; it will seem a very strange 
one.'

'I have no doubt it's a reasonable one, sir, and has a meaning in 
it,' replied the locksmith; 'or it would not be yours at all.  Have 
you just come back to town, sir?'

'But half an hour ago.'

'Bringing no news of Barnaby, or his mother?' said the locksmith 
dubiously.  'Ah! you needn't shake your head, sir.  It was a wild-
goose chase.  I feared that, from the first.  You exhausted all 
reasonable means of discovery when they went away.  To begin again 
after so long a time has passed is hopeless, sir--quite hopeless.'

'Why, where are they?' he returned impatiently.  'Where can they 
be?  Above ground?'

'God knows,' rejoined the locksmith, 'many that I knew above it 
five years ago, have their beds under the grass now.  And the world 
is a wide place.  It's a hopeless attempt, sir, believe me.  We 
must leave the discovery of this mystery, like all others, to time, 
and accident, and Heaven's pleasure.'

'Varden, my good fellow,' said Mr Haredale, 'I have a deeper 
meaning in my present anxiety to find them out, than you can 
fathom.  It is not a mere whim; it is not the casual revival of my 
old wishes and desires; but an earnest, solemn purpose.  My 
thoughts and dreams all tend to it, and fix it in my mind.  I have 
no rest by day or night; I have no peace or quiet; I am haunted.'

His voice was so altered from its usual tones, and his manner 
bespoke so much emotion, that Gabriel, in his wonder, could only 
sit and look towards him in the darkness, and fancy the expression 
of his face.

'Do not ask me,' continued Mr Haredale, 'to explain myself.  If I 
were to do so, you would think me the victim of some hideous fancy.  
It is enough that this is so, and that I cannot--no, I can not--lie 
quietly in my bed, without doing what will seem to you 
incomprehensible.'

'Since when, sir,' said the locksmith after a pause, 'has this 
uneasy feeling been upon you?'

Mr Haredale hesitated for some moments, and then replied: 'Since 
the night of the storm.  In short, since the last nineteenth of 
March.'

As though he feared that Varden might express surprise, or reason 
with him, he hastily went on:

'You will think, I know, I labour under some delusion.  Perhaps I 
do.  But it is not a morbid one; it is a wholesome action of the 
mind, reasoning on actual occurrences.  You know the furniture 
remains in Mrs Rudge's house, and that it has been shut up, by my 
orders, since she went away, save once a-week or so, when an old 
neighbour visits it to scare away the rats.  I am on my way there 
now.'

'For what purpose?' asked the locksmith.

'To pass the night there,' he replied; 'and not to-night alone, but 
many nights.  This is a secret which I trust to you in case of any 
unexpected emergency.  You will not come, unless in case of strong 
necessity, to me; from dusk to broad day I shall be there.  Emma, 
your daughter, and the rest, suppose me out of London, as I have 
been until within this hour.  Do not undeceive them.  This is the 
errand I am bound upon.  I know I may confide it to you, and I rely 
upon your questioning me no more at this time.'

With that, as if to change the theme, he led the astounded 
locksmith back to the night of the Maypole highwayman, to the 
robbery of Edward Chester, to the reappearance of the man at Mrs 
Rudge's house, and to all the strange circumstances which 
afterwards occurred.  He even asked him carelessly about the man's 
height, his face, his figure, whether he was like any one he had 
ever seen--like Hugh, for instance, or any man he had known at any 
time--and put many questions of that sort, which the locksmith, 
considering them as mere devices to engage his attention and 
prevent his expressing the astonishment he felt, answered pretty 
much at random.

At length, they arrived at the corner of the street in which the 
house stood, where Mr Haredale, alighting, dismissed the coach.  
'If you desire to see me safely lodged,' he said, turning to the 
locksmith with a gloomy smile, 'you can.'

Gabriel, to whom all former marvels had been nothing in comparison 
with this, followed him along the narrow pavement in silence.  When 
they reached the door, Mr Haredale softly opened it with a key he 
had about him, and closing it when Varden entered, they were left 
in thorough darkness.

They groped their way into the ground-floor room.  Here Mr 
Haredale struck a light, and kindled a pocket taper he had brought 
with him for the purpose.  It was then, when the flame was full 
upon him, that the locksmith saw for the first time how haggard, 
pale, and changed he looked; how worn and thin he was; how 
perfectly his whole appearance coincided with all that he had said 
so strangely as they rode along.  It was not an unnatural impulse 
in Gabriel, after what he had heard, to note curiously the 
expression of his eyes.  It was perfectly collected and rational;--
so much so, indeed, that he felt ashamed of his momentary 
suspicion, and drooped his own when Mr Haredale looked towards him, 
as if he feared they would betray his thoughts.

'Will you walk through the house?' said Mr Haredale, with a glance 
towards the window, the crazy shutters of which were closed and 
fastened.  'Speak low.'

There was a kind of awe about the place, which would have rendered 
it difficult to speak in any other manner.  Gabriel whispered 
'Yes,' and followed him upstairs.

Everything was just as they had seen it last.  There was a sense of 
closeness from the exclusion of fresh air, and a gloom and 
heaviness around, as though long imprisonment had made the very 
silence sad.  The homely hangings of the beds and windows had begun 
to droop; the dust lay thick upon their dwindling folds; and damps 
had made their way through ceiling, wall, and floor.  The boards 
creaked beneath their tread, as if resenting the unaccustomed 
intrusion; nimble spiders, paralysed by the taper's glare, checked 
the motion of their hundred legs upon the wall, or dropped like 
lifeless things upon the ground; the death-watch ticked; and the 
scampering feet of rats and mice rattled behind the wainscot.

As they looked about them on the decaying furniture, it was strange 
to find how vividly it presented those to whom it had belonged, and 
with whom it was once familiar.  Grip seemed to perch again upon 
his high-backed chair; Barnaby to crouch in his old favourite 
corner by the fire; the mother to resume her usual seat, and watch 
him as of old.  Even when they could separate these objects from 
the phantoms of the mind which they invoked, the latter only glided 
out of sight, but lingered near them still; for then they seemed to 
lurk in closets and behind the doors, ready to start out and 
suddenly accost them in well-remembered tones.

They went downstairs, and again into the room they had just now 
left.  Mr Haredale unbuckled his sword and laid it on the table, 
with a pair of pocket pistols; then told the locksmith he would 
light him to the door.

'But this is a dull place, sir,' said Gabriel lingering; 'may no 
one share your watch?'

He shook his head, and so plainly evinced his wish to be alone, 
that Gabriel could say no more.  In another moment the locksmith 
was standing in the street, whence he could see that the light once 
more travelled upstairs, and soon returning to the room below, 
shone brightly through the chinks of the shutters.

If ever man were sorely puzzled and perplexed, the locksmith was, 
that night.  Even when snugly seated by his own fireside, with Mrs 
Varden opposite in a nightcap and night-jacket, and Dolly beside 
him (in a most distracting dishabille) curling her hair, and 
smiling as if she had never cried in all her life and never could--
even then, with Toby at his elbow and his pipe in his mouth, and 
Miggs (but that perhaps was not much) falling asleep in the 
background, he could not quite discard his wonder and uneasiness.  
So in his dreams--still there was Mr Haredale, haggard and 
careworn, listening in the solitary house to every sound that 
stirred, with the taper shining through the chinks until the day 
should turn it pale and end his lonely watching.



Chapter 43


Next morning brought no satisfaction to the locksmith's thoughts, 
nor next day, nor the next, nor many others.  Often after nightfall 
he entered the street, and turned his eyes towards the well-known 
house; and as surely as he did so, there was the solitary light, 
still gleaming through the crevices of the window-shutter, while 
all within was motionless, noiseless, cheerless, as a grave.  
Unwilling to hazard Mr Haredale's favour by disobeying his strict 
injunction, he never ventured to knock at the door or to make his 
presence known in any way.  But whenever strong interest and 
curiosity attracted him to the spot--which was not seldom--the 
light was always there.

If he could have known what passed within, the knowledge would have 
yielded him no clue to this mysterious vigil.  At twilight, Mr 
Haredale shut himself up, and at daybreak he came forth.  He never 
missed a night, always came and went alone, and never varied his 
proceedings in the least degree.

The manner of his watch was this.  At dusk, he entered the house in 
the same way as when the locksmith bore him company, kindled a 
light, went through the rooms, and narrowly examined them.  That 
done, he returned to the chamber on the ground-floor, and laying 
his sword and pistols on the table, sat by it until morning.

He usually had a book with him, and often tried to read, but never 
fixed his eyes or thoughts upon it for five minutes together.  The 
slightest noise without doors, caught his ear; a step upon the 
pavement seemed to make his heart leap.

He was not without some refreshment during the long lonely hours; 
generally carrying in his pocket a sandwich of bread and meat, and 
a small flask of wine.  The latter diluted with large quantities of 
water, he drank in a heated, feverish way, as though his throat 
were dried; but he scarcely ever broke his fast, by so much as a 
crumb of bread.

If this voluntary sacrifice of sleep and comfort had its origin, as 
the locksmith on consideration was disposed to think, in any 
superstitious expectation of the fulfilment of a dream or vision 
connected with the event on which he had brooded for so many years, 
and if he waited for some ghostly visitor who walked abroad when 
men lay sleeping in their beds, he showed no trace of fear or 
wavering.  His stern features expressed inflexible resolution; his 
brows were puckered, and his lips compressed, with deep and settled 
purpose; and when he started at a noise and listened, it was not 
with the start of fear but hope, and catching up his sword as 
though the hour had come at last, he would clutch it in his tight-
clenched hand, and listen with sparkling eyes and eager looks, 
until it died away.

These disappointments were numerous, for they ensued on almost 
every sound, but his constancy was not shaken.  Still, every night 
he was at his post, the same stern, sleepless, sentinel; and still 
night passed, and morning dawned, and he must watch again.

This went on for weeks; he had taken a lodging at Vauxhall in which 
to pass the day and rest himself; and from this place, when the 
tide served, he usually came to London Bridge from Westminster by 
water, in order that he might avoid the busy streets.

One evening, shortly before twilight, he came his accustomed road 
upon the river's bank, intending to pass through Westminster Hall 
into Palace Yard, and there take boat to London Bridge as usual.  
There was a pretty large concourse of people assembled round the 
Houses of Parliament, looking at the members as they entered and 
departed, and giving vent to rather noisy demonstrations of 
approval or dislike, according to their known opinions.  As he made 
his way among the throng, he heard once or twice the No-Popery cry, 
which was then becoming pretty familiar to the ears of most men; 
but holding it in very slight regard, and observing that the idlers 
were of the lowest grade, he neither thought nor cared about it, 
but made his way along, with perfect indifference.

There were many little knots and groups of persons in Westminster 
Hall: some few looking upward at its noble ceiling, and at the rays 
of evening light, tinted by the setting sun, which streamed in 
aslant through its small windows, and growing dimmer by degrees, 
were quenched in the gathering gloom below; some, noisy passengers, 
mechanics going home from work, and otherwise, who hurried quickly 
through, waking the echoes with their voices, and soon darkening 
the small door in the distance, as they passed into the street 
beyond; some, in busy conference together on political or private 
matters, pacing slowly up and down with eyes that sought the 
ground, and seeming, by their attitudes, to listen earnestly from 
head to foot.  Here, a dozen squabbling urchins made a very Babel 
in the air; there, a solitary man, half clerk, half mendicant, 
paced up and down with hungry dejection in his look and gait; at 
his elbow passed an errand-lad, swinging his basket round and 
round, and with his shrill whistle riving the very timbers of the 
roof; while a more observant schoolboy, half-way through, pocketed 
his ball, and eyed the distant beadle as he came looming on.  It 
was that time of evening when, if you shut your eyes and open them 
again, the darkness of an hour appears to have gathered in a 
second.  The smooth-worn pavement, dusty with footsteps, still 
called upon the lofty walls to reiterate the shuffle and the tread 
of feet unceasingly, save when the closing of some heavy door 
resounded through the building like a clap of thunder, and drowned 
all other noises in its rolling sound.

Mr Haredale, glancing only at such of these groups as he passed 
nearest to, and then in a manner betokening that his thoughts were 
elsewhere, had nearly traversed the Hall, when two persons before 
him caught his attention.  One of these, a gentleman in elegant 
attire, carried in his hand a cane, which he twirled in a jaunty 
manner as he loitered on; the other, an obsequious, crouching, 
fawning figure, listened to what he said--at times throwing in a 
humble word himself--and, with his shoulders shrugged up to his 
ears, rubbed his hands submissively, or answered at intervals by an 
inclination of the head, half-way between a nod of acquiescence, 
and a bow of most profound respect.

In the abstract there was nothing very remarkable in this pair, for 
servility waiting on a handsome suit of clothes and a cane--not to 
speak of gold and silver sticks, or wands of office--is common 
enough.  But there was that about the well-dressed man, yes, and 
about the other likewise, which struck Mr Haredale with no pleasant 
feeling.  He hesitated, stopped, and would have stepped aside and 
turned out of his path, but at the moment, the other two faced 
about quickly, and stumbled upon him before he could avoid them.

The gentleman with the cane lifted his hat and had begun to tender 
an apology, which Mr Haredale had begun as hastily to acknowledge 
and walk away, when he stopped short and cried, 'Haredale!  Gad 
bless me, this is strange indeed!'

'It is,' he returned impatiently; 'yes--a--'

'My dear friend,' cried the other, detaining him, 'why such great 
speed?  One minute, Haredale, for the sake of old acquaintance.'

'I am in haste,' he said.  'Neither of us has sought this meeting.  
Let it be a brief one.  Good night!'

'Fie, fie!' replied Sir John (for it was he), 'how very churlish!  
We were speaking of you.  Your name was on my lips--perhaps you 
heard me mention it?  No?  I am sorry for that.  I am really 
sorry.--You know our friend here, Haredale?  This is really a most 
remarkable meeting!'

The friend, plainly very ill at ease, had made bold to press Sir 
John's arm, and to give him other significant hints that he was 
desirous of avoiding this introduction.  As it did not suit Sir 
John's purpose, however, that it should be evaded, he appeared 
quite unconscious of these silent remonstrances, and inclined his 
hand towards him, as he spoke, to call attention to him more 
particularly.

The friend, therefore, had nothing for it, but to muster up the 
pleasantest smile he could, and to make a conciliatory bow, as Mr 
Haredale turned his eyes upon him.  Seeing that he was recognised, 
he put out his hand in an awkward and embarrassed manner, which was 
not mended by its contemptuous rejection.

'Mr Gashford!' said Haredale, coldly.  'It is as I have heard then.  
You have left the darkness for the light, sir, and hate those whose 
opinions you formerly held, with all the bitterness of a renegade.  
You are an honour, sir, to any cause.  I wish the one you espouse 
at present, much joy of the acquisition it has made.'

The secretary rubbed his hands and bowed, as though he would disarm 
his adversary by humbling himself before him.  Sir John Chester 
again exclaimed, with an air of great gaiety, 'Now, really, this is 
a most remarkable meeting!' and took a pinch of snuff with his 
usual self-possession.

'Mr Haredale,' said Gashford, stealthily raising his eyes, and 
letting them drop again when they met the other's steady gaze, is 
too conscientious, too honourable, too manly, I am sure, to attach 
unworthy motives to an honest change of opinions, even though it 
implies a doubt of those he holds himself.  Mr Haredale is too 
just, too generous, too clear-sighted in his moral vision, to--'

'Yes, sir?' he rejoined with a sarcastic smile, finding the 
secretary stopped.  'You were saying'--

Gashford meekly shrugged his shoulders, and looking on the ground 
again, was silent.

'No, but let us really,' interposed Sir John at this juncture, 'let 
us really, for a moment, contemplate the very remarkable character 
of this meeting.  Haredale, my dear friend, pardon me if I think 
you are not sufficiently impressed with its singularity.  Here we 
stand, by no previous appointment or arrangement, three old 
schoolfellows, in Westminster Hall; three old boarders in a 
remarkably dull and shady seminary at Saint Omer's, where you, 
being Catholics and of necessity educated out of England, were 
brought up; and where I, being a promising young Protestant at that 
time, was sent to learn the French tongue from a native of Paris!'

'Add to the singularity, Sir John,' said Mr Haredale, 'that some of 
you Protestants of promise are at this moment leagued in yonder 
building, to prevent our having the surpassing and unheard-of 
privilege of teaching our children to read and write--here--in this 
land, where thousands of us enter your service every year, and to 
preserve the freedom of which, we die in bloody battles abroad, in 
heaps: and that others of you, to the number of some thousands as 
I learn, are led on to look on all men of my creed as wolves and 
beasts of prey, by this man Gashford.  Add to it besides the bare 
fact that this man lives in society, walks the streets in broad 
day--I was about to say, holds up his head, but that he does not--
and it will be strange, and very strange, I grant you.'

'Oh! you are hard upon our friend,' replied Sir John, with an 
engaging smile.  'You are really very hard upon our friend!'

'Let him go on, Sir John,' said Gashford, fumbling with his gloves.  
'Let him go on.  I can make allowances, Sir John.  I am honoured 
with your good opinion, and I can dispense with Mr Haredale's.  Mr 
Haredale is a sufferer from the penal laws, and I can't expect his 
favour.'

'You have so much of my favour, sir,' retorted Mr Haredale, with a 
bitter glance at the third party in their conversation, 'that I am 
glad to see you in such good company.  You are the essence of your 
great Association, in yourselves.'

'Now, there you mistake,' said Sir John, in his most benignant way.  
'There--which is a most remarkable circumstance for a man of your 
punctuality and exactness, Haredale--you fall into error.  I don't 
belong to the body; I have an immense respect for its members, but 
I don't belong to it; although I am, it is certainly true, the 
conscientious opponent of your being relieved.  I feel it my duty 
to be so; it is a most unfortunate necessity; and cost me a bitter 
struggle.--Will you try this box?  If you don't object to a 
trifling infusion of a very chaste scent, you'll find its flavour 
exquisite.'

'I ask your pardon, Sir John,' said Mr Haredale, declining the 
proffer with a motion of his hand, 'for having ranked you among the 
humble instruments who are obvious and in all men's sight.  I 
should have done more justice to your genius.  Men of your capacity 
plot in secrecy and safety, and leave exposed posts to the duller 
wits.'

'Don't apologise, for the world,' replied Sir John sweetly; 'old 
friends like you and I, may be allowed some freedoms, or the deuce 
is in it.'

Gashford, who had been very restless all this time, but had not 
once looked up, now turned to Sir John, and ventured to mutter 
something to the effect that he must go, or my lord would perhaps 
be waiting.

'Don't distress yourself, good sir,' said Mr Haredale, 'I'll take 
my leave, and put you at your ease--' which he was about to do 
without ceremony, when he was stayed by a buzz and murmur at the 
upper end of the hall, and, looking in that direction, saw Lord 
George Gordon coming in, with a crowd of people round him.

There was a lurking look of triumph, though very differently 
expressed, in the faces of his two companions, which made it a 
natural impulse on Mr Haredale's part not to give way before this 
leader, but to stand there while he passed.  He drew himself up 
and, clasping his hands behind him, looked on with a proud and 
scornful aspect, while Lord George slowly advanced (for the press 
was great about him) towards the spot where they were standing.

He had left the House of Commons but that moment, and had come 
straight down into the Hall, bringing with him, as his custom was, 
intelligence of what had been said that night in reference to the 
Papists, and what petitions had been presented in their favour, and 
who had supported them, and when the bill was to be brought in, and 
when it would be advisable to present their own Great Protestant 
petition.  All this he told the persons about him in a loud voice, 
and with great abundance of ungainly gesture.  Those who were 
nearest him made comments to each other, and vented threats and 
murmurings; those who were outside the crowd cried, 'Silence,' and 
Stand back,' or closed in upon the rest, endeavouring to make a 
forcible exchange of places: and so they came driving on in a very 
disorderly and irregular way, as it is the manner of a crowd to do.

When they were very near to where the secretary, Sir John, and Mr 
Haredale stood, Lord George turned round and, making a few remarks 
of a sufliciently violent and incoherent kind, concluded with the 
usual sentiment, and called for three cheers to back it.  While 
these were in the act of being given with great energy, he 
extricated himself from the press, and stepped up to Gashford's 
side.  Both he and Sir John being well known to the populace, they 
fell back a little, and left the four standing together.

'Mr Haredale, Lord George,' said Sir John Chester, seeing that the 
nobleman regarded him with an inquisitive look.  'A Catholic 
gentleman unfortunately--most unhappily a Catholic--but an esteemed 
acquaintance of mine, and once of Mr Gashford's.  My dear Haredale, 
this is Lord George Gordon.'

'I should have known that, had I been ignorant of his lordship's 
person,' said Mr Haredale.  'I hope there is but one gentleman in 
England who, addressing an ignorant and excited throng, would speak 
of a large body of his fellow-subjects in such injurious language 
as I heard this moment.  For shame, my lord, for shame!'

'I cannot talk to you, sir,' replied Lord George in a loud voice, 
and waving his hand in a disturbed and agitated manner; 'we have 
nothing in common.'

'We have much in common--many things--all that the Almighty gave 
us,' said Mr Haredale; 'and common charity, not to say common sense 
and common decency, should teach you to refrain from these 
proceedings.  If every one of those men had arms in their hands at 
this moment, as they have them in their heads, I would not leave 
this place without telling you that you disgrace your station.'

'I don't hear you, sir,' he replied in the same manner as before; 
'I can't hear you.  It is indifferent to me what you say.  Don't 
retort, Gashford,' for the secretary had made a show of wishing to 
do so; 'I can hold no communion with the worshippers of idols.'

As he said this, he glanced at Sir John, who lifted his hands and 
eyebrows, as if deploring the intemperate conduct of Mr Haredale, 
and smiled in admiration of the crowd and of their leader.

'HE retort!' cried Haredale.  'Look you here, my lord.  Do you know 
this man?'

Lord George replied by laying his hand upon the shoulder of his 
cringing secretary, and viewing him with a smile of confidence.

'This man,' said Mr Haredale, eyeing him from top to toe, 'who in 
his boyhood was a thief, and has been from that time to this, a 
servile, false, and truckling knave: this man, who has crawled and 
crept through life, wounding the hands he licked, and biting those 
he fawned upon: this sycophant, who never knew what honour, truth, 
or courage meant; who robbed his benefactor's daughter of her 
virtue, and married her to break her heart, and did it, with 
stripes and cruelty: this creature, who has whined at kitchen 
windows for the broken food, and begged for halfpence at our chapel 
doors: this apostle of the faith, whose tender conscience cannot 
bear the altars where his vicious life was publicly denounced--Do 
you know this man?'

'Oh, really--you are very, very hard upon our friend!' exclaimed 
Sir John.

'Let Mr Haredale go on,' said Gashford, upon whose unwholesome face 
the perspiration had broken out during this speech, in blotches of 
wet; 'I don't mind him, Sir John; it's quite as indifferent to me 
what he says, as it is to my lord.  If he reviles my lord, as you 
have heard, Sir John, how can I hope to escape?'

'Is it not enough, my lord,' Mr Haredale continued, 'that I, as 
good a gentleman as you, must hold my property, such as it is, by a 
trick at which the state connives because of these hard laws; and 
that we may not teach our youth in schools the common principles of 
right and wrong; but must we be denounced and ridden by such men as 
this!  Here is a man to head your No-Popery cry!  For shame.  For 
shame!'

The infatuated nobleman had glanced more than once at Sir John 
Chester, as if to inquire whether there was any truth in these 
statements concerning Gashford, and Sir John had as often plainly 
answered by a shrug or look, 'Oh dear me! no.'  He now said, in the 
same loud key, and in the same strange manner as before:

'I have nothing to say, sir, in reply, and no desire to hear 
anything more.  I beg you won't obtrude your conversation, or these 
personal attacks, upon me.  I shall not be deterred from doing my 
duty to my country and my countrymen, by any such attempts, whether 
they proceed from emissaries of the Pope or not, I assure you.  
Come, Gashford!'

They had walked on a few paces while speaking, and were now at the 
Hall-door, through which they passed together.  Mr Haredale, 
without any leave-taking, turned away to the river stairs, which 
were close at hand, and hailed the only boatman who remained there.

But the throng of people--the foremost of whom had heard every word 
that Lord George Gordon said, and among all of whom the rumour had 
been rapidly dispersed that the stranger was a Papist who was 
bearding him for his advocacy of the popular cause--came pouring 
out pell-mell, and, forcing the nobleman, his secretary, and Sir 
John Chester on before them, so that they appeared to be at their 
head, crowded to the top of the stairs where Mr Haredale waited 
until the boat was ready, and there stood still, leaving him on a 
little clear space by himself.

They were not silent, however, though inactive.  At first some 
indistinct mutterings arose among them, which were followed by a 
hiss or two, and these swelled by degrees into a perfect storm.  
Then one voice said, 'Down with the Papists!' and there was a 
pretty general cheer, but nothing more.  After a lull of a few 
moments, one man cried out, 'Stone him;' another, 'Duck him;' 
another, in a stentorian voice, 'No Popery!'  This favourite cry 
the rest re-echoed, and the mob, which might have been two hundred 
strong, joined in a general shout.

Mr Haredale had stood calmly on the brink of the steps, until they 
made this demonstration, when he looked round contemptuously, and 
walked at a slow pace down the stairs.  He was pretty near the 
boat, when Gashford, as if without intention, turned about, and 
directly afterwards a great stone was thrown by some hand, in the 
crowd, which struck him on the head, and made him stagger like a 
drunken man.

The blood sprung freely from the wound, and trickled down his coat.  
He turned directly, and rushing up the steps with a boldness and 
passion which made them all fall back, demanded:

'Who did that?  Show me the man who hit me.'

Not a soul moved; except some in the rear who slunk off, and, 
escaping to the other side of the way, looked on like indifferent 
spectators.

'Who did that?' he repeated.  'Show me the man who did it.  Dog, 
was it you?  It was your deed, if not your hand--I know you.'

He threw himself on Gashford as he said the words, and hurled him 
to the ground.  There was a sudden motion in the crowd, and some 
laid hands upon him, but his sword was out, and they fell off 
again.

'My lord--Sir John,'--he cried, 'draw, one of you--you are 
responsible for this outrage, and I look to you.  Draw, if you are 
gentlemen.'  With that he struck Sir John upon the breast with the 
flat of his weapon, and with a burning face and flashing eyes stood 
upon his guard; alone, before them all.

For an instant, for the briefest space of time the mind can readily 
conceive, there was a change in Sir John's smooth face, such as no 
man ever saw there.  The next moment, he stepped forward, and laid 
one hand on Mr Haredale's arm, while with the other he endeavoured 
to appease the crowd.

'My dear friend, my good Haredale, you are blinded with passion--
it's very natural, extremely natural--but you don't know friends 
from foes.'

'I know them all, sir, I can distinguish well--' he retorted, 
almost mad with rage.  'Sir John, Lord George--do you hear me?  Are 
you cowards?'

'Never mind, sir,' said a man, forcing his way between and pushing 
him towards the stairs with friendly violence, 'never mind asking 
that.  For God's sake, get away.  What CAN you do against this 
number?  And there are as many more in the next street, who'll be 
round dfrectly,'--indeed they began to pour in as he said the 
words--'you'd be giddy from that cut, in the first heat of a 
scuffle.  Now do retire, sir, or take my word for it you'll be 
worse used than you would be if every man in the crowd was a woman, 
and that woman Bloody Mary.  Come, sir, make haste--as quick as you 
can.'

Mr Haredale, who began to turn faint and sick, felt how sensible 
this advice was, and descended the steps with his unknown friend's 
assistance.  John Grueby (for John it was) helped him into the 
boat, and giving her a shove off, which sent her thirty feet into 
the tide, bade the waterman pull away like a Briton; and walked up 
again as composedly as if he had just landed.

There was at first a slight disposition on the part of the mob to 
resent this interference; but John looking particularly strong and 
cool, and wearing besides Lord George's livery, they thought better 
of it, and contented themselves with sending a shower of small 
missiles after the boat, which plashed harmlessly in the water; 
for she had by this time cleared the bridge, and was darting 
swiftly down the centre of the stream.

From this amusement, they proceeded to giving Protestant knocks at 
the doors of private houses, breaking a few lamps, and assaulting 
some stray constables.  But, it being whispered that a detachment 
of Life Guards had been sent for, they took to their heels with 
great expedition, and left the street quite clear.



Chapter 44


When the concourse separated, and, dividing into chance clusters, 
drew off in various directions, there still remained upon the scene 
of the late disturbance, one man.  This man was Gashford, who, 
bruised by his late fall, and hurt in a much greater degree by the 
indignity he had undergone, and the exposure of which he had been 
the victim, limped up and down, breathing curses and threats of 
vengeance.

It was not the secretary's nature to waste his wrath in words.  
While he vented the froth of his malevolence in those effusions, he 
kept a steady eye on two men, who, having disappeared with the rest 
when the alarm was spread, had since returned, and were now visible 
in the moonlight, at no great distance, as they walked to and fro, 
and talked together.

He made no move towards them, but waited patiently on the dark side 
of the street, until they were tired of strolling backwards and 
forwards and walked away in company.  Then he followed, but at some 
distance: keeping them in view, without appearing to have that 
object, or being seen by them.

They went up Parliament Street, past Saint Martin's church, and 
away by Saint Giles's to Tottenham Court Road, at the back of 
which, upon the western side, was then a place called the Green 
Lanes.  This was a retired spot, not of the choicest kind, leading 
into the fields.  Great heaps of ashes; stagnant pools, overgrown 
with rank grass and duckweed; broken turnstiles; and the upright 
posts of palings long since carried off for firewood, which menaced 
all heedless walkers with their jagged and rusty nails; were the 
leading features of the landscape: while here and there a donkey, 
or a ragged horse, tethered to a stake, and cropping off a wretched 
meal from the coarse stunted turf, were quite in keeping with the 
scene, and would have suggested (if the houses had not done so, 
sufficiently, of themselves) how very poor the people were who 
lived in the crazy huts adjacent, and how foolhardy it might prove 
for one who carried money, or wore decent clothes, to walk that way 
alone, unless by daylight.

Poverty has its whims and shows of taste, as wealth has.  Some of 
these cabins were turreted, some had false windows painted on their 
rotten walls; one had a mimic clock, upon a crazy tower of four 
feet high, which screened the chimney; each in its little patch of 
ground had a rude seat or arbour.  The population dealt in bones, 
in rags, in broken glass, in old wheels, in birds, and dogs.  
These, in their several ways of stowage, filled the gardens; and 
shedding a perfume, not of the most delicious nature, in the air, 
filled it besides with yelps, and screams, and howling.

Into this retreat, the secretary followed the two men whom he had 
held in sight; and here he saw them safely lodged, in one of the 
meanest houses, which was but a room, and that of small dimensions.  
He waited without, until the sound of their voices, joined in a 
discordant song, assured him they were making merry; and then 
approaching the door, by means of a tottering plank which crossed 
the ditch in front, knocked at it with his hand.

'Muster Gashfordl' said the man who opened it, taking his pipe from 
his mouth, in evident surprise.  'Why, who'd have thought of this 
here honour!  Walk in, Muster Gashford--walk in, sir.'

Gashford required no second invitation, and entered with a gracious 
air.  There was a fire in the rusty grate (for though the spring 
was pretty far advanced, the nights were cold), and on a stool 
beside it Hugh sat smoking.  Dennis placed a chair, his only one, 
for the secretary, in front of the hearth; and took his seat again 
upon the stool he had left when he rose to give the visitor 
admission.

'What's in the wind now, Muster Gashford?' he said, as he resumed 
his pipe, and looked at him askew.  'Any orders from head-quarters?  
Are we going to begin?  What is it, Muster Gashford?'

'Oh, nothing, nothing,' rejoined the secretary, with a friendly nod 
to Hugh.  'We have broken the ice, though.  We had a little spurt 
to-day--eh, Dennis?'

'A very little one,' growled the hangman.  'Not half enough for me.'

'Nor me neither!' cried Hugh.  'Give us something to do with life 
in it--with life in it, master.  Ha, ha!'

'Why, you wouldn't,' said the secretary, with his worst expression 
of face, and in his mildest tones, 'have anything to do, with--with 
death in it?'

'I don't know that,' replied Hugh.  'I'm open to orders.  I don't 
care; not I.'

'Nor I!' vociferated Dennis.

'Brave fellows!' said the secretary, in as pastor-like a voice as 
if he were commending them for some uncommon act of valour and 
generosity.  'By the bye'--and here he stopped and warmed his 
hands: then suddenly looked up--'who threw that stone to-day?'

Mr Dennis coughed and shook his head, as who should say, 'A mystery 
indeed!'  Hugh sat and smoked in silence.

'It was well done!' said the secretary, warming his hands again.  
'I should like to know that man.'

'Would you?' said Dennis, after looking at his face to assure 
himself that he was serious.  'Would you like to know that man, 
Muster Gashford?'

'I should indeed,' replied the secretary.

'Why then, Lord love you,' said the hangman, in his hoarest 
chuckle, as he pointed with his pipe to Hugh, 'there he sits.  
That's the man.  My stars and halters, Muster Gashford,' he added 
in a whisper, as he drew his stool close to him and jogged him with 
his elbow, 'what a interesting blade he is!  He wants as much 
holding in as a thorough-bred bulldog.  If it hadn't been for me 
to-day, he'd have had that 'ere Roman down, and made a riot of it, 
in another minute.'

'And why not?' cried Hugh in a surly voice, as he overheard this 
last remark.  'Where's the good of putting things off?  Strike 
while the iron's hot; that's what I say.'

'Ah!' retorted Dennis, shaking his head, with a kind of pity for 
his friend's ingenuous youth; 'but suppose the iron an't hot, 
brother!  You must get people's blood up afore you strike, and have 
'em in the humour.  There wasn't quite enough to provoke 'em to-
day, I tell you.  If you'd had your way, you'd have spoilt the fun 
to come, and ruined us.'

'Dennis is quite right,' said Gashford, smoothly.  'He is 
perfectly correct.  Dennis has great knowledge of the world.'

'I ought to have, Muster Gashford, seeing what a many people I've 
helped out of it, eh?' grinned the hangman, whispering the words 
behind his hand.

The secretary laughed at this jest as much as Dennis could desire, 
and when he had done, said, turning to Hugh:

'Dennis's policy was mine, as you may have observed.  You saw, for 
instance, how I fell when I was set upon.  I made no resistance.  I 
did nothing to provoke an outbreak.  Oh dear no!'

'No, by the Lord Harry!' cried Dennis with a noisy laugh, 'you went 
down very quiet, Muster Gashford--and very flat besides.  I thinks 
to myself at the time "it's all up with Muster Gashford!"  I never 
see a man lay flatter nor more still--with the life in him--than 
you did to-day.  He's a rough 'un to play with, is that 'ere 
Papist, and that's the fact.'

The secretary's face, as Dennis roared with laughter, and turned 
his wrinkled eyes on Hugh who did the like, might have furnished a 
study for the devil's picture.  He sat quite silent until they 
were serious again, and then said, looking round:

'We are very pleasant here; so very pleasant, Dennis, that but for 
my lord's particular desire that I should sup with him, and the 
time being very near at hand, I should he inclined to stay, until 
it would be hardly safe to go homeward.  I come upon a little 
business--yes, I do--as you supposed.  It's very flattering to you; 
being this.  If we ever should be obliged--and we can't tell, you 
know--this is a very uncertain world'--

'I believe you, Muster Gashford,' interposed the hangman with a 
grave nod.  'The uncertainties as I've seen in reference to this 
here state of existence, the unexpected contingencies as have come 
about!--Oh my eye!'  Feeling the subject much too vast for 
expression, he puffed at his pipe again, and looked the rest.

'I say,' resumed the secretary, in a slow, impressive way; 'we 
can't tell what may come to pass; and if we should be obliged, 
against our wills, to have recourse to violence, my lord (who has 
suffered terribly to-day, as far as words can go) consigns to you 
two--bearing in mind my recommendation of you both, as good staunch 
men, beyond all doubt and suspicion--the pleasant task of 
punishing this Haredale.  You may do as you please with him, or 
his, provided that you show no mercy, and no quarter, and leave no 
two beams of his house standing where the builder placed them.  You 
may sack it, burn it, do with it as you like, but it must come 
down; it must be razed to the ground; and he, and all belonging to 
him, left as shelterless as new-born infants whom their mothers 
have exposed.  Do you understand me?' said Gashford, pausing, and 
pressing his hands together gently.

'Understand you, master!' cried Hugh.  'You speak plain now.  Why, 
this is hearty!'

'I knew you would like it,' said Gashford, shaking him by the hand; 
'I thought you would.  Good night!  Don't rise, Dennis: I would 
rather find my way alone.  I may have to make other visits here, 
and it's pleasant to come and go without disturbing you.  I can 
find my way perfectly well.  Good night!'

He was gone, and had shut the door behind him.  They looked at each 
other, and nodded approvingly: Dennis stirred up the fire.

'This looks a little more like business!' he said.

'Ay, indeed!' cried Hugh; 'this suits me!'

'I've heerd it said of Muster Gashford,' said the hangman, 'that 
he'd a surprising memory and wonderful firmness--that he never 
forgot, and never forgave.--Let's drink his health!'

Hugh readily complied--pouring no liquor on the floor when he drank 
this toast--and they pledged the secretary as a man after their own 
hearts, in a bumper.



Chapter 45


While the worst passions of the worst men were thus working in the 
dark, and the mantle of religion, assumed to cover the ugliest 
deformities, threatened to become the shroud of all that was good 
and peaceful in society, a circumstance occurred which once more 
altered the position of two persons from whom this history has long 
been separated, and to whom it must now return.

In a small English country town, the inhabitants of which supported 
themselves by the labour of their hands in plaiting and preparing 
straw for those who made bonnets and other articles of dress and 
ornament from that material,--concealed under an assumed name, and 
living in a quiet poverty which knew no change, no pleasures, and 
few cares but that of struggling on from day to day in one great 
toil for bread,--dwelt Barnaby and his mother.  Their poor cottage 
had known no stranger's foot since they sought the shelter of its 
roof five years before; nor had they in all that time held any 
commerce or communication with the old world from which they had 
fled.  To labour in peace, and devote her labour and her life to 
her poor son, was all the widow sought.  If happiness can be said 
at any time to be the lot of one on whom a secret sorrow preys, she 
was happy now.  Tranquillity, resignation, and her strong love of 
him who needed it so much, formed the small circle of her quiet 
joys; and while that remained unbroken, she was contented.

For Barnaby himself, the time which had flown by, had passed him 
like the wind.  The daily suns of years had shed no brighter gleam 
of reason on his mind; no dawn had broken on his long, dark night.  
He would sit sometimes--often for days together on a low seat by 
the fire or by the cottage door, busy at work (for he had learnt 
the art his mother plied), and listening, God help him, to the 
tales she would repeat, as a lure to keep him in her sight.  He had 
no recollection of these little narratives; the tale of yesterday 
was new to him upon the morrow; but he liked them at the moment; 
and when the humour held him, would remain patiently within doors, 
hearing her stories like a little child, and working cheerfully 
from sunrise until it was too dark to see.

At other times,--and then their scanty earnings were barely 
sufficient to furnish them with food, though of the coarsest sort,--
he would wander abroad from dawn of day until the twilight 
deepened into night.  Few in that place, even of the children, 
could be idle, and he had no companions of his own kind.  Indeed 
there were not many who could have kept up with him in his rambles, 
had there been a legion.  But there were a score of vagabond dogs 
belonging to the neighbours, who served his purpose quite as well.  
With two or three of these, or sometimes with a full half-dozen 
barking at his heels, he would sally forth on some long expedition 
that consumed the day; and though, on their return at nightfall, 
the dogs would come home limping and sore-footed, and almost spent 
with their fatigue, Barnaby was up and off again at sunrise with 
some new attendants of the same class, with whom he would return in 
like manner.  On all these travels, Grip, in his little basket at 
his master's back, was a constant member of the party, and when 
they set off in fine weather and in high spirits, no dog barked 
louder than the raven.

Their pleasures on these excursions were simple enough.  A crust of 
bread and scrap of meat, with water from the brook or spring, 
sufficed for their repast.  Barnaby's enjoyments were, to walk, and 
run, and leap, till he was tired; then to lie down in the long 
grass, or by the growing corn, or in the shade of some tall tree, 
looking upward at the light clouds as they floated over the blue 
surface of the sky, and listening to the lark as she poured out her 
brilliant song.  There were wild-flowers to pluck--the bright red 
poppy, the gentle harebell, the cowslip, and the rose.  There were 
birds to watch; fish; ants; worms; hares or rabbits, as they darted 
across the distant pathway in the wood and so were gone: millions 
of living things to have an interest in, and lie in wait for, and 
clap hands and shout in memory of, when they had disappeared.  In 
default of these, or when they wearied, there was the merry 
sunlight to hunt out, as it crept in aslant through leaves and 
boughs of trees, and hid far down--deep, deep, in hollow places--
like a silver pool, where nodding branches seemed to bathe and 
sport; sweet scents of summer air breathing over fields of beans or 
clover; the perfume of wet leaves or moss; the life of waving 
trees, and shadows always changing.  When these or any of them 
tired, or in excess of pleasing tempted him to shut his eyes, there 
was slumber in the midst of all these soft delights, with the 
gentle wind murmuring like music in his ears, and everything around 
melting into one delicious dream.

Their hut--for it was little more--stood on the outskirts of the 
town, at a short distance from the high road, but in a secluded 
place, where few chance passengers strayed at any season of the 
year.  It had a plot of garden-ground attached, which Barnaby, in 
fits and starts of working, trimmed, and kept in order.  Within 
doors and without, his mother laboured for their common good; and 
hail, rain, snow, or sunshine, found no difference in her.

Though so far removed from the scenes of her past life, and with so 
little thought or hope of ever visiting them again, she seemed to 
have a strange desire to know what happened in the busy world.  Any 
old newspaper, or scrap of intelligence from London, she caught at 
with avidity.  The excitement it produced was not of a pleasurable 
kind, for her manner at such times expressed the keenest anxiety 
and dread; but it never faded in the least degree.  Then, and in 
stormy winter nights, when the wind blew loud and strong, the old 
expression came into her face, and she would be seized with a fit 
of trembling, like one who had an ague.  But Barnaby noted little 
of this; and putting a great constraint upon herself, she usually 
recovered her accustomed manner before the change had caught his 
observation.

Grip was by no means an idle or unprofitable member of the humble 
household.  Partly by dint of Barnaby's tuition, and partly by 
pursuing a species of self-instruction common to his tribe, and 
exerting his powers of observation to the utmost, he had acquired a 
degree of sagacity which rendered him famous for miles round.  His 
conversational powers and surprising performances were the 
universal theme: and as many persons came to see the wonderful 
raven, and none left his exertions unrewarded--when he condescended 
to exhibit, which was not always, for genius is capricious--his 
earnings formed an important item in the common stock.  Indeed, the 
bird himself appeared to know his value well; for though he was 
perfectly free and unrestrained in the presence of Barnaby and his 
mother, he maintained in public an amazing gravity, and never 
stooped to any other gratuitous performances than biting the ankles 
of vagabond boys (an exercise in which he much delighted), killing 
a fowl or two occasionally, and swallowing the dinners of various 
neighbouring dogs, of whom the boldest held him in great awe and 
dread.

Time had glided on in this way, and nothing had happened to disturb 
or change their mode of life, when, one summer's night in June, 
they were in their little garden, resting from the labours of the 
day.  The widow's work was yet upon her knee, and strewn upon the 
ground about her; and Barnaby stood leaning on his spade, gazing at 
the brightness in the west, and singing softly to himself.

'A brave evening, mother!  If we had, chinking in our pockets, but 
a few specks of that gold which is piled up yonder in the sky, we 
should be rich for life.'

'We are better as we are,' returned the widow with a quiet smile.  
'Let us be contented, and we do not want and need not care to have 
it, though it lay shining at our feet.'

'Ay!' said Barnaby, resting with crossed arms on his spade, and 
looking wistfully at the sunset, that's well enough, mother; but 
gold's a good thing to have.  I wish that I knew where to find it.  
Grip and I could do much with gold, be sure of that.'

'What would you do?' she asked.

'What!  A world of things.  We'd dress finely--you and I, I mean; 
not Grip--keep horses, dogs, wear bright colours and feathers, do 
no more work, live delicately and at our ease.  Oh, we'd find uses 
for it, mother, and uses that would do us good.  I would I knew 
where gold was buried.  How hard I'd work to dig it up!'

'You do not know,' said his mother, rising from her seat and laying 
her hand upon his shoulder, 'what men have done to win it, and how 
they have found, too late, that it glitters brightest at a 
distance, and turns quite dim and dull when handled.'

'Ay, ay; so you say; so you think,' he answered, still looking 
eagerly in the same direction.  'For all that, mother, I should 
like to try.'

'Do you not see,' she said, 'how red it is?  Nothing bears so many 
stains of blood, as gold.  Avoid it.  None have such cause to hate 
its name as we have.  Do not so much as think of it, dear love.  It 
has brought such misery and suffering on your head and mine as few 
have known, and God grant few may have to undergo.  I would rather 
we were dead and laid down in our graves, than you should ever come 
to love it.'

For a moment Barnaby withdrew his eyes and looked at her with 
wonder.  Then, glancing from the redness in the sky to the mark 
upon his wrist as if he would compare the two, he seemed about to 
question her with earnestness, when a new object caught his 
wandering attention, and made him quite forgetful of his purpose.

This was a man with dusty feet and garments, who stood, bare-
headed, behind the hedge that divided their patch of garden from 
the pathway, and leant meekly forward as if he sought to mingle 
with their conversation, and waited for his time to speak.  His 
face was turned towards the brightness, too, but the light that 
fell upon it showed that he was blind, and saw it not.

'A blessing on those voices!' said the wayfarer.  'I feel the 
beauty of the night more keenly, when I hear them.  They are like 
eyes to me.  Will they speak again, and cheer the heart of a poor 
traveller?'

'Have you no guide?' asked the widow, after a moment's pause.

'None but that,' he answered, pointing with his staff towards the 
sun; 'and sometimes a milder one at night, but she is idle now.'

'Have you travelled far?'

'A weary way and long,' rejoined the traveller as he shook his 
head.  'A weary, weary, way.  I struck my stick just now upon the 
bucket of your well--be pleased to let me have a draught of water, 
lady.'

'Why do you call me lady?' she returned.  'I am as poor as you.'

'Your speech is soft and gentle, and I judge by that,' replied the 
man.  'The coarsest stuffs and finest silks, are--apart from the 
sense of touch--alike to me.  I cannot judge you by your dress.'

'Come round this way,' said Barnaby, who had passed out at the 
garden-gate and now stood close beside him.  'Put your hand in 
mine.  You're blind and always in the dark, eh?  Are you frightened 
in the dark?  Do you see great crowds of faces, now?  Do they grin 
and chatter?'

'Alas!' returned the other, 'I see nothing.  Waking or sleeping, 
nothing.'

Barnaby looked curiously at his eyes, and touching them with his 
fingers, as an inquisitive child might, led him towards the house.

'You have come a long distance, 'said the widow, meeting him at the 
door.  'How have you found your way so far?'

'Use and necessity are good teachers, as I have heard--the best of 
any,' said the blind man, sitting down upon the chair to which 
Barnaby had led him, and putting his hat and stick upon the red-
tiled floor.  'May neither you nor your son ever learn under them.  
They are rough masters.'

'You have wandered from the road, too,' said the widow, in a tone 
of pity.

'Maybe, maybe,' returned the blind man with a sigh, and yet with 
something of a smile upon his face, 'that's likely.  Handposts and 
milestones are dumb, indeed, to me.  Thank you the more for this 
rest, and this refreshing drink!'

As he spoke, he raised the mug of water to his mouth.  It was 
clear, and cold, and sparkling, but not to his taste nevertheless, 
or his thirst was not very great, for he only wetted his lips and 
put it down again.

He wore, hanging with a long strap round his neck, a kind of scrip 
or wallet, in which to carry food.  The widow set some bread and 
cheese before him, but he thanked her, and said that through the 
kindness of the charitable he had broken his fast once since 
morning, and was not hungry.  When he had made her this reply, he 
opened his wallet, and took out a few pence, which was all it 
appeared to contain.

'Might I make bold to ask,' he said, turning towards where Barnaby 
stood looking on, 'that one who has the gift of sight, would lay 
this out for me in bread to keep me on my way?  Heaven's blessing 
on the young feet that will bestir themselves in aid of one so 
helpless as a sightless man!'

Barnaby looked at his mother, who nodded assent; in another moment 
he was gone upon his charitable errand.  The blind man sat 
listening with an attentive face, until long after the sound of his 
retreating footsteps was inaudible to the widow, and then said, 
suddenly, and in a very altered tone:

'There are various degrees and kinds of blindness, widow.  There 
is the connubial blindness, ma'am, which perhaps you may have 
observed in the course of your own experience, and which is a kind 
of wilful and self-bandaging blindness.  There is the blindness of 
party, ma'am, and public men, which is the blindness of a mad bull 
in the midst of a regiment of soldiers clothed in red.  There is 
the blind confidence of youth, which is the blindness of young 
kittens, whose eyes have not yet opened on the world; and there is 
that physical blindness, ma'am, of which I am, contrairy to my own 
desire, a most illustrious example.  Added to these, ma'am, is that 
blindness of the intellect, of which we have a specimen in your 
interesting son, and which, having sometimes glimmerings and 
dawnings of the light, is scarcely to be trusted as a total 
darkness.  Therefore, ma'am, I have taken the liberty to get him 
out of the way for a short time, while you and I confer together, 
and this precaution arising out of the delicacy of my sentiments 
towards yourself, you will excuse me, ma'am, I know.'

Having delivered himself of this speech with many flourishes of 
manner, he drew from beneath his coat a flat stone bottle, and 
holding the cork between his teeth, qualified his mug of water with 
a plentiful infusion of the liquor it contained.  He politely 
drained the bumper to her health, and the ladies, and setting it 
down empty, smacked his lips with infinite relish.

'I am a citizen of the world, ma'am,' said the blind man, corking 
his bottle, 'and if I seem to conduct myself with freedom, it is 
therefore.  You wonder who I am, ma'am, and what has brought me 
here.  Such experience of human nature as I have, leads me to that 
conclusion, without the aid of eyes by which to read the movements 
of your soul as depicted in your feminine features.  I will 
satisfy your curiosity immediately, ma'am; immediately.'  With 
that he slapped his bottle on its broad back, and having put it 
under his garment as before, crossed his legs and folded his hands, 
and settled himself in his chair, previous to proceeding any 
further.

The change in his manner was so unexpected, the craft and 
wickedness of his deportment were so much aggravated by his 
condition--for we are accustomed to see in those who have lost a 
human sense, something in its place almost divine--and this 
alteration bred so many fears in her whom he addressed, that she 
could not pronounce one word.  After waiting, as it seemed, for 
some remark or answer, and waiting in vain, the visitor resumed:

'Madam, my name is Stagg.  A friend of mine who has desired the 
honour of meeting with you any time these five years past, has 
commissioned me to call upon you.  I should be glad to whisper that 
gentleman's name in your ear.--Zounds, ma'am, are you deaf?  Do you 
hear me say that I should be glad to whisper my friend's name in 
your ear?'

'You need not repeat it,' said the widow, with a stifled groan; 'I 
see too well from whom you come.'

'But as a man of honour, ma'am,' said the blind man, striking 
himself on the breast, 'whose credentials must not be disputed, I 
take leave to say that I WILL mention that gentleman's name.  Ay, 
ay,' he added, seeming to catch with his quick ear the very motion 
of her hand, 'but not aloud.  With your leave, ma'am, I desire the 
favour of a whisper.'

She moved towards him, and stooped down.  He muttered a word in her 
ear; and, wringing her hands, she paced up and down the room like 
one distracted.  The blind man, with perfect composure, produced 
his bottle again, mixed another glassful; put it up as before; and, 
drinking from time to time, followed her with his face in silence.

'You are slow in conversation, widow,' he said after a time, 
pausing in his draught.  'We shall have to talk before your son.'

'What would you have me do?' she answered.  'What do you want?'

'We are poor, widow, we are poor,' he retorted, stretching out his 
right hand, and rubbing his thumb upon its palm.

'Poor!' she cried.  'And what am I?'

'Comparisons are odious,' said the blind man.  'I don't know, I 
don't care.  I say that we are poor.  My friend's circumstances are 
indifferent, and so are mine.  We must have our rights, widow, or 
we must be bought off.  But you know that, as well as I, so where 
is the use of talking?'

She still walked wildly to and fro.  At length, stopping abruptly 
before him, she said:

'Is he near here?'

'He is.  Close at hand.'

'Then I am lost!'

'Not lost, widow,' said the blind man, calmly; 'only found.  Shall 
I call him?'

'Not for the world,' she answered, with a shudder.

'Very good,' he replied, crossing his legs again, for he had made 
as though he would rise and walk to the door.  'As you please, 
widow.  His presence is not necessary that I know of.  But both he 
and I must live; to live, we must eat and drink; to eat and drink, 
we must have money:--I say no more.'

'Do you know how pinched and destitute I am?' she retorted.  'I do 
not think you do, or can.  If you had eyes, and could look around 
you on this poor place, you would have pity on me.  Oh! let your 
heart be softened by your own affliction, friend, and have some 
sympathy with mine.'

The blind man snapped his fingers as he answered:

'--Beside the question, ma'am, beside the question.  I have the 
softest heart in the world, but I can't live upon it.  Many a 
gentleman lives well upon a soft head, who would find a heart of 
the same quality a very great drawback.  Listen to me.  This is a 
matter of business, with which sympathies and sentiments have 
nothing to do.  As a mutual friend, I wish to arrange it in a 
satisfactory manner, if possible; and thus the case stands.--If you 
are very poor now, it's your own choice.  You have friends who, in 
case of need, are always ready to help you.  My friend is in a more 
destitute and desolate situation than most men, and, you and he 
being linked together in a common cause, he naturally looks to you 
to assist him.  He has boarded and lodged with me a long time (for 
as I said just now, I am very soft-hearted), and I quite approve of 
his entertaining this opinion.  You have always had a roof over 
your head; he has always been an outcast.  You have your son to 
comfort and assist you; he has nobody at all.  The advantages must 
not be all one side.  You are in the same boat, and we must divide 
the ballast a little more equally.'

She was about to speak, but he checked her, and went on.

'The only way of doing this, is by making up a little purse now and 
then for my friend; and that's what I advise.  He bears you no 
malice that I know of, ma'am: so little, that although you have 
treated him harshly more than once, and driven him, I may say, out 
of doors, he has that regard for you that I believe even if you 
disappointed him now, he would consent to take charge of your son, 
and to make a man of him.'

He laid a great stress on these latter words, and paused as if to 
find out what effect they had produced.  She only answered by her 
tears.

'He is a likely lad,' said the blind man, thoughtfully, 'for many 
purposes, and not ill-disposed to try his fortune in a little 
change and bustle, if I may judge from what I heard of his talk 
with you to-night.--Come.  In a word, my friend has pressing 
necessity for twenty pounds.  You, who can give up an annuity, can 
get that sum for him.  It's a pity you should be troubled.  You 
seem very comfortable here, and it's worth that much to remain so.  
Twenty pounds, widow, is a moderate demand.  You know where to 
apply for it; a post will bring it you.--Twenty pounds!'

She was about to answer him again, but again he stopped her.

'Don't say anything hastily; you might be sorry for it.  Think of 
it a little while.  Twenty pounds--of other people's money--how 
easy!  Turn it over in your mind.  I'm in no hurry.  Night's coming 
on, and if I don't sleep here, I shall not go far.  Twenty pounds!  
Consider of it, ma'am, for twenty minutes; give each pound a 
minute; that's a fair allowance.  I'll enjoy the air the while, 
which is very mild and pleasant in these parts.'

With these words he groped his way to the door, carrying his chair 
with him.  Then seating himself, under a spreading honeysuckle, and 
stretching his legs across the threshold so that no person could 
pass in or out without his knowledge, he took from his pocket a 
pipe, flint, steel and tinder-box, and began to smoke.  It was a 
lovely evening, of that gentle kind, and at that time of year, when 
the twilight is most beautiful.  Pausing now and then to let his 
smoke curl slowly off, and to sniff the grateful fragrance of the 
flowers, he sat there at his ease--as though the cottage were his 
proper dwelling, and he had held undisputed possession of it all 
his life--waiting for the widow's answer and for Barnaby's return.



Chapter 46


When Barnaby returned with the bread, the sight of the pious old 
pilgrim smoking his pipe and making himself so thoroughly at home, 
appeared to surprise even him; the more so, as that worthy person, 
instead of putting up the loaf in his wallet as a scarce and 
precious article, tossed it carelessly on the table, and producing 
his bottle, bade him sit down and drink.

'For I carry some comfort, you see,' he said.  'Taste that.  Is it 
good?'

The water stood in Barnaby's eyes as he coughed from the strength 
of the draught, and answered in the affirmative.

'Drink some more,' said the blind man; 'don't be afraid of it.  
You don't taste anything like that, often, eh?'

'Often!' cried Barnaby.  'Never!'

'Too poor?' returned the blind man with a sigh.  'Ay.  That's bad.  
Your mother, poor soul, would be happier if she was richer, 
Barnaby.'

'Why, so I tell her--the very thing I told her just before you came 
to-night, when all that gold was in the sky,' said Barnaby, drawing 
his chair nearer to him, and looking eagerly in his face.  'Tell 
me.  Is there any way of being rich, that I could find out?'

'Any way!  A hundred ways.'

'Ay, ay?' he returned.  'Do you say so?  What are they?--Nay, 
mother, it's for your sake I ask; not mine;--for yours, indeed.  
What are they?'

The blind man turned his face, on which there was a smile of 
triumph, to where the widow stood in great distress; and answered,

'Why, they are not to be found out by stay-at-homes, my good 
friend.'

'By stay-at-homes!' cried Barnaby, plucking at his sleeve.  'But I 
am not one.  Now, there you mistake.  I am often out before the 
sun, and travel home when he has gone to rest.  I am away in the 
woods before the day has reached the shady places, and am often 
there when the bright moon is peeping through the boughs, and 
looking down upon the other moon that lives in the water.  As I 
walk along, I try to find, among the grass and moss, some of that 
small money for which she works so hard and used to shed so many 
tears.  As I lie asleep in the shade, I dream of it--dream of 
digging it up in heaps; and spying it out, hidden under bushes; and 
seeing it sparkle, as the dew-drops do, among the leaves.  But I 
never find it.  Tell me where it is.  I'd go there, if the journey 
were a whole year long, because I know she would be happier when I 
came home and brought some with me.  Speak again.  I'll listen to 
you if you talk all night.'

The blind man passed his hand lightly over the poor fellow's face, 
and finding that his elbows were planted on the table, that his 
chin rested on his two hands, that he leaned eagerly forward, and 
that his whole manner expressed the utmost interest and anxiety, 
paused for a minute as though he desired the widow to observe this 
fully, and then made answer:

'It's in the world, bold Barnaby, the merry world; not in solitary 
places like those you pass your time in, but in crowds, and where 
there's noise and rattle.'

'Good! good!' cried Barnaby, rubbing his hands.  'Yes! I love 
that.  Grip loves it too.  It suits us both.  That's brave!'

'--The kind of places,' said the blind man, 'that a young fellow 
likes, and in which a good son may do more for his mother, and 
himself to boot, in a month, than he could here in all his life--
that is, if he had a friend, you know, and some one to advise 
with.'

'You hear this, mother?' cried Barnaby, turning to her with 
delight.  'Never tell me we shouldn't heed it, if it lay shining 
at out feet.  Why do we heed it so much now?  Why do you toil from 
morning until night?'

'Surely,' said the blind man, 'surely.  Have you no answer, widow?  
Is your mind,' he slowly added, 'not made up yet?'

'Let me speak with you,' she answered, 'apart.'

'Lay your hand upon my sleeve,' said Stagg, arising from the table; 
'and lead me where you will.  Courage, bold Barnaby.  We'll talk 
more of this: I've a fancy for you.  Wait there till I come back.  
Now, widow.'

She led him out at the door, and into the little garden, where they 
stopped.

'You are a fit agent,' she said, in a half breathless manner, 'and 
well represent the man who sent you here.'

'I'll tell him that you said so,' Stagg retorted.  'He has a regard 
for you, and will respect me the more (if possible) for your 
praise.  We must have our rights, widow.'

'Rights!  Do you know,' she said, 'that a word from me--'

'Why do you stop?' returned the blind man calmly, after a long 
pause.  'Do I know that a word from you would place my friend in 
the last position of the dance of life?  Yes, I do.  What of that?  
It will never be spoken, widow.'

'You are sure of that?'

'Quite--so sure, that I don't come here to discuss the question.  I 
say we must have our rights, or we must be bought off.  Keep to 
that point, or let me return to my young friend, for I have an 
interest in the lad, and desire to put him in the way of making his 
fortune.  Bah! you needn't speak,' he added hastily; 'I know what 
you would say: you have hinted at it once already.  Have I no 
feeling for you, because I am blind?  No, I have not.  Why do you 
expect me, being in darkness, to be better than men who have their 
sight--why should you?  Is the hand of Heaven more manifest in my 
having no eyes, than in your having two?  It's the cant of you 
folks to be horrified if a blind man robs, or lies, or steals; oh 
yes, it's far worse in him, who can barely live on the few 
halfpence that are thrown to him in streets, than in you, who can 
see, and work, and are not dependent on the mercies of the world.  
A curse on you!  You who have five senses may be wicked at your 
pleasure; we who have four, and want the most important, are to 
live and be moral on our affliction.  The true charity and justice 
of rich to poor, all the world over!'

He paused a moment when he had said these words, and caught the 
sound of money, jingling in her hand.

'Well?' he cried, quickly resuming his former manner.  'That should 
lead to something.  The point, widow?'

'First answer me one question,' she replied.  'You say he is close 
at hand.  Has he left London?'

'Being close at hand, widow, it would seem he has,' returned the 
blind man.

'I mean, for good?  You know that.'

'Yes, for good.  The truth is, widow, that his making a longer stay 
there might have had disagreeable consequences.  He has come away 
for that reason.'

'Listen,' said the widow, telling some money out, upon a bench 
beside them.  'Count.'

'Six,' said the blind man, listening attentively.  'Any more?'

'They are the savings,' she answered, 'of five years.  Six 
guineas.'

He put out his hand for one of the coins; felt it carefully, put it 
between his teeth, rung it on the bench; and nodded to her to 
proceed.

'These have been scraped together and laid by, lest sickness or 
death should separate my son and me.  They have been purchased at 
the price of much hunger, hard labour, and want of rest.  If you 
CAN take them--do--on condition that you leave this place upon the 
instant, and enter no more into that room, where he sits now, 
expecting your return.'

'Six guineas,' said the blind man, shaking his head, 'though of the 
fullest weight that were ever coined, fall very far short of twenty 
pounds, widow.'

'For such a sum, as you know, I must write to a distant part of the 
country.  To do that, and receive an answer, I must have time.'

'Two days?' said Stagg.

'More.'

'Four days?'

'A week.  Return on this day week, at the same hour, but not to the 
house.  Wait at the corner of the lane.'

'Of course,' said the blind man, with a crafty look, 'I shall find 
you there?'

'Where else can I take refuge?  Is it not enough that you have made 
a beggar of me, and that I have sacrificed my whole store, so 
hardly earned, to preserve this home?'

'Humph!' said the blind man, after some consideration.  'Set me 
with my face towards the point you speak of, and in the middle of 
the road.  Is this the spot?'

'It is.'

'On this day week at sunset.  And think of him within doors.--For 
the present, good night.'

She made him no answer, nor did he stop for any.  He went slowly 
away, turning his head from time to time, and stopping to listen, 
as if he were curious to know whether he was watched by any one.  
The shadows of night were closing fast around, and he was soon lost 
in the gloom.  It was not, however, until she had traversed the 
lane from end to end, and made sure that he was gone, that she re-
entered the cottage, and hurriedly barred the door and window.

'Mother!' said Barnaby.  'What is the matter?  Where is the blind 
man?'

'He is gone.'

'Gone!' he cried, starting up.  'I must have more talk with him.  
Which way did he take?'

'I don't know,' she answered, folding her arms about him.  'You 
must not go out to-night.  There are ghosts and dreams abroad.'

'Ay?' said Barnaby, in a frightened whisper.

'It is not safe to stir.  We must leave this place to-morrow.'

'This place!  This cottage--and the little garden, mother!'

'Yes!  To-morrow morning at sunrise.  We must travel to London; 
lose ourselves in that wide place--there would be some trace of us 
in any other town--then travel on again, and find some new abode.'

Little persuasion was required to reconcile Barnaby to anything 
that promised change.  In another minute, he was wild with delight; 
in another, full of grief at the prospect of parting with his 
friends the dogs; in another, wild again; then he was fearful of 
what she had said to prevent his wandering abroad that night, and 
full of terrors and strange questions.  His light-heartedness in 
the end surmounted all his other feelings, and lying down in his 
clothes to the end that he might be ready on the morrow, he soon 
fell fast asleep before the poor turf fire.

His mother did not close her eyes, but sat beside him, watching.  
Every breath of wind sounded in her ears like that dreaded footstep 
at the door, or like that hand upon the latch, and made the calm 
summer night, a night of horror.  At length the welcome day 
appeared.  When she had made the little preparations which were 
needful for their journey, and had prayed upon her knees with many 
tears, she roused Barnaby, who jumped up gaily at her summons.

His clothes were few enough, and to carry Grip was a labour of 
love.  As the sun shed his earliest beams upon the earth, they 
closed the door of their deserted home, and turned away.  The sky 
was blue and bright.  The air was fresh and filled with a thousand 
perfumes.  Barnaby looked upward, and laughed with all his heart.

But it was a day he usually devoted to a long ramble, and one of 
the dogs--the ugliest of them all--came bounding up, and jumping 
round him in the fulness of his joy.  He had to bid him go back in 
a surly tone, and his heart smote him while he did so.  The dog 
retreated; turned with a half-incredulous, half-imploring look; 
came a little back; and stopped.

It was the last appeal of an old companion and a faithful friend--
cast off.  Barnaby could bear no more, and as he shook his head and 
waved his playmate home, he burst into tears.

'Oh mother, mother, how mournful he will be when he scratches at 
the door, and finds it always shut!'

There was such a sense of home in the thought, that though her own 
eyes overflowed she would not have obliterated the recollection of 
it, either from her own mind or from his, for the wealth of the 
whole wide world.



Chapter 47


